






















































Hansard: November 21, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 45A  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 21, 2016, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (Ind.) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10; Independent (Ind.) — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1413 
 November 21, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce two groups of people in the Assembly 
today. One group of two brothers, there’s Jason and Joseph 
Sliva from Yorkton. They’re up in the west gallery. They’re 
here for the Holodomor memorial this afternoon, also good 
friends of mine. Jason is a commercial pilot instructor, works at 
Yorkton Aircraft Service. And Joseph is a grade 11 student, and 
we’re talking a lot about government and parliamentary 
procedures this morning. So I ask all members to welcome them 
to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, some special guests up 
in your gallery, the very top centre, is three very special people 
from Yorkton. One is Corporal Kim Stewart. She’s been a 
member of the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] for 14 
years, has served all over the province. She recently transferred 
to the integrated organized crime south, proceeds of crime unit, 
from Yorkton. She’s going to be missed in Yorkton, Mr. 
Speaker. She’s also married to a member, has three kids, very 
hard working. And again she’s visiting us in her Assembly this 
morning or this afternoon. 
 
With them also is Corporal Terry Hyggen. Terry is a 14-year 
RCMP member. Another person that has served north, south, 
east, and west, I think, in the province including Saskatoon 
major crimes unit, currently serving in Yorkton. He actually 
served for a time recently when we were short of a staff 
sergeant, looking to fill that position. Terry stepped up as a 
corporal, filled that position for quite a length of time very 
capably, and we really do appreciate his hard work in the 
service. 
 
The only thing that’s kind of a downside of him, he likes 
Harleys. But he also drives a black Dodge truck, so we kind of, 
we debate over that. But a very appreciated member of our 
community and our RCMP, and great to have him — a very 
close friend of mine — too here, Mr. Speaker.  
 
With them is my CA [constituency assistant], Ms Lauretta 
Ritchie-McInnes. She has been a CA for 21 years I think now: 
12 years in Melville-Saltcoats, nine years in Yorkton. Very 
capable of many gifts in her life, a lot of professional 
designations as well. She serves us very well in Yorkton. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to welcome them to their 
Legislative Assembly and say thanks to RCMP members. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. With leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Once again, it’s time to celebrate Saskatchewan 
Multicultural Week. We’ll hear more about it in a member’s 
statement in a few minutes. But today I would like to introduce 
to you and through you, seated in the Speaker’s gallery, the 
executive director of the Multicultural Council of 
Saskatchewan, Rhonda Rosenberg. Rhonda, give us a wave. 
With Rhonda today is Neeraj Saroj and he’s vice-president of 
the council. Bruno Kossmann, Multicultural Council of 
Saskatchewan past president, also joins us with his wife, 
Sharon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Multicultural Week kicked off this 
past Saturday. We have had a number of honours and awards 
presented today. Joining us in the House is Jellyn Ayudan who 
is the recipient of the Multicultural Youth Leadership Award, 
and we have Faeeza Moolla as the recipient of the Betty 
Szuchewycz Award for outstanding contributions to 
multiculturalism in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I ask all 
members to help me in welcoming these fine individuals to 
their Legislative Assembly. 
 
While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to introduce an 
important individual from the broomball community in 
Saskatchewan. Seated in your gallery is Mr. Don Black, 
Saskatchewan Broomball Association president. Joining Don 
today, his wife, Tracy Davies. 
 
Don was instrumental in bringing the 2016 World Broomball 
Championships to Regina which was held at the beginning of 
November. I had a chance to speak to the audience. There was 
some 800 people there. It was a happening event with, indeed, 
people from around the world. Don has made a significant 
contribution to the sports sector and our province. 
 
So I’d ask all members to please help me in welcoming Don to 
his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d just 
like to join with the minister in welcoming certainly the folks 
from the multicultural association of Saskatchewan, 42 years 
young, and to join them in the celebration of Multicultural 
Week. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, incidents in the city and 
indeed around the world remind us of what a tremendous good 
fortune we have here in Saskatchewan, but also the challenge 
that we have here in Saskatchewan in terms of living up to the 
best of those multicultural ideals, the values of respect for 
diversity and, you know, that we’re all better when we’re 
working together and in respect and in peace and in celebration. 
 
So it’s really great to see everyone here from the multicultural 



1414 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2016 

association of Saskatchewan, and it might be just, you know, 
carrying on from the great events of Saturday on through the 
whole week. 
 
And if I might while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I just want to 
say a quick hello and a quick congratulations to Don Black and 
to Tracy Davies. And these are two individuals that give not 
just to the broomball community, Mr. Speaker, but to the 
province as a whole. The world’s a better place for the work of 
Don Black and Tracy Davies, and it’s good to see them here 
today at their Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, seated in 
the west gallery are 45 grade 7 and 8 students from Ethel 
Milliken Elementary School. They are accompanied by their 
teachers: Mr. Kristopher Jan and Ms. Janice Hiebert and Ms. 
Brooklyn Leibel and Mr. Jonathan Stadler. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re here to observe the proceedings this 
morning, and later this afternoon I’m going to meet them out 
there and probably going to be more of a question-answer 
session. I would like to ask members to welcome them to their 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you and to 
all members of the Legislative Assembly, we have a group of 
teachers here. But we have one very special teacher from 
Whitewood, Saskatchewan, and that is our daughter Gina 
Kodman. And she’s come down here to find out what her old 
man does. So I would like to welcome her to her Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — Well what his old man does is scoop the 
Speaker on his introductions, apparently. Members of the 
Legislative Assembly, it is my honour today to introduce to you 
a group of teachers who are here in the legislature to attend the 
18th annual Saskatchewan Teachers’ Institute on Parliamentary 
Democracy. The institute began on Saturday and will conclude 
on Wednesday, November 23rd. 
 
This group has already met with a number of people, including 
members of the judiciary and representatives of the Chief 
Electoral office. Earlier today they met with caucus staff from 
both sides of the House, the Clerks, and the Legislative Library. 
Over the next two days, they are scheduled to meet with caucus 
Chairs, caucus Whips, several MLAs [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly], cabinet ministers, and the Ministry of 
Education. 
 
I would ask the teachers and guests to give us a wave as I 
introduce them: Blair Beck, Angela Fielding, Walter Fielding, 
Scott Wallis, Crystal Schindel, Gillian Strange, Kelly Walker, 
Dawn Helmeczi, Lauren Johnston, Christopher Garner, Perry 
Ostapowich, Gina Kodman, Kyle Clark, Trenton Johnston, 
Lane Gray, Jennifer Herrod, Courtney Bisson, Kevin Dyck, 
Amy Klassen, Colin Knight, Dorothy Asapace, Jane Robertson, 
Marie-Chantal Poulin, Vicki Coghill, Caitlin Gammel, Chris 
Schmidt-Watt. 
 

I’d like to make a special mention of our steering committee 
comprised of four teachers who have attended past institutes, as 
well as an official from the Ministry of Education. From the 
ministry we have Stephenie Leitao Csada, consultant for 
francophone education; steering committee, Doug Panko, 
Laurel LaBar, Terry Leibel, Karen Blackwell Jones, and Larry 
Mikulcik. 
 
I ask all members to welcome this group to the Saskatchewan 
legislature. 
 
I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with you in 
welcoming these individuals to their Assembly. This is an 
exciting and interesting program. It’s gone on for a number of 
years, and I think gives a chance for citizens of our province to 
develop an understanding of what takes place in the legislature 
and gives them the opportunity to share that with their students. 
 
I went to the windup supper last year and I sat with a teacher 
and I said, how was this? Did this compare with what your 
expectations were? And he said, I started out with very low 
expectations and it certainly did not exceed them. In any event, 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all MLAs join in welcoming 
these people. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave for an 
extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a few 
introductions to make and would like to join in other members 
in welcoming a number of individuals and groups to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
First, the teachers who are present with us for the Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Institute on Parliamentary Democracy, I want to 
welcome you to your Legislative Assembly and thank you for 
taking time away from your communities and your families and 
your classrooms to be here today and to participate in what I 
hope is a very useful exercise to not only learn more about our 
democracy but also share ideas about how to teach and impart 
what you learned here to your classrooms, and hopefully excite 
an interest with your students in the Legislative Assembly and 
how it impacts them, their lives, and their learning. So thank 
you to each of you for being here. 
 
I also want to join in with both the member opposite and my 
colleague in welcoming Don and Tracy here today to their 
Legislative Assembly.  
 
It was my pleasure a couple of weeks ago to do a member’s 
statement congratulating Don on his good work in bringing the 



November 21, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1415 

broomball championships to Regina, and I understand it was a 
very successful event. And I want to welcome both of you. It’s 
great to see you here. 
 
The Speaker will note that I didn’t scoop him on the 
introduction, but I want to make special welcome to my brother 
Blair who is here from Carnduff, Saskatchewan. Blair was quite 
excited about coming and seeing what it is I do and yes, I really 
do have a seat here. And Blair and his wife, Tara, are very 
involved members of their community in Carnduff, 
Saskatchewan. And although I probably kid him more than I 
should, I’m proud of the work that he does in his classroom and 
in his community. And I hope that this is a worthwhile 
experience for you and for all of your colleagues here today. So 
I’d invite all members to join me in welcoming all of these 
important guests to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the Assembly, it’s my pleasure to introduce 
delegates from the Midwestern Legislative Conference 
exchange that are visiting us. If they would stand when I call 
their name: Representative Joan Ballweg of Wisconsin; Mike 
McCabe from the MLC [Midwestern Legislative Conference], 
and Ileen Grossman as well, staff members with the MLC. 
Accompanying them is Sheila Sterling — I had to check and 
make sure she was still sitting there — from the Speaker’s 
office. I would ask members to welcome them to our 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d just 
like to join with the member from Cannington in welcoming the 
delegation from the Midwestern Legislative Conference to our 
Legislative Assembly, and certainly Saskatchewan is a proud 
member of the MLC. Always good to have that interaction, and 
certainly good to join with other Bowhay Institute for 
Legislative Leadership Development graduates over lunch to 
get caught up quickly with folks. But certainly Representative 
Ballweg, Ileen Grossman, Mike McCabe, people that do a lot of 
great work for a great institution that Saskatchewan’s very 
proud to play a role in. So on behalf of the official opposition, 
welcome very much to the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to also join with the Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport in 
acknowledging Faeeza Moolla to our Legislative Assembly. 
 
Last week I had the opportunity of attending the National 
Philanthropy Day awards luncheon and my good friend Faeeza 
was awarded the Outstanding Individual Volunteer of the Year 
Award. So I’d like everyone here to acknowledge and show the 
appreciation of someone who has given of her time and energy 
to our fine city and our community. So thank you very much for 
joining us today. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present a petition again today to reverse cuts to the Lighthouse 
program. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that in April 
2014 the then minister of Social Services said that the 
Lighthouse in Saskatoon would “. . . take pressure off existing 
detox facilities, hospitals, and police cells while keeping people 
safe, especially in our brutally cold winters.” Mr. Speaker, they 
point out that on the same day the minister of Health said, “We 
want to ensure that individuals with mental health and 
addictions issues have a safe place to stay.” 
 
The petitioners also point out that since then, this government 
has repeatedly indicated that the Lighthouse stabilization unit 
keeps individuals out of hospital emergency rooms and jail 
cells. And we just need to look to the Saskatoon Health Region, 
Mr. Speaker, where there’s been record over capacity in our 
emergency rooms there, and obviously the cut to the Lighthouse 
isn’t the whole part of the problem, but it certainly is a 
contributing factor and doesn’t help. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately reverse 
their recent cuts to funding that allows extremely 
vulnerable people to access the services of the Lighthouse 
stabilization unit in Saskatoon, and revisit their imposition 
of a strict and narrow definition of homelessness in 
November 2015 which forced the Lighthouse to cut back 
its hours of essential services in February of 2016, and take 
immediate steps to ensure that homeless people in 
Saskatchewan have emergency shelter, clothing, and food 
available to them before more lives are lost. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens from 
Saskatoon, Carrot River, and Prince Albert. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise today to present a petition from the citizens who are 
opposed to the federal government’s decision to impose a 
carbon tax in the province of Saskatchewan. And I’d like to 
read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Assiniboia, 
Mossbank, Gravelbourg, Tugaske, McCord, Bengough, 
Shamrock, Glentworth, Wymark, Swift Current, Lafleche, 
Avonlea, Rockglen, Willow Bunch, Coronach, Moose Jaw, 
Weyburn, Limerick, Scout Lake, Flintoft, Crane Valley, 
Woodrow, Fife Lake, Wood Mountain, Estevan, Regina, 
Congress, Killdeer, and Palmer. I do so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 



1416 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2016 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too am 
proud to rise in my place to present a petition in reference to a 
second bridge desperately needed for Prince Albert. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, part of the prayer reads that the 
Saskatchewan Party government refuses to stand up for Prince 
Albert and this critical infrastructure issue, and that the need for 
a second bridge for Prince Albert has never been clearer than it 
is today. Prince Albert, communities north of Prince Albert, and 
businesses that send people and products through Prince Albert 
require a solution. 
 
In the prayer that reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Ask that the Sask Party government stop stalling, hiding 
behind rhetoric, and refusing to listen to the people calling 
for action, and to begin immediately to plan and then 
quickly commence the construction of a second bridge 
from Prince Albert, using federal and provincial dollars. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 
from the Prince Albert area, as many other pages from all 
throughout Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I proudly submit this 
petition for a second bridge in Prince Albert. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition in support of renewing funding for heritage languages 
here in Saskatchewan. And we know that after 25 years the 
Government of Saskatchewan has discontinued all support for 
heritage language learning in Saskatchewan. Since 1991, 
heritage language schools have depended on this modest 
funding from the Ministry of Education to help sustain their 
programs, but as a result of the announcement by the Ministry 
of Education, many of these non-profit heritage language 
schools are facing the difficult decision of whether or not they 
can continue to operate. 
 
And we know that in addition to providing language and 
cultural classes, these schools offer a welcoming environment 
and crucial support for newcomers who are searching for a way 
to feel at home in their new surroundings here in Saskatchewan. 
The heritage language schools contribute to the retention of 
immigrants in Saskatchewan by helping people to maintain 
their culture, identities, and traditions while at the same time 
learning about Canadian ways of life. Furthermore, studying 
additional language offers many benefits for all Canadians, 
especially in today’s growing international markets. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to reconsider this decision and restore funding for heritage 
language education in Saskatchewan heritage language 
schools. 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from the 
cities of Regina and Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today and present a petition in support of child care centres in 
the province. Those who signed this petition wish to bring our 
attention to the following: across Saskatchewan, licensed 
non-profit child care centres are taxed inconsistently. Many of 
our licensed non-profit centres pay commercial property tax and 
this is not done in Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario, BC [British 
Columbia], or New Brunswick. 
 
Child care is essential to the economy, yet most centres struggle 
to balance their budgets. This issue threatens both the number 
of child care spaces and the quality of care. Quality child care 
has an enormous impact on a child’s future outcomes and yields 
a high rate of economic return. Child care centres are 
institutions of early learning and childhood development. It is 
appropriate that they have the same tax treatment as schools. I’ll 
read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan recognize 
that licensed non-profit child care centres provide 
programs that are foundational to a healthy society by 
including them in The Education Act, and exempt all 
licensed non-profit child care centres in Saskatchewan 
from property tax through changes to appropriate 
legislation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, citizens signing this petition reside in Regina, 
Edenwold, and Saskatoon. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition calling for a stop to the Sask Party sell-off of 
SaskTel. 
 
The petitioners draw attention to the following points: that in 
the recent election campaign, the Sask Party promised that they 
would not privatize SaskTel. The petitioners call for: that 
instead of looking at their own waste and scandal, the Sask 
Party is now talking about breaking their promise and looking 
to sell off SaskTel to make a quick dollar. 
 
The petitioners point out that SaskTel is owned by all of us, and 
it was built with Saskatchewan hard work, innovation, and 
pride. And also, Mr. Speaker, they point out that SaskTel 
creates thousands of good jobs, ensures service to parts of the 
province that other providers ignore, and offers the lowest 
mobile phone rates in all of Canada. 

 
In the prayer that reads as follows, [Mr. Speaker] the 
petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the Saskatchewan Party 
government to keep their promise, to stop their plan to sell 
off SaskTel, and to keep our valued Crown corporation in 



November 21, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1417 

the hands of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition was signed by good citizens 
from Craven and Moose Jaw. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present a petition calling on the government to reverse the cuts 
to the Aboriginal court worker program. The Government of 
Saskatchewan senselessly cut the budget for the Aboriginal 
court worker program in the 2016-2017 provincial budget, 
resulting in layoffs of Aboriginal court workers throughout the 
province. 
 
Despite this decision, those on this side of the House know that 
Aboriginal court workers play an important role helping 
Aboriginal people in criminal and child apprehension cases. 
Aboriginal peoples are disproportionately represented in 
Saskatchewan’s correctional centres, and Aboriginal court 
workers successfully help to make our communities safer 
through reduced recidivism rates. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan reverse its 
short-sighted and counterproductive cuts to the Aboriginal 
court worker program. 

 
And those signing the petition today come from Saskatoon, 
Prince Albert, Fort Qu’Appelle, Dysart, and Regina. I do so 
submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
to stop the redirection of funding of the Northern Teacher 
Education Program Council Inc. 
 
A recent report shows that 94 per cent of NORTEP [northern 
teacher education program] grads found employment in the 
North. NORTEP has improved teacher retention rates in the 
North. NORTEP has a positive economic impact in northern 
Saskatchewan. NORTEP provides a high-quality, face-to-face 
instructional and services to students. The province financial 
deficit cannot be fixed by cutting indigenous education in the 
North in a program that has served the North for over 40 years. 
The prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to immediately restore 
their five-year agreement to fund the northern education 
program council, inc. and to continue funding 
NORTEP-NORPAC programs in La Ronge. 

 
And it’s signed by hundreds and hundreds of people in northern 
Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 

Canadian Western Agribition 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise in the House to celebrate the start of an important week for 
producers, the city of Regina, and our province: Agribition. 
 
For nearly 50 years, the Canadian Western Agribition has been 
a fixture in the calendars of people across Saskatchewan and 
around the world. It’s time for producers and innovators in our 
great province to show the world our excellence in agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the show is anchored by beef cattle and features 
also horses, bison, sheep, goats, and an extensive agribusiness 
trade show. Canadian Western Agribition is a blend of 
agriculture, First Nations, and festive entertainment, featuring 
rides, music, shopping, and food. Agribition also hosts evening 
pro rodeo performances for action-packed entertainment. The 
event is an international hub of agricultural excellence, hosting 
over 800 international guests from over 70 countries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people are already excited about the new 
International Trade Centre that’s currently under construction. 
That project will mean a few changes to Agribition 2016, but 
it’s still business as usual and Agribition will again will be the 
world-class event exhibitors and guests have grown to expect. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our province has a long history of success in 
agriculture, and I know that our producers will continue to lead 
the world in technology, crop science, and stock breeding for 
many years to come. I hope that all members will join me in 
congratulating CEO [chief executive officer] Chris Lane, the 
board of directors, and all the organizers and volunteers on what 
will surely be another successful Agribition. Agribition is where 
the world meets, and this year is no different. It’s business as 
usual. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Gardiner 
Park. 
 

Holodomor 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Today 
we joined together, many members in the rotunda today, to 
remember those who perished during the Ukrainian genocide of 
the 1930s. The genocide is referred to as Holodomor, which 
means extermination by hunger. 
 
Despite record grain harvests during 1932 and 1933, the Soviets 
confiscated crops and refused to allow Ukrainians to store any 
food. Those caught with grain were sentenced to death and 
often immediately executed. Up to 10 million Ukrainians 
perished. I’ll put that into a little context, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
roughly 17 people every single minute were systematically 
starved. We cannot imagine the extent of the devastation 
wrought on Ukrainians during this time. However, despite how 
difficult it is to hear about such pain, it’s our responsibility to 
listen and to learn. We must remember their suffering so that 
such atrocities may never happen again. 
 
[14:00] 
 
In 2015 a permanent reminder of Holodomor was dedicated. 
It’s a statue to the east of the Legislative Building called Bitter 



1418 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2016 

Memories of Childhood. I’d urge all members to go and pay 
their respects. This monument serves as a lasting reminder of 
the famine’s devastation and impact on children. Sadly, 
one-third of those who lost their lives were children, needlessly 
cut too short. 
 
In 2006 the Ukrainian parliament deemed Holodomor a 
genocide. And two years later, the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan became the first jurisdiction in North America to 
recognize the genocide and to acknowledge the suffering 
inflicted on Ukrainians. We remember the past to mourn what 
was lost and to acknowledge the incredible resilience of the 
Ukrainian people. Memory eternal. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Transgender Day of Remembrance 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 
today to recognize the passing of a very solemn day, the 
Transgender Day of Remembrance. Mr. Speaker, the 
Transgender Day of Remembrance is an annual observance on 
November 20th that honours the memory of those who have 
been murdered through acts of anti-transgender violence. I was 
honoured to attend an event Saturday evening put on by 
TransSask and held at the Unitarian Fellowship Centre in 
Regina. 
 
Stephanie Cox, a transgender woman and board Co-Chair, 
served as a speaker and MC [master of ceremonies] for the 
event. She spoke of her own personal experience and talked 
about the harassment she faces while going about her day in 
Regina. We lit candles and Stephanie read the names of the 259 
people who have died around the world due to transphobia in 
the last year. My colleague from Prince Albert Northcote also 
attended a similar ceremony in her constituency yesterday. 
 
Here in Saskatchewan, transgendered people are among the 
most disenfranchised. Trans people are often pushed to the 
fringes of our society and face many barriers. Trans people face 
homelessness, depression, and inner personal violence at rates 
greater than that in the general population. Although this annual 
event is a sobering one, it is always highlighted by the 
community of love and compassion that gathers together each 
year. 
 
I hope that, in the spirit of Transgender Day of Remembrance, 
all members will keep the violence against transgendered 
people close to their hearts. Together we can build a better 
world, one without the evils of transphobia and homophobia. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Canadian Western Agribition Week 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
in this Assembly today to announce that the 46th Canadian 
Western Agribition kicked off this morning at Evraz Place. 
From November 21st to 26th, Regina will once again be hosting 
Canada’s biggest livestock show.  

Mr. Speaker, each year Agribition attracts more than 130,000 
visitors, including 800 international guests from more than 70 
countries, and generates more than $56 million in economic 
activity. This prestigious event happens over six days, 
showcasing more than 4,500 head of North America’s finest 
livestock, agricultural equipment, and an impressive trade show 
that has 400 vendors from around the world. Along with the 
livestock shows, there’s the Agri-Ed program for school 
children, ThinkAG Career Expo, the Indigenous Ag Summit, 
Grain Expo, and the food pavilion presented by Mosaic.  
 
There’s truly something for everyone at this year’s event, as 
Agribition also features more family and entertainment events. 
These include the high school rodeo competition; the 
international stock dog competition; full-contact jousting; and 
for the first time, Running with the Bulls, a number of brave 
souls that will test their luck in the arena against nine bulls for a 
chance to win $1,500. 
 
This year also marks the return of the Agribition Pro Rodeo, 
where top rodeo athletes from around the world will compete 
over four nights for $100,000 in prize money. Mr. Speaker, I 
invite all of my colleagues to take the time out of their busy 
schedules to check out this world-class event hosted right here 
in Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 

 
Housewarming for Long-Term Care Facility 

 
Mr. Steele: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Poet James 
Montgomery wrote that home is: 
 

. . . a spot of earth supremely blest, 
A dearer, sweeter spot than all the rest. 

 
On Friday this rang true for more than 200 long-term care 
residents of The Meadows in Swift Current. The Rural and 
Remote Health minister joined families and staff at a 
housewarming party, and a housewarming party is certainly the 
right term. 
 
Home to 225 people, the facility is really a connection of small 
houses of only 10 or so residents. Each 10 have their own 
entrance, patio, spa, and lounges. Each resident has a private 
bathroom and windows that open for fresh air. The residents 
can even cook dinners for their neighbours, or garden. This all 
is because residents took part in the design process. 
 
So although the traditional gift for a housewarming is a 
casserole, the minister instead presented residents with a silver 
award for infrastructure from the Canadian Council for P3s 
[public-private partnerships]. The Meadows is a recent winner 
of the national award, with the panel praising its home-like 
home atmosphere. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is proud to be part of a project 
that means so much to so many. I ask the members to join me in 
congratulating The Meadows, the residents, of their P3 
award-winning and, most of all, of their new home. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 



November 21, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1419 

Reeve Retires After 47 Years of Municipal Service 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my honour to rise today and recognize a distinguished citizen of 
the Rosetown-Elrose constituency, Mr. Colin Ahrens, reeve of 
the rural municipality of Marriott, No. 317. This Friday Colin 
will celebrate his retirement after a remarkable 47 years of 
municipal service. 
 
Colin began his municipal career in 1969, serving as councillor 
for division 3. His service as reeve of the RM [rural 
municipality] of Marriott began in 1996, where he served until 
his retirement this year. During his years on council, Colin also 
represented the municipality on numerous committees. 
 
Friday’s event is important to me personally as I spent my 
municipal career with the RM of Marriott. While Colin started 
out as my boss, we quickly became friends and remain friends 
to this day. Among the highlights of Colin’s career that come to 
mind for me is attendance at many conventions of the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, including a 
special one in the early ’90s when Colin and I along with 
councillors Jerry Spence and Mike Longworth were fortunate 
enough to win the provincial RM curling playdowns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our community is a better place today than it was 
47 years ago because of Colin’s contributions. I ask all 
members to join me in congratulating Reeve Colin Ahrens on 
an outstanding career in municipal governance and to thank him 
for his years of commitment and service. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

Multicultural Honours Awards 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past Saturday 
I had the privilege of attending the annual Multicultural 
Honours Awards presented by the Multicultural Council of 
Saskatchewan. This wonderful awards ceremony was the 
kickoff to Multicultural Week here in Saskatchewan. It was 
held at Government House and was co-hosted by the council 
and our Lieutenant Governor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Jellyn Ayudan was the recipient of the 
Multicultural Youth Leadership Award. Still in high school, 
Jellyn is already active in multicultural work. She arrived in 
Canada in October of 2009 from the Philippines and now 
dedicates her life to empowering other new immigrants and 
refugees to achieve their fullest potential. 
 
Faeeza Moolla is the recipient of the Betty Szuchewycz Award 
for outstanding contributions to multiculturalism in 
Saskatchewan. Faeeza immigrated to Regina from South Africa 
18 years ago. Growing up in a country rife with apartheid 
restrictions, she now uses that experience to engage in 
multiculturalism within and outside the Muslim community. 
Faeeza is committed to addressing racism and discrimination 
and to building bridges across different cultures and faiths. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating Jellyn and 
Faeeza on their awards and thanking them for their 

contributions to our province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Auditor’s Report and Details of Land Transactions 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, last week the brother of 
one of the Sisters of Our Lady of the Missions joined us in our 
office and at the legislature and had some questions for the 
Premier on the Sask Party’s GTH [Global Transportation Hub] 
land deal. And of course his sister and the nuns received 
$11,000 per acre with the threat of expropriation, and 
well-connected businessmen ended up receiving $103,000 per 
acre. 
 
Now the Premier hasn’t been answering questions, sadly, in this 
Assembly, but I’m hoping that he’ll answer this question from 
Mr. Dunne and for the sisters. Why did the sisters get one price 
from the Ministry of Highways, but the two well-connected 
businessmen who ended up walking away with $11 million of 
profit from Saskatchewan people’s hard-earned money get 
another price — millions more, a sweetheart deal from the Sask 
Party? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I just reject 
the premise of the member’s question, especially his last 
statements that he made there. Mr. Speaker, at the request of 
myself and Executive Council, and frankly also at the request of 
the NDP [New Democratic Party], we asked the Provincial 
Auditor if the auditor would use her good offices to investigate 
the transactions involved in the assembly of land for the Global 
Transportation Hub, Mr. Speaker. And she went about that 
work I think professionally, and credit members opposite, have 
acknowledged the fact — the critic in particular — that it’s 
been done, the audit was done well and the auditor has 
performed her part in all of this. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the auditor did point out that there were 
problems in terms of how government proceeded with land 
assembly. The situation was unique in terms of the nature of 
escalating land prices. The situation was not optimal, as she had 
pointed out, because communication between Global 
Transportation Hub and Highways should have been better. 
She’s made specific recommendations in this regard. We will 
implement all of those recommendations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But she did look at some of the other matters that had been 
raised by members of the opposition and other members in the 
community with respect to some of what we just heard in his 
last question. And I would just say this, Mr. Speaker, and this is 
a quote from the auditor’s press release, June 30, 2016, and I 
quote, “The audit did not find evidence of conflicts of interest, 
or indications of fraud or wrongdoing by the GTH management 
or Board of Directors,” one of which would have been the 
minister responsible. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are 



1420 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2016 

getting sick and tired of these non-answers and the yarn that’s 
being spun. So the Premier actually did say, though, that he 
rejected the premise of the question. It was a pretty simple 
question. It alluded to the $11,000 per acre that that government 
paid the nuns, and the $103,000 per acre that they paid to the 
well-connected business people. What does the Premier reject 
about that premise? What does he have to say to the nuns? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think if my hon. friend 
would check the record of Hansard, it would note that I took 
exception with the premise of his question as represented in the 
last part of his preamble where he attributed, where he 
attributed motives with respect to members of the community or 
members of the government that would clearly be a conflict of 
interest, that would clearly be inappropriate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What the hon. member has alleged is that there was a conflict of 
interest on the part of the minister. That’s what he has 
consistently alleged. He has inferred that there was some 
behaviour that would not be appropriate for members of 
cabinet, never mind members of this House, in terms of dealing 
with others who are . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well, Mr. 
Speaker, do the members opposite want to hear the answer to 
the question? Mr. Speaker, or the relationship between 
members on this side of the House and business people, Mr. 
Speaker, to which we have taken exception. 
 
And moreover, and again I quote from the press release of the 
Provincial Auditor, the press release that accompanied the audit 
that the members opposite asked for, that we asked for, of the 
whole land assembly matter. Here’s what the independent 
officer of the Legislative Assembly said, the Provincial Auditor, 
and I quote: “The audit did not find evidence of conflicts of 
interest, or indications of fraud or wrongdoing by the GTH 
management or Board of Directors.” And that includes the 
minister responsible. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, if the Premier has nothing 
to hide, you’d think he would be willing to come clean with 
very simple, straightforward questions to him. I guess one of 
the questions that hasn’t been answered by the Premier — 
strangely that he can’t answer this — is that we’ve learned 
there’s a concealed identity in this whole deal, the first time it 
was brought to cabinet. Of course we’ve learned that the 
concealed identity was actually the landlord for the minister 
responsible, that Sask Party-supporting Alberta land baron. 
 
This is a very simple, straightforward question to the Premier 
that he failed to answer last week, and Saskatchewan people 
deserve an answer. When did he find out that the concealed 
identity was the landlord of the minister? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I would want to offer this to 
my hon. friend and to members of the House: the matter that he 
just raised wasn’t discovered by members opposite; it was 

referenced in the auditor’s report because the auditor was going 
to look at all of these transactions. 
 
The auditor actually pointed out . . . and I don’t have the quote 
in front of me and I want to be respectful of the auditor’s office 
and not put words that were not in the report. But certainly you 
could paraphrase her look into this particular issue as saying 
that the government acted correctly in not going ahead with an 
offer, with a transaction with someone who was not identified 
to the cabinet. In fact, that’s why the matter was not dealt with. 
The auditor says that is the appropriate approach in an instance 
like that, or that was the appropriate thing to do. I’m 
paraphrasing, but I think that’s a fair summary, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But all of . . . This matter included every issue the members 
raised on that side of the House. The so-called leaked cabinet 
document, the auditor has indicated in testimony to the Public 
Accounts Committee that there was no leaked cabinet 
document. The phone calls, the phone call that they’ve raised 
breathlessly as part of some conspiracy that didn’t exist was 
dealt with by the auditor in testimony and in committee. 
 
She had access to every cabinet document; we made sure of 
that. She had access to everyone involved in the situation. And 
she said in the press release that accompanied the audit report, 
to members: “The audit did not find evidence of conflicts of 
interest, or indications of fraud or wrongdoing by the GTH 
management or Board of Directors.” And that included the 
minister responsible. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Another day, another simple 
straightforward question not answered by the Premier. And it’s 
strange, awfully strange that he can’t answer that question. You 
know, they can characterize our questions however they want, 
but Saskatchewan people deserve answers, and people like Mr. 
Dunne and the sisters deserve nothing less. And we’ll keep 
pushing on this front. Actually maybe the Premier should 
reference Mr. Dunne’s letter to the editor this weekend. It might 
be an interesting read that he could dig into. 
 
Instead of using, you know, the Premier simply using more and 
more excuses, and bragging about . . . He used to brag about an 
appraisal that he claimed vindicated him and his party. Mr. 
Speaker, of course the Premier ignored all the government’s 
appraisals that were way lower, way lower, many times lower, 
and clung to that one that was never intended for the buyer to 
see. We know now it wasn’t even used in negotiations and 
apparently was never even reviewed by that government. But it 
was the Premier’s lifeline. It’s what he clung to time and time 
again to justify the exorbitant price he paid to these business 
people. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, will the Premier, and finally now, admit that 
the appraisal he clung to for so long was actually irrelevant, that 
it blew his weak defence apart, or is he going to stick to the 
tired political lines? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Leader 



November 21, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1421 

of the Opposition references getting to the bottom of the matter. 
You know who got to the bottom of the matter, Mr. Speaker? 
The Provincial Auditor and her team of experts got to the 
bottom of the matter. She had full authority to conduct whatever 
sort of audit that she wished to conduct. She had access to all of 
the documents, all of the documents . . . Members opposite can 
heckle and dismiss that work all they want, Mr. Speaker. But 
the fact is the Provincial Auditor did a very thorough job by her 
own testimony just recently at the Public Accounts Committee. 
 
She looked through thousands of documents. She had access to 
all of the individuals involved in the transaction being 
referenced, Mr. Speaker, and she came to a conclusion at the 
end of the . . . Well the chairperson of the Public Accounts 
Committee can dismiss that work from her seat. The fact is, 
though, the Provincial Auditor . . . The fact is the Provincial 
Auditor came to a conclusion, Mr. Speaker, and it was in her 
press release of June 30, 2016, and I’ll quote that directly. 
These are the words of the Provincial Auditor: “The audit did 
not find evidence of conflicts of interest or indications of fraud 
or wrongdoing by the GTH management or Board of 
Directors.” Those are the words of the Provincial Auditor and 
that was her conclusion. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, of course that wasn’t a 
forensic audit. It was scathing. It laid in plain light incredibly 
concerning dealings of this government, and it certainly 
requires us to do our job. The auditor’s done hers. Now it’s our 
time. 
 
I guess my question was straightforward to the Premier and I’m 
looking for an answer on this. Why did he time and time again, 
did he cling to this appraisal, the seller’s appraisal, that was 
irrelevant? Why did he cling to that as his defence when his 
government hadn’t even reviewed it? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I would agree with the Leader of the 
Opposition that the Provincial Auditor did her job, which was to 
get to the bottom of the matter, which she did. And her 
conclusion, Mr. Speaker, was very clear. She said that “The 
audit did not find evidence of conflicts of interest, or indications 
of fraud or wrongdoing by the GTH management or Board of 
Directors.” That was the conclusion of the Provincial Auditor. 
 
And the Leader of the Opposition has raised this matter of a 
forensic audit. Let me quote the Provincial Auditor who had 
this question put directly to her, directly to her by the member 
for Nutana just very recently at the Public Accounts Committee. 
And I’ll quote her response, from the Provincial Auditor, 
“Frankly, if we did a forensic audit, there would . . . [have been] 
a lot of matters that we included within our report that would 
not have been provided to the committee.” 
 
Those are the words of the Provincial Auditor on a forensic 
audit versus the audit that she did. She had full authority. She 
had full authority to determine whatever sort of audit she 
wished to do. This was what she felt would be the most 
thorough audit, and she came to a conclusion, Mr. Speaker. 

The members opposite clearly don’t like the conclusion. They 
clearly . . . They dismiss the conclusion. That’s what they’re 
doing, Mr. Speaker. Every day they’re dismissing the 
conclusion, whether it be from their seat or whether it be from 
their feet. Her conclusion, from the Provincial Auditor: “The 
audit did not find evidence of conflicts of interest, or indications 
of fraud or wrongdoing by the GTH management or Board of 
Directors.” 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

State of Provincial Economy 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Not answered. A weak and pathetic 
display by that government in this Assembly again, a Premier 
who won’t even stand up and answer simple, straightforward 
questions when we’re talking about millions of dollars that have 
been wasted, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The fact is though that the Sask Party has been failing on many 
fronts. This government’s mismanagement, scandal, and waste 
are growing and so too are their deficits and their debt, Mr. 
Speaker. They’ve added billions of dollars, in fact a billion 
dollars . . . billions of dollars year after year, $7 billion in just 7 
years to the debt. They blew through the rainy day fund, blew 
through the surplus, blew through record revenues, didn’t save a 
dime. They hid their budget, denied the real number, and 
refused to release a financial first quarter report and stood by as 
11,000 more Saskatchewan workers are looking for work than 
just last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: instead of investing in diversifying 
the economy, creating jobs and cutting back on the Sask Party’s 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste, why is he cutting deep 
into our classrooms and to health care to make Saskatchewan 
people pay for Sask Party mismanagement? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, what the hon. member, what 
the NDP characterized as lost to the public in terms of 
investments . . . Well the member, the Deputy Leader of the 
NDP, as he’s wont to do from his seat — rarely from his feet — 
wants to enter the debate. He has, Mr. Speaker, he has, Mr. 
Speaker, supported the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
They asked this rhetorical question: where did the money go? 
Mr. Speaker, taxes have been cut in this province in the last 
nine years by $6 billion. That’s where the money went. Mr. 
Speaker, we made 8 billion more in infrastructure investment 
than members did when they had the chance over the same 
period of time. That’s where the money went, Mr. Speaker. I 
would point out to members opposite that between a third and 
40 per cent of the operating debt of this province has been 
eliminated by members on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A growth plan supported by infrastructure and tax relief has left 
this for Saskatchewan people to consider: there are now 1.14 
million people living in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. There are 60,000 more jobs in Saskatchewan today 
than when members opposite were in power. We will meet the 
financial challenges of today and we will do so respecting a 
growth agenda that is attracting people and keeping this 



1422 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2016 

economy strong, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Day after day the 
Sask Party members refuse to take responsibility for the 
financial mess that their government has created. We saw a fine 
demonstration of that by our Premier. Times were good as they 
strutted into office. Population was on the rise. There was a 
surplus. Revenues were at record levels, but that was a decade 
ago. Since then they start running deficit after deficit and added 
billions of dollars to the provincial debt. Mr. Speaker, they’ve 
even authorized themselves the ability to borrow another 
unprecedented $6 billion. And when asked about it last week 
the minister said, “We need to take full advantage of debt 
financing.” 
 
Well that would be a whole lot easier to swallow if they were 
investing in diversifying the economy or creating jobs. Instead, 
what are they doing? They’re investing more into their own 
mismanagement and their $1.5 billion job-killing carbon 
capture tax. Mr. Speaker, debt is debt is debt. So will the 
minister finally quit with the excuses and admit that they’re 
making Saskatchewan pay for Sask Party mismanagement, 
scandal, and waste? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
1.15 million people living in the province of Saskatchewan 
today, the most ever before in the history of the province living 
in this province here today, Mr. Speaker. The member opposite 
talks about debt with respect to our provincial debt here in the 
province, that we have borrowed money to invest in 
infrastructure, into new schools, into new health care facilities, 
and to highways and infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. Assets that we 
can look to and it’s going to contribute to . . . we can look to for 
the next 30 to 40 years in this province, is going to contribute to 
quality of life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, under this government, at the end of this fiscal 
year, our debt-to-GDP [gross domestic product] ratio will be 
about 19 to 20 per cent. Under the NDP, in the height of the 
NDP days, debt-to-GDP was at 65 per cent, Mr. Speaker. Under 
the height of the NDP, interest on the public debt was some 
$900 million a year, Mr. Speaker. Today it’s below $300 
million a year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are investing in new schools, in new health care facilities. 
We are putting in place opportunities for young people to come 
back to this province, when under the NDP, thousands upon 
thousands of our young people left the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We’re not going back to the dark 
days of the NDP. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I understand that the Finance 
minister is under a lot of stress, but his comments just now were 
not an answer to the question. And I know it’s hard to make 
excuses for this government’s total mismanagement, their 

scandals, and their waste. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m concerned because the financial mess that he 
has created for the people of Saskatchewan is starting to get to 
him, and it’s keeping him up at night. Mr. Speaker, if the 
minister was burning the midnight oil trying to get out of the 
financial mess that he and the Sask Party created, that would be 
understandable. But, Mr. Speaker, he’s not up at night working 
on the books; he’s trolling Facebook. Last Thursday night, until 
well past 4 in the morning, the current Minister of Finance was 
up arguing with two former ministers on one of their Facebook 
pages. 
 
Mr. Speaker, social media is here, and having cabinet ministers 
engaged informally is to be commended. But this goes well 
beyond. He is the person entrusted with our province’s finances, 
but my guess is that there are members of the Premier’s office 
staff who no longer think he should be entrusted with a 
Facebook password. 
 
Will the Finance minister commit today to stop with the 
fighting, the spinning, and the name calling, and finally do his 
job? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if the matters of 
state are so important that we need to bring in some inane 
diatribe on Facebook by the left wing in this province going 
after . . . when they gather around because we make one 
comment with respect to a former mayor, a one-term mayor in 
Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the province’s 
finances. I can assure the member she’s factually incorrect. I 
was not up till 4 o’clock in the morning on Thursday night. I 
can tell you that, Mr. Speaker. But fair enough. If that’s the 
issues of importance today in question period, we’ll debate that 
all day long, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What I find more interesting, what I find more interesting, Mr. 
Speaker, last week when that Finance critic, when that Finance 
critic was asked in the scrum by the media, well what would 
you do differently when faced with a $1.2 billion loss of 
revenues, loss of revenues here in the province of Saskatchewan 
because the resource revenue sector, the downturn in the 
commodity sector of the last couple of years, what did this 
member say, Mr. Speaker? And I quote, “First of all, we said 
the technology fund.” Mr. Speaker, she went on to say, so 
certainly more diversification in a green economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, do you know what the technology fund is? That’s 
a euphemism for a carbon tax here in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s the same member, that’s the same member who will not 
stand in her place here and defend the Leap Manifesto but will 
go off to Edmonton to a national NDP convention and stand 
there with her colleagues from the national NDP and defend the 
Leap Manifesto, Mr. Speaker. Then she comes back here and 
she stands in the rotunda and says, well we believe in a more 
diversified economy by a technology fund. That’s a carbon tax. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 



November 21, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1423 

Support for Adoptive Parents 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, all too often, it’s 
Saskatchewan’s most vulnerable who are being targeted by the 
Sask Party to pay the price for their mismanagement, scandals, 
and waste. Adoptive families are finding it increasingly difficult 
to receive the supports that government had promised them, 
particularly adoptive parents of children with special or 
complex needs. 
 
Jalyn Zborowski is here today. She is the adoptive parent of two 
young girls who require special complex needs programming. 
Parents like Jalyn enter the adoption process knowing full well 
the extra love and support these children often require. Mr. 
Speaker, they do so with understanding that the government 
will have their back and follow through on their commitments 
as well. 
 
To the minister: why is this government not following through 
on assisting adopted children with complex needs? 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am 
happy to meet with this family at any point that they would like 
to meet. I am concerned about what I’ve heard here today and I 
look forward to meeting with them. I’m sure, as you’re aware, I 
cannot discuss any specifics of this case without consent from 
that family and will endeavour to do so. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, these families deserve to have 
an answer of why this ministry is making the decisions that 
they’re making and what their commitment is going to be for 
these adoptive parents. 
 
Jalyn is not the only parent concerned about having to fight 
with government when it comes to supporting adopted children. 
Kara Thorpe is also a mother of two children in Prince Albert. 
In recent months, Kara has found it very difficult to get the 
services this government owes to her children. Kara committed 
to loving and caring for these children. She is doing that, Mr. 
Speaker — that, and much more. But the Sask Party is failing in 
their commitment to assist her and other adoptive families and 
children with complex needs. 
 
Will the minister commit to reaching out to these parents and 
assure that they get the supports their children deserve? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the 
member opposite for the question and I believe I just did offer 
the opportunity to sit down with these families and talk further 
about what supports they may not be accessing that they could 
be accessing. 
 
Again I can’t speak to the specifics of this case because I don’t 

believe we have a consent form in process, but I’m happy to 
speak and sit down with these families at any time. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Consultant Review of Education System 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, the minister seems to be in a big 
rush to implement big changes in education. We know that 
changes are coming to our children’s classrooms across this 
province, but the Sask Party is sending just a single consultant 
on a whirlwind tour of the province and allowing him just four 
weeks — four weeks to consult with parents, teachers, school 
divisions, and other key stakeholders. Even school boards 
readily admit that they have no idea how or when these 
consultations are taking place. They have many questions, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Rural school divisions are particularly concerned about what 
amalgamation will mean for them. They are already stretched 
too thin. Mr. Speaker, rural school divisions are worried that 
their voice will be lost if amalgamations make them even larger. 
So will the minister put the minds of rural educators at ease and 
commit that local voices will not be lost with further 
amalgamations of rural school divisions? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the most important thing 
for us is the children of our province and to make sure that they 
have a good learning environment, that we provide the 
necessary supports for our schools and for our teachers and for 
the students that are in them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I realize that any time there’s change 
contemplated, it’s sometimes difficult for people to accept and 
understand as they work through it. But, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
assure all the trustees, all the superintendents, that that’s our 
goal is to have the children first. We want to ensure student 
success, but we also want to strengthen accountability and 
create efficient operational structures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite, and I quote from her August 
25, stated “. . . she’s not surprised the government is looking at 
amalgamation and she’s fine with the idea where it makes 
sense.” Mr. Speaker, that was August 25th from the 
StarPhoenix. Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite has changed 
her position on amalgamation, I’ll let her stand up and change 
her position on amalgamation. But, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to 
approach things with an open mind and do what’s best for the 
kids in our province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — This isn’t about fear of change, and no one is 
buying that this is about improving classrooms for our kids. I 
went to school in rural Saskatchewan and I know how 
important these schools are to their communities. And it’s 
essential for rural communities to have a voice in the way that 
their children’s classrooms are run. 



1424 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2016 

Last week the newly elected SSBA [Saskatchewan School 
Boards Association] president, himself from rural 
Saskatchewan, put it best when he said, “It’s very difficult for 
people out here to believe the decisions in the best interests of 
someone from Mankota are going to be made from Regina.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, rural schools don’t want decisions being made on 
their behalf by someone sitting at a desk in a city hundreds of 
kilometres away. They know that the decisions made by their 
locally elected trustees are made with the best interests of their 
own communities in mind. So will the minister assure rural 
school divisions that his government will keep education in 
their communities and commit today to keep locally elected 
school board trustees? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, our goal will be on the 
children in our province and the students and what they need to 
learn. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite closed 176 schools. I 
wonder where the consultation was on that. In the city of 
Calgary, in the city of Edmonton, Mr. Speaker, in their term in 
office, 32,000 students left our province. So much for their idea 
of consultation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are going to stand by the students in our 
province. We’re going to stand by the teachers in our province. 
And we’re going to try and have the most efficient operating 
system that we can so that we can do the very best for our kids, 
unlike those people that are dealing with the kids that are now 
adults in Calgary. 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 188 through 194. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled the 
responses to questions 188 to 194. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To facilitate 
the work of committees, I move that this House be now 
adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that this Assembly do now 
adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly now stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30. 
 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:38.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1413 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1413 
  McCall ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1413, 1415 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1414 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1414 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1414 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1414 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1414 
  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1415 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1415 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1415 
  Marit ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1415 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1416 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1416 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1416 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1416 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1417 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1417 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Canadian Western Agribition 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1417 
 Holodomor 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 1417 
 Transgender Day of Remembrance 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1418 
 Canadian Western Agribition Week 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1418 
 Housewarming for Long-Term Care Facility 
  Steele ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1418 
 Reeve Retires After 47 Years of Municipal Service 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1419 
 Multicultural Honours Awards 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1419 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Auditor’s Report and Details of Land Transactions 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1419 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1419 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1420 
 State of Provincial Economy 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1421 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1421 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1422 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1422 
 Support for Adoptive Parents 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1423 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 1423 
 Consultant Review of Education System 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1423 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1423 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1424 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


