






















































Hansard: June 15, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 17A  WEDNESDAY, JUNE 15, 2016, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Hon. Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Hon. Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Merriman, Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 51; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Maurice Riou http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 537 
 June 15, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Assembly, it has been . . . Pursuant to section 
29 of The Advocate for Children and Youth Act, I am 
submitting one copy of the special investigation report, The 
Silent World of Jordan, to be tabled in the Legislative Assembly 
on Wednesday, June 15, 2016. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, for an extended 
introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave granted. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
my pleasure to introduce eight distinguished guests to the 
Legislative Assembly today. They are members of the Rising 
State Leaders delegation, participants in a special program 
organized by the Canadian embassy in Washington, DC 
[District of Columbia]. 
 
The program is designed to bring outstanding state-level 
legislators and leaders from across the United States to Canada 
to build and foster greater ties among leaders in our two 
countries. The last time a Rising State Leaders delegation 
visited Saskatchewan was in 2009. 
 
Please welcome the following guests seated in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker: State Senator Katie Hobbs of Arizona, State 
Representative Aundre Bumgardner of Connecticut, State 
Representative Tom Demmer of Illinois, State Representative 
Sarah Roberts of Michigan, State Representative Drew 
Christensen of Minnesota, State Representative Jeramey 
Anderson of Mississippi, State Representative Travis Bennett of 
New Hampshire, and State Representative Melissa Sargent of 
Wisconsin. 
 
They are accompanied here this afternoon by two officials from 
the Canadian embassy in Washington: Mr. Dan Abele, head of 
intergovernmental affairs; and Mr. Weston Bachman, 
international government relations officer, congressional and 
intergovernmental affairs. 
 
Our guests have a busy schedule during their time here in 
Saskatchewan. The delegation will learn about our vast 
resources of our province, and tomorrow they will travel to 
Estevan to tour the Boundary dam 3, our leading-edge carbon 
capture and storage facility. 
 
Canada and the US [United States] share the largest trading 
relationship in the world, and Saskatchewan is an important 
partner and participant in this relationship. The US is by far our 
province’s largest trading partner. Last year Saskatchewan 

exported $17.7 billion worth of goods to the United States, 
representing 54 per cent of our province’s total exports. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of the legislature here 
today to join with me in welcoming our guests from the eight 
Rising States, the eight Rising States leaders to the Assembly 
this afternoon. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, it’s an honour to join with the minister and 
welcome this delegation from the United States here today, the 
senator and the representatives that have joined us here today, 
the Rising State leaders delegation along with those that serve 
our Canadian embassy. 
 
Certainly the United States is an incredibly important friend and 
ally to Saskatchewan and to Canada. We’re thankful for your 
presence here today, for taking the time to come to 
Saskatchewan and to strengthen that relationship that’s critical 
to us and to our country on so many fronts. 
 
As was mentioned, you’re certainly our largest trading partner, 
and as an exporting province we have a very vital trade 
relationship with the United States. You’re a crucial customer 
of potash, energy, and our mining exports and so many other 
exports like our agricultural implements. And it’s always clear 
as well that our greatest export to the United States has been, 
and always will be, our hockey players. And certainly we’re 
reminded by that with the passing of hockey legend, Mr. 
Hockey, Gordie Howe from Floral, Saskatchewan, who was 
loved by both Americans and Canadians. 
 
We also share strong agricultural ties. It’s important for you to 
know that we have a showcase, the Farm Progress Show, that’s 
opened up here today, and I hope you’re able to take some of 
that marketplace and that showcase in at this point in time. 
 
And I guess it would be remiss to say . . . It’s very important 
that I want to share with you that we mourn with all of you in 
the wake of the horrifying attack of hate and terror this week in 
Orlando, that we stand together, that we stand against hate, and 
that we stand together with the LGBTQ [lesbian, gay, bisexual, 
transgender, queer and/or questioning] community. 
 
So thanks once again to this delegation for taking time here in 
Saskatchewan. Thank you for nurturing and strengthening this 
very vital relationship, and I ask all members of this Assembly 
to welcome these leaders to our Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I too would like to welcome the delegation 
and acknowledge and welcome the visiting Rising State leaders 
delegation, including members from the Canadian embassy in 
Washington, DC. I thank you for coming to Saskatchewan and 
Canada. I would especially like to thank the Government of 
Canada and the embassy in Washington, DC for organizing this 
year’s event. Events such as this allow us the chance to 
continue fostering special economic and political ties between 
our countries. I ask all members to please join in welcoming our 
guests to the Saskatchewan legislature. 
 



538 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2016 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to this Assembly, it’s my pleasure to introduce 
some municipal officials from the great town of Nipawin. In 
your gallery, Mr. Speaker, we have His Worship Mayor David 
Trann — give us a wave if you would, Your Worship — also 
councillor Mike Botterill and director of community 
development, Chris Hudyma. These gentleman are here today, 
as I mentioned, from Nipawin. 
 
Nipawin is not only home to one of the best golf courses in the 
province, they also received some very exciting news a couple 
days ago concerning a huge new infrastructure project that 
we’re going to hear more about in just a few minutes during 
members’ statements. Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to 
please give these officials from Nipawin a warm welcome to 
their Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through and on behalf of the opposition members, I also want to 
thank the municipal leaders from Nipawin as well. I’m looking 
forward to hearing more about this infrastructure 
announcement, and I want to welcome you to your legislature. 
So thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
want to welcome some very special guests that travelled a great 
distance to be here today. They’re good friends and family of 
mine. And I would ask the Assembly members to recognize and 
welcome Willy Desjarlais of Buffalo Narrows and Cheryl 
Chartier of Buffalo Narrows and Ashley Daigneault of 
Ile-a-la-Crosse. Mr. Speaker, they know the distance that we 
travel as the MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly], not 
only for Athabasca but for Cumberland. So I’d ask all members 
of the Assembly to give a special welcome to these 
long-distance travellers, and to point out that this is your 
Legislative Assembly. So please feel welcome, and again 
thanks so much for being here today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
welcome some special guests sitting in your gallery today. 
They’re from the Saskatchewan literary community that are 
here with us today. We’ve got Ken Coates who’s the winner of 
the University of Saskatchewan Non-fiction Award. Give us a 
quick wave. I’ve got Courtney Bates-Hardy who’s the executive 
director of the Sask Book Awards. I’ve got Daniel Parr, the 
Chair of the Saskatchewan Book Awards, and I’ve got Melissa 
Bennett who’s the Legislative Librarian. 
 
The Saskatchewan Book Awards are important in recognizing 
the great literary works that are being produced right here at 
home. And I had an opportunity to listen to not only Mr. Coates 
but Rita Bouvier — I think she’s already left — but producing 

some amazing literary works right here in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d like everybody in the Assembly here to join me in 
welcoming these special guests to their legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On behalf 
of the official opposition, I’d like to join with the minister in 
welcoming these important figures to their Legislative 
Assembly. Certainly the annual Saskatchewan Book Awards 
luncheon and reading at the Legislative Library hosted by our 
great Legislative Librarian, Melissa Bennett, is always 
something that folks look forward to and sometimes regret the 
fact that there’s not enough time or hands to do the work, that 
you can’t enjoy the whole thing. But thank you very much to 
the folks from the Saskatchewan Book Awards for the great 
work they do all the year through, but especially for the 
showcase that they provide with this event. 
 
And a very special hello and congratulations and keep up the 
great work to Ken Coates, a tremendous academic in this era of 
reconciliation, Mr. Speaker. This is an individual that lives that 
out every day and has a tremendous impact on the way that 
hopefully the future of this province will go. We see that in his 
work. We see that in his teaching, and we see that here today. 
So again, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the minister 
opposite in welcoming these very important people to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
certainly always a special day when a member has a school 
group visiting from his or her constituency and especially, Mr. 
Speaker, if the school group is from your hometown. That is my 
case today, Mr. Speaker.  
 
Seated in the west gallery are 49 students from the Cupar 
School. They are made up of the students from grade 8 and 9 
and 11 and 12. And when I asked the principal, who is 
accompanying them today, why the grade 10s are missing, he 
said, well first of all, we didn’t have enough room on the buses 
for them. The grade 10s are going on their annual canoe trip in 
northern Saskatchewan next week, so they had to stay home. 
 
So the students, Mr. Speaker, are accompanied by their 
principal, Mr. Murray Bruce, and one of their staff members, 
Mr. Mike Smith. Also the two bus drivers, Ms. Patsy Santo and 
Mr. Joe Brodner, are with them. They did the tour of the 
building earlier over the noon hour. I’d met with them, and we 
had some questions. I asked them not to act like some of us do 
during question period, and they assured me they would do that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I should mention, Mr. Speaker, that being that the school is 
from Cupar and my office is a very short block away from 
there, you might expect that there may be a couple of students 
with the last name Hart in the group, and there is. Actually there 
should have been four, but two of the family members aren’t 
with us today. There’s a grade 12 student sitting in the front row 
by the name of Ethan Hart. I think he’s the fellow there with the 
slightly red face. He’s my nephew’s son. And also in the front 



June 15, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 539 

row there is my granddaughter, Alyx Hart. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to mention that on Friday is the 
grade 12 graduation, and most of the grade 12 students are with 
us here today. So, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to 
welcome them to their legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
want to join my colleagues in recognizing the two writers that 
we honoured today. First of all, I wanted to recognize in my 
home community of Ile-a-la-Crosse, Rita Bouvier, who gave us 
some very powerful writing today about a young man who in 
1966 at the age of 12 years old tried to hitchhike home, 
hitchhike home and try and make a 600-mile journey to try to 
be home with his family and friends, as he was going to a 
school in Ontario. And they found that young man in 1966, 
dead beside some railroad tracks, Mr. Speaker. And it really 
spoke about the history, and Rita’s words brought his story to 
light. So it was a really powerful presentation that we heard 
today. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, on the optimistic side and the growth side, we 
also had the opportunity to visit with Ken Coates today. I’m 
sorry I missed his presentation, but Professor Ken Coates is also 
giving the northern and Aboriginal people great opportunity to 
rebuild from our tragic past by engaging Aboriginal leaders, by 
being seen in northern Saskatchewan, and just by being a great 
human being. 
 
[13:45] 
 
And I want to thank both Rita for bringing these stories to light, 
and Professor Ken Coates for helping many of the northern 
Aboriginal people in forging a better and bolder and braver and 
new path. And it’s important that I share those words with him 
and to point out to the Assembly that the readings today by both 
of these authors are very powerful statements. 
 
And I think, as the MLA for Athabasca, I just want to say to 
both of them, thank you very much for your contribution to 
mankind and humanity in general, and to point out that the 
work that you’re doing is so valued. And we must continue to 
strive for a better and stronger North, and that affects the 
Aboriginal people tremendously. I thank you, sir, for your kind 
service, and certainly to Rita for her great words. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you to all members of the legislature, I would like 
to introduce a couple of friends of mine that came down today, 
Charles and Elva Boulanger up there in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. These are the type of people that we meet as 
politicians where, when you’re newly elected and you go into a 
community to an event for the first time, there are some people 
that make you feel so welcome when you show up at the event. 
That’s the way that Charles and Elva were when we started, and 
I am just pleased to welcome them today to their Assembly. 
And just in part of their history, not only have they worked on 
my campaign to help me be elected, but also worked on a 
couple of other members including the member for Meewasin. 

So I thank them for that. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And to 
you and through you on behalf of the members here, I’d like to 
extend a welcome to some producers that are here today from 
the Southey area. I just want to welcome them to their 
Legislative Assembly. Thank you very much for taking the time 
out of your busy schedules to bring your concerns to your 
Legislative Assembly. This is your space, and we know how 
busy you are, so for you to take the time to come and express 
your concerns is something that is very important to our 
democracy. And I want to really thank you for doing that. So 
again to all members, please welcome these producers, these 
important contributors to our economy to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
join with the member opposite in welcoming the constituents of 
mine that are here from the Southey area. I can’t quite see them 
all, but I recognize some of the faces. I was out meeting with 
some of my constituents last night over an issue that I’m 
guessing we may hear more about in a little while. But I’m 
certainly pleased to see them here this afternoon, and I would 
ask all members to welcome them to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to all 
members of this Assembly, I’d like to introduce two individuals 
sitting in the east gallery: my cousin, Ken Sarauer, and his son 
who also happens to be my godson, Jonah. Give a little wave, 
Jonah. He’s a little shy. 
 
Ken along with his wife, Kim, and their other two children, 
Celeste and Brennan, live in Humboldt, but Ken farms the 
family farm in the Lake Lenore area, the farm that his dad and 
my dad grew up on and our grandpa farmed. And hopefully 
maybe, who knows, one day Jonah will be farming as well. 
They’re in town here to check out the Farm Progress Show, and 
I’m hopeful that we’ll be able to join them after question 
period. So please join me in welcoming them to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to all 
members of the Assembly, I would like to introduce Richard 
and Wendy Basnett in the west gallery. Give a wave. Hi. 
 
Richard and Wendy live in my constituency of Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood and have been members of the 
Saskatchewan House of Prayer for several years. Richard 
recently retired from the Rabbit Lake mine where he worked as 
an auditor and a senior mine geologist. Wendy retired some 
years ago after 37 years as a physical therapist. The 



540 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2016 

Saskatchewan House of Prayer prays for all MLAs and 
encourages our work. I am grateful for their support and their 
prayers. I look forward to chatting with them a little later this 
afternoon. I ask all members to join me in welcoming them to 
their Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you, 
through you, and to all the members of the Assembly, I would 
like to introduce some of my constituents of Regina Pasqua: 
Mr. Ravinder Singh and his wife, Kulwinder Kour, and their 
daughters, Amber Kaur and Anika Kaur. They are accompanied 
by Ravinder’s mother and father-in-law, Daljeet Singh and 
Sukhwinder Kour, who are visiting from India. They are here 
today visiting this beautiful building and watching proceedings. 
Next week they are planning to leave for Alberta and BC 
[British Columbia] to explore this beautiful country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all the members of the Assembly to join me 
welcoming them to their Legislative Building. 
 
The Speaker: — I too would like to welcome everyone who’s 
joined us today. It’s an honour to have you in our galleries. But 
I just would like to remind all people here today in the galleries 
not to take part in the debate, and that includes applause. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition to improve PTSD 
[post-traumatic stress disorder] coverage for Saskatchewan 
workers. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that PTSD or 
post-traumatic stress disorder can severely impact the lives of 
Saskatchewan workers, that delaying both diagnosis and 
treatment can be detrimental to recovery, Mr. Speaker. The 
petitioners basically are simply asking for fair treatment under 
workers’ compensation, that when you are exposed to traumatic 
events on the job and receive a subsequent diagnosis of PTSD, 
that it would be presumed that those traumatic events caused 
the PTSD which would lead to quicker treatment and hopefully 
the return to work, Mr. Speaker. The prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Saskatchewan government to 
make the necessary changes to ensure that if Saskatchewan 
workers are exposed to traumatic events on the job and are 
then diagnosed with PTSD, it is presumed to be caused by 
the worker’s employment and the worker will subsequently 
be covered under workers’ compensation and receive the 
same benefits as other workers with work-related injuries. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens of Govan, 
Strasbourg, Earl Grey, and Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to stand today to present a petition as it relates to the 

rental purchase option for home ownership in northern 
Saskatchewan that the government cancelled without warning 
in 2012. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly cause the Saskatchewan 
Party government to restore the rental purchase option, 
rent-to-own option for responsible renters in northern 
Saskatchewan, for all of northern Saskatchewan including 
La Ronge, Air Ronge, Creighton, and Denare Beach, 
allowing northerners the dignity of owning their own 
homes and building communities in the province’s 
beautiful North. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 
from all throughout the province, and the ones that have signed 
this particular page are primarily from La Ronge and Air 
Ronge. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition. The people who have signed this want to bring to our 
attention the following. Wetlands serve a very vital function in 
our ecosystem. They take the form of marshes and bogs, fens, 
swamps, and open water. Wetlands are home to wildlife, 
including waterfowl, and they clean the water running off of 
agricultural fields. They protect us from flood and drought, and 
they are a playground where families can explore and play. And 
in the worst cases, such as some areas of the prairies, as much 
as 90 per cent of our wetlands have disappeared. As they 
continue to disappear, so too do the many benefits they provide. 
 
So I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the Government of Saskatchewan to: 
 
Increase funding to do the proper inventory work, putting 
Saskatchewan in a better position to manage the water 
resource. 
 
Speed up the evaluation of high-risk watersheds where 
there is significant damage annually from flooding. This 
evaluation must include a recognition of drainage works 
that could be closed or restored that will alleviate some of 
the issues downstream with respect to flooding and nutrient 
loading. 
 
Create a sound and transparent mitigation process that 
adequately addresses sustainable development. The 
sequence should first focus on avoiding environmental 
harm wherever possible before a secondary focus on 
minimizing the harm, with compensation being sought 
only when the development is deemed essential and the 
first two stages cannot be met. 

 
Sorry for the long prayer, Mr. Speaker. This is brought to you 
from the individuals from Regina and Pilot Butte. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 



June 15, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 541 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition in support of funding heritage 
languages here in Saskatchewan. And we know that after 25 
years, the Government of Saskatchewan is discontinuing all 
support for heritage language learning in Saskatchewan. Since 
1991, heritage language schools have depended on this modest 
funding from the Ministry of Education to help sustain their 
programs. But as a result of the announcement by the Ministry 
of Education, many of these non-profit heritage language 
schools will be faced with the difficult decision of whether they 
can continue to operate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to reconsider this decision and restore funding for heritage 
language education in Saskatchewan heritage language 
schools. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition today are from the 
city of Regina. I do so present. Thank you. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Farm Progress Show 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, today we kick off the 39th 
annual Farm Progress Show, one of Canada’s largest trade 
shows that attracts 45,000 visitors from around the globe each 
year. It’s the place to be for opportunity, innovation, and 
excitement. This year organizers look forward to new 
programming that adds even more value for exhibitors, 
sponsors, and the visiting public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one in eight Canadian jobs are in the agriculture 
and agri-food sector. That’s over 50,000 jobs in Saskatchewan 
from engineering, research, processing, to sales, finance, and 
everything in between. And as the world population continues 
to grow, the demand for skilled people to work in agriculture 
and our products will continue to grow as well. 
 
I’m looking forward to attending the show once again, along 
with colleagues. And as a former teacher, I value the new 
thinkAG Career and Education Expo which allows students to 
explore the endless career and entrepreneurial opportunities in 
agriculture, learn about modern food production, and discover 
the diversity of agriculture-related post-secondary options. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the international buyers program is also a feature 
that sets this show apart from other shows. International guests 
and buyer delegations from over 50 countries are matched with 
products, services, and suppliers that they need. Our province’s 
and country’s leading manufacturers can meet international 
customers, Canada’s farmers, Canadian farmers face to face in 

one marketplace. It’s just one more reason this show is the best 
in the country. I encourage all members and everyone in 
Saskatchewan to attend our annual Farm Progress show. 
Thanks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm River. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we all know, this 
week is the 39th annual Canada’s Farm Progress Show in 
Regina. The Farm Progress Show is the largest dryland farm 
technology show in Canada, showcasing the latest in farm 
equipment, technology services, and practices. It attracts over 
700 exhibitors and more than 45,000 visitors annually from 
over 50 countries. 
 
Every year, Farm Progress generates over $500 million in sales; 
$50 million of that are from farm machinery alone. Dozens of 
agricultural innovations are showcased and unveiled for the 
very first time at this show. Companies also use this show to 
introduce improvements, upgrades, and new developments in 
their products. 
 
New to the show this year is a thinkAG Career and Education 
Expo. This expo will allow students to explore the endless 
career and entrepreneurial opportunities in agriculture, learn 
about modern food production, and discover the diversity of 
agriculture-related post-secondary options. Some additional 
attractions for this year include modern lifestyles pavilion, the 
farm progress forum, outstanding young farmers, the livestock 
centre, and the antique truck and tractor show. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d encourage everyone to come and enjoy one of 
Canada’s premier agricultural events. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Global Wind Day 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, today is Global Wind Day. 
Every June 15th, people around the world mark this special 
occasion to highlight the importance of wind as a source for 
renewable energy. Here in Saskatchewan, Prairie people have a 
long history of harnessing the power of wind in order to provide 
the power they need. Going back to the days before Tommy 
Douglas’s rural electrification brought coal-fired electricity 
across the prairie, farmers used turbines to run generators and 
windmills to operate pumps at water wells. 
 
In 2016 wind is again being looked at as a valuable source for 
our energy needs. Over the last 20 years, governments in 
Saskatchewan have opened small-scale operations to explore 
the potential that wind offers in our province. We all know that 
rapid action is needed to transition our electricity system to 
more renewables, including wind. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Fortunately, new technologies are driving down the cost of 
wind power, making it as cheap or cheaper than other sources 
of electricity. Increasingly it’s becoming obvious that wind 
energy is a mature and cost-competitive technology that we can 
use to help meet our electricity needs while strengthening the 



542 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2016 

economy and creating green jobs. More jobs in renewable 
energy will help to make our economy more diversified and 
resistant to fluctuations in the price of natural resources, 
meaning fewer surprises for government and less need for 
transformational change with the boom-bust cycle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing 
Global Wind Day and in committing to working together to 
build a greener electricity grid to bring Saskatchewan into the 
21st century. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Governments to Fund Nipawin Water Treatment Plant 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Monday the 
federal government, the town of Nipawin, and our government 
were pleased to announce funding for the new Nipawin water 
treatment plant. This $20.8 million facility will provide clean, 
safe drinking water for Nipawin residents and will meet the 
water needs for population growth in the community well into 
the future. The new plant will improve the quality of the town’s 
water and reduce the level of minerals in the water, eliminating 
the need for residents and local businesses to have private water 
softening systems. This project also includes the installation of 
new distribution pumps and emergency power generation 
equipment to ensure a reliable supply of water during power 
outages. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since 2008 our government has invested more 
than $8 billion in infrastructure alone across Saskatchewan. 
Three hundred and fifty million of that has gone directly into 
municipal infrastructure in communities large and small across 
our province. We know that infrastructure investment is key to 
keeping Saskatchewan strong. Mr. Speaker, we are proud of our 
partnerships with our municipal and federal partners and will 
continue to work with them on important infrastructure projects 
as our province continues to grow. 
 
I ask all members to join me in thanking the town of Nipawin as 
they continue to plan for growth and advanced projects like this 
that help improve the quality of life for all residents. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 

Readings From Saskatchewan Book Award Winners 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it was 
an honour today to attend, with some of my colleagues, 
readings only an hour or so ago from two of 2016 
Saskatchewan Book Award winners. The Saskatchewan Book 
Awards are yearly awards given out to Saskatchewan authors 
who have demonstrated excellence in their published works. 
There were 10 winners this year across the categories, and 
many more nominees. 
 
The Legislative Library hosts an annual reading where they 
showcase Sask Book Award winners. Mr. Speaker, the authors 
showcased today were Rita Bouvier, for her collection of poetry 
called nakamowin’sa for the seasons that explored the history 

of First Nations culture, and I quote, “echo a quiet manifesto for 
change.” And Ken Coates’s non-fiction #Idlenomore and the 
Remaking of Canada discusses the Idle No More movement and 
how it is shaping the future of our nation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the readings show the great talent these authors 
have and how they are drawing attention to such important 
issues. Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of this Assembly 
to congratulate Rita and Ken on their awards and to 
congratulate all the 2016 Saskatchewan award recipients and 
nominees. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Westview. 
 

Warman and Martensville Business Excellence Awards 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise in the House to acknowledge the first-ever Warman & 
Martensville Chambers of Commerce Business Excellence 
Awards Gala. Partnering together, these two organizations 
hosted their first annual awards ceremony, celebrating and 
recognizing the leadership of local businesses in their 
communities. 
 
I, along with the member for Saskatoon University, had the 
privilege to attend the event in Warman on May 27th. It was a 
terrific evening which showcased the entrepreneurial spirit and 
energy within the Warman and Martensville business 
communities. Mr. Speaker, I also had the honour and privilege 
of presenting the 2016 Community Involvement Award on 
behalf of SaskTel, which was awarded to Lakeview Insurance. 
 
This year’s other award recipients included Marla Janzen 
Realty, the Warman Small Animal Hospital, and Passions 
Beauty Studio. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was just a few years ago, in 2009 and 2012, that 
Martensville and Warman were officially designated city status. 
This awards night exemplifies how these two communities have 
thrived economically and attracted businesses and industries to 
their region. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate all of this year’s 
award winners and nominees. I also ask all members to join me 
in thanking the two chambers for their continued work and 
dedication supporting local businesses in our communities. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Carlton. 
 

Prince Albert Citizens Support Project Triple Play 
 
Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
great honour to talk about some exciting things that are taking 
place in my home city of Prince Albert. 
 
As some of you already know, the 2018 Junior Men’s World 
Softball Championship tournament will be hosted by our great 
northern city. This event will have tremendous economic 
impact on Prince Albert and the province in general and will 
attract world-class athletes. 



June 15, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 543 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to talk about Project Triple Play, an 
initiative that is taking place to help modernize the softball 
facilities and help make it possible for the city to host such a 
prestigious tournament. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Prince Albert are generous and the 
sponsors are already coming in. However, I would like to 
highlight a few in particular. Major contributions have come 
from Rusty Clunie and family, Russell Clunie Senior and 
family, Gord Broda and family, Ken Berkosky and family. 
 
Further, the title sponsor of Project Triple Play is Broda Group. 
Broda is a name familiar to many members of this Assembly 
since they are a Saskatchewan company headquartered in Prince 
Albert that is one of the major builders of the Regina bypass. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of this Assembly to 
thank the sponsors and organizers of Project Triple Play for 
their leadership in this community. Thank you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Carbon Capture and Storage Project 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, a lot has been said by the 
Sask Party about their carbon capture projects, so let’s take a 
little trip down memory lane. On October 2nd, 2014, the 
then-$1.4 billion CCS [carbon capture and storage] project was 
officially launched. On October 26th, 2015, it was revealed that 
about $12 million in fines were paid to Cenovus. On October 
28th, documents showed that the CCS had been down, had 
downtime and produced at 40 per cent capacity for the year. 
Still the Premier said it was on target. 
 
But SaskPower confirmed it had never run at 100 per cent 
capacity. On October 29th the Premier defended the 
government’s silence but admitted the Sask Party could have 
been more forthcoming about the problems. Then on November 
2nd it was admitted that they should have been clearer about the 
problems from the beginning. Later in November the Sask Party 
had to apologize in writing to a delegation that had been visiting 
the carbon capture project to clarify the truth and share the 
reality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after all of this, along with the secretive Cenovus 
deal, how can Saskatchewan people be sure they and world 
leaders are getting the accurate story of the Sask Party’s 
expensive experiment? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, while we’re taking a ride 
down memory lane, perhaps we could remind the member 
opposite of what the member from Nutana said about the 
facility at one point in time. She was just amazed at the facility, 
she said. She thought it was a great step forward for the people 
of Saskatchewan. And then not too much later, a few months 
later, she said that the project wasn’t in keeping with what the 
NDP [New Democratic Party] would do, Mr. Speaker — a 
direct flip-flop there. Now they would have the people of 
Saskatchewan believe that they are in favour of the facility 

except that it’s cost too much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The fact of the matter is, is this is world-leading technology. 
There are groups from around the world, Mr. Speaker, 
including a group that’s in the gallery today that are going to be 
touring the facility, Mr. Speaker. They believe that this facility 
is working very, very well. It’s capturing on target of about 
800 000 tonnes of CO2 for this year, Mr. Speaker, the 
equivalent of taking about 200,000 cars off the roads of our 
province, Mr. Speaker. It’s the right direction to move, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s time the NDP got on board. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s astounding that that 
scandal-plagued minister is still rising in this Assembly to 
answer questions. The only thing that’s really clear about this 
project is that it’s captured a whole lot more Saskatchewan cash 
than it ever has carbon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know the problem with this project did not end with the 
refusal of that government to be up front. The Sask Party chose 
SNC-Lavalin to work on the carbon capture project, then 
promptly sued them for their work. But before that lawsuit was 
even settled, they gave them another contract, Mr. Speaker. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party’s strange commitment to 
SNC-Lavalin was made even more concerning when the 
company was named in the infamous Panama papers. They 
allege SNC-Lavalin paid secret commissions to offshore 
companies. Was the Sask Party even aware of this at all? 
 
And just this week media found out that the carbon capture 
project had more than 6,800 work orders on it since just May 
2013 and now we’re told that there were thousands more with 
SNC-Lavalin, but the government won’t come clean on the 
number. Mr. Speaker, when can Saskatchewan people expect a 
full accounting of these ongoing costs — including those with 
SNC — and how they contribute to the massive overrun that 
this project is clearly driving up the cost of power for everyone 
in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, this project has been very 
positive for the people of Saskatchewan. In 2015 about $2 
million were made from the sale of CO2. This year it’s expected 
to be about $16 million of sales, from the sale of CO2 to 
Cenovus, Mr. Speaker. And people from around the world think 
this is a very good project, including the Environment minister 
from the federal government, Mr. Speaker, who visited just 
recently and identified the magnitude of the opportunity in the 
world — just in China alone at $50 trillion, Mr. Speaker. I think 
that’s very important to note as well. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I will add one more comment, that any time 
that SaskPower or any other government agency feels that they 
haven’t been dealt with properly by a provider here in 
Saskatchewan, indeed we will take action with respect to that, 
Mr. Speaker. We will not back off in any way, shape, or form 
with respect to that, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why we are in 
court action with respect to this project. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 



544 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2016 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party should at 
the very least come clean about the billions that they’ve blown 
and the problems that they’ve hidden from Saskatchewan 
people. The minister touts $2 million in a deal, a bad deal with 
Cenovus, Mr. Speaker, on a $1.5 billion project? That’s 
ludicrous, Mr. Speaker. And he refuses to give a straight answer 
about that deal with Cenovus. You know, the one that had to be 
renegotiated, the one the minister had been briefed on that put 
taxpayers, ratepayers on the hook for a $90 million penalty. 
And even through renegotiation it’s clear that Cenovus saw a 
real benefit, at least a $100 million advantage to getting out of 
that commitment to take our carbon. 
 
Cenovus is certainly standing up for their shareholders, but it’s 
clear that the Sask Party isn’t standing up for Saskatchewan 
people. Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party’s excuse for going with 
Cenovus in the first place was that they were going to take all of 
the carbon. So now they’ve got to find another buyer. The 
government says, and SaskPower says that could take up to two 
years. That means losing 8 to $9 million a year. So, Mr. 
Speaker, what’s the plan to find new buyers? And what 
guarantee do we have that this time they’ll put the interests of 
Saskatchewan people first? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, when the original RFP 
[request for proposal] went out for interest in terms of the sale 
of CO2, there was a huge amount of interest from a number of 
different companies with respect to that sale of CO2, Mr. 
Speaker. Cenovus was eventually selected because they did the 
most on the CO2. Indeed there are a number of companies 
SaskPower is talking to right now with respect to that, as 
offtakers, if there is a need for additional CO2 to be sold outside 
of the contract with Cenovus, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is a project that is certainly beneficial to the people of 
Saskatchewan. The NDP at one time were onside, then they’re 
offside, then they’re back onside. We’re never sure where they 
are, Mr. Speaker. I suspect it’s because the member from 
Nutana is a signator to the Leap Manifesto and of course they 
don’t want anything to do with that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But you know, you would think there had never been a . . . 
You’d think there hadn’t been a recent election here in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, given the fact that in the Estevan 
area the NDP got less than 10 per cent of the vote of the people 
of Saskatchewan, and they haven’t accepted it yet. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Yes. You know, it’s a good thing that 
scandal-plagued minister doesn’t let the facts stand in the way, 
Mr. Speaker. You know, behind closed doors they signed a 
sweetheart deal with Cenovus, but now they’re turning their 
back on our kids’ teachers. 
 
It’s bad enough that on front after front, people are learning 
they can’t trust this government’s word. But now it’s obvious 
that you can’t even trust their signature, Mr. Speaker. Not 
honouring the contract they signed, shorting school divisions 

and classrooms, making students pay for the Sask Party’s 
mismanagement is an absolute disgrace. This can’t stand and it 
has to be reversed. Though the Education minister admits that 
he isn’t holding up his end of the bargain on the teachers’ salary 
agreement, he’s washing his hands of the consequences. 
 
[14:15] 
 
So I’ll ask the Deputy Premier: how can he possibly defend not 
honouring this contract, making students and our kids pay the 
price? Will he stand up here today, honour the deal, and commit 
to supporting students and classrooms that are strained all 
across Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I want to clarify some 
facts for the members opposite and for the teachers of our 
province. The teachers’ collective bargaining agreement will be 
fully honoured, and teachers will be paid the amount that was 
negotiated. I want to make that abundantly clear. The teachers 
in our province worked hard. They deserve to get paid, and this 
government will never see that they don’t get paid. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, a few years ago there was one of the 
divisions that was paying their teachers slow. As soon as we 
learned about it, within hours we provided some additional 
funding to make sure that that never happened again. 
 
This is a difficult budget year for our province, Mr. Speaker, 
and we’re going to ask the school divisions to absorb an amount 
that is less than half of one per cent of the entire education 
budget. Mr. Speaker, the operating grants provided to school 
divisions is unrestricted. They can move things between budget 
lines and we expect them to work with us and find some 
savings and find some economies. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, the minister tried that line 
yesterday. But let me give him some facts. Regina Public will 
not be filling vacancies. That means fewer teachers and more 
students in each classroom. Prairie South is cutting school 
assistants including two social workers and a helpline position. 
Sask Rivers has cut 1,100 hours. Saskatoon Public is looking at 
ending involvement in the provincial education sector strategic 
plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the cost of this government’s bad faith 
negotiations. There is a reason that the government is part of 
these salary negotiations: they have the money. School boards 
can’t expand their funding envelope. They can’t increase 
production and make more money. If the Sask Party had no 
intention of being true to their word, why were they even at the 
table? 
 
What message does this send to other government employees 
who will negotiate with the Sask Party? That deals don’t 
matter? And if the government can negotiate in bad faith, how 
will they enforce labour laws with private companies to make 
sure that they act any differently? 
 



June 15, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 545 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, during tough times, 
governments of all stripes need to make difficult choices. In 
1992, during difficult economic times, the then-NDP 
government gave the teachers a salary increase of zero, nothing. 
In 1993, again during difficult economic times, the NDP gave 
the teachers yet again another zero, nada, nothing. 1995, again 
difficult times for the province, the NDP gave the teachers a 
zero, and an overall education increase of negative point nine 
per cent, an actual decrease in 1995. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 2015, during that challenging . . . [inaudible] 
. . . this government gave teachers a 1.9 per cent salary increase 
and an overall education budget increase of, Mr. Speaker, 12 
per cent. In 2016, also challenging economic times, this 
government again gave the teachers a 1.9 per cent salary 
increase and an 8 per cent, almost 8 per cent increase to the total 
budget. Mr. Speaker, we will never apologize for asking the 
divisions for look for economies and to make sacrifices and to 
work hard to make sure the money stays in the classroom where 
it belongs, as opposed to the members opposite that closed 176 
schools. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — What is it with this government that they can’t 
accept responsibility, Mr. Speaker? They walk away from their 
signature on contracts for our teachers, and now they’re shoving 
even more risk and costs onto the backs of already struggling 
municipalities and Saskatchewan families. Like school boards 
being faced to pay for a deal that the government agreed to, 
under this government’s new scheme, cities are being forced to 
take responsibility for maintaining the sites until new schools 
are built. Saskatoon came close to being stuck with a big bill for 
this already, and now the mayor of Regina is concerned that this 
practice is yet another example of the Sask Party downloading 
their responsibilities onto the city. He said, “This leaves a 
distinct taste of downloading. I’m not happy with that.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, school sites were and should be the responsibility 
of the provincial government. So will the government end this 
practice or will they once again ignore legitimate concerns and 
plow ahead? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve had in our province 
legislation that was passed under the NDP government that 
provided that 10 per cent of new subdivisions is held in 
municipal reserve for parks and schools — land that is provided 
by the developers for the benefit of the community so they can 
have schools, so that they can have park areas. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s what we’ve done with these areas. 
 
The mayor of Regina asked us for money for that instead, so 
what did we do? We said, okay, how much do you want? He 
asked for $1 million per lot. We gave him $1 million per lot. 
Then he said, we’d also like to have $1 million to service each 
one. So in each and every one of the Regina properties, he 
received over $2 million. And that was the same practice that 
took place with all nine of the joint-use schools. The other cities 

are pleased that they’re getting a school and I’m sure the 
citizens of Regina will be as well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Proposed Potash Project 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, many residents, land owners, and 
producers from Southey and surrounding area have joined us 
here today. They have concerns about the proposed Yancoal 
potash solution mine. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a large project and these people want to 
make sure the right checks and balances are in place, that their 
concern about the land acquisition process be taken seriously, 
that their concerns about pitting neighbour against neighbour be 
dealt with, and that the Sask Party stands up for local citizens to 
ensure that projects and jobs are secure. Given the Minister of 
Economy’s history of boondoggles and scandals, you’ll forgive 
these folks for wanting assurances. 
 
So what can the minister tell those here today to ensure them 
that he will listen to the concerns they have brought forward? 
And will he commit today to ensure full and complete 
consultations — consultations that recognize the size of this 
proposal — are undertaken before they approve this project? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I would join with the member 
opposite in welcoming the guests from the Southey area of the 
province of Saskatchewan, and I would want them to know that 
the Government of Saskatchewan has a strict regulatory regime, 
but it supports the responsible development of Saskatchewan’s 
resources. 
 
Officials from the Ministry of the Environment, SaskWater, and 
the Ministry of the Economy have accommodated meetings 
with the public to answer questions and concerns on Yancoal’s 
potash project. It’s also our understanding that Yancoal has 
accommodated open house and consultation. 
 
There is much more in this process of Yancoal moving forward 
with their operations, if they have operations in the future. The 
environmental assessment is just one step in that process, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So we would welcome the opportunity at any time to have a 
discussion further about it with representatives of the group 
here today if that’s what they would wish. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, of course we want concerned 
residents to get a fair hearing. And the Sask Party and the 
scandal-plagued minister may have forgotten, but we’re here to 
represent Saskatchewan people. And like many of them, we 
want any new development to be done right and include 
protection for the water we drink, the air we breathe, and the 
land we use to grow food. 
 



546 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2016 

But, Mr. Speaker, we’re also concerned about Saskatchewan’s 
potash industry. China is one of our largest customers. The 
introduction of this state-run mine could have huge impacts on 
our industry and thousands of jobs. And from the bypass 
scandals to the failing carbon capture project, the P3s 
[public-private partnership] for everything from hospitals to 
schools and bridges that will indebt communities for decades, 
Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has shown no ability to plan long 
or even medium term. 
 
So what is the Sask Party’s plan to make sure they are not 
allowing China to have undue control over the price of potash, 
and eliminating China as one of the biggest customers for 
Saskatchewan’s current potash mines? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, successive governments in 
Saskatchewan, including the NDP over the years, welcomed 
international investment into our province. We have the French 
people that are involved in the mining industry in uranium in 
this province, Mr. Speaker. We have, most recently, west 
German folks that are involved in the potash industry out at 
Bethune. We have BHP from Australia in Saskatchewan as 
well, at Jansen, Mr. Speaker. We have been involved as a 
government, as governments over the years, in many, many 
different resource developments here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In fact, if the truth is known, Mr. Speaker, the NDP liked the 
potash industry so much, they nationalized it back in the ’70s, 
Mr. Speaker. So for them to suggest somehow or another that 
they aren’t in favour of the development of potash resources 
here in the province of Saskatchewan is just false, Mr. Speaker. 
 
To get to the important point in her question, if ever there is a 
development with respect to this one that is being talked about, 
Yancoal, Mr. Speaker, the province of Saskatchewan, the 
Government of Saskatchewan, would never allow potash to be 
sold lower than the international world price to anyone, 
including the Chinese. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Closure of Correctional Facility 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
Buffalo Narrows correctional centre has shown the importance 
of having northerners serve their sentence in the North where 
they can be close to the land, close to their families, and close to 
their elders. It’s a minimum security facility so the inmates that 
are serving their time can also serve the community, as the 
community serves them. But the Saskatchewan Party just 
doesn’t get that. The people of Buffalo Narrows and area are 
still very upset as they see the Sask Party is ignoring the North 
once again. 
 
Some of the workers that the Sask Party kicked out of their jobs 
are here today. Can the minister explain to them why the 
Buffalo Narrows correctional centre was singled out and 
targeted, and why these good people can no longer work in and 
serve their community? 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said earlier 
when asked the question later . . . or earlier on last week, these 
were not and are not easy decisions. 
 
I want to thank all of the staff and the ones that are here today 
for the great work they have done. 
 
These decisions are not easy because we have people working 
in these institutions. As of today, Mr. Speaker, there are two 
offenders left in the Buffalo Narrows facility. Closing this 
facility, Mr. Speaker, was about how to achieve the best results 
in our service delivery and the most efficient use of our existing 
correctional facilities. This was not an easy decision. My 
colleagues on this side have had to make difficult decisions 
also. 
 
This funding for Buffalo Narrows, I mean all of the funding 
was up against the living unit at the Prince Albert Correctional 
Centre, was up against the 96-bed correctional mental health 
facility in Saskatchewan, in North Battleford, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These are tough decisions, Mr. Speaker. But we are paid and 
elected to make tough decisions, not just when they’re easy. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, with the Sask Party, it’s 
nothing but scandal after scandal. And all these scandals cost a 
lot of money. But instead of taking responsibility for their 
mismanagement and waste, they have targeted the North, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And let’s take a history of that waste: $47 million on the smart 
meter mess; $43 million to demolish and rebuild a brand new 
overpass; $41 million to one American consultant on lean; $1.5 
billion on a carbon capture project full of setbacks, delays, and 
repairs; and of course, Mr. Speaker, your bypass scandal that 
ballooned from $400 million to over $2 billion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Why didn’t the Sask Party take responsibility and cut the 
billions of billions of dollars that they wasted? Why, Mr. 
Speaker, did they choose to ignore all that wasted money and 
try and balance the budget on the backs of Buffalo Narrows 
correctional centre and their workers, Mr. Speaker? Why did 
they target the North, gut this northern community, overcrowd 
other facilities, and put good people out of work and eliminate 
effective correctional programs, all to save a million dollars a 
year? Why? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, we again reject the premise of 
the member’s question. The comments he made in his preamble 
were absolutely ridiculous. Over $109 million has been invested 
since 2007 on targeted policing initiatives and programs which 
include, Mr. Speaker, the North. This government has added 
over 380 bed spaces and invested over $60 million in our 
correctional facilities throughout the province. 



June 15, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 547 

This side of government has created over 200 well-paying jobs 
in Prince Albert and area due to our recent expansions. We 
expanded our facilities by also focusing on demand reduction, 
and that’s one thing that the member did not mention, of course: 
police and crisis teams, Hub and COR [centre of responsibility], 
Whitespruce training facility, and of course the serious violent 
offender response, Mr. Speaker. We have spent, invested a lot 
of money within the province of Saskatchewan. We have 
invested money in the North for the betterment of all people. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, I’m trying to understand what 
about this they don’t understand. Today the Children’s 
Advocate reported that correctional facilities need to do a better 
job when it comes to dealing with complex cases and unique 
needs. 
 
The Buffalo Narrows correctional facility is not a youth facility 
but does check all of those boxes, and that’s important because 
the same logic applies. It is a community-based, 
minimum-security facility. There is a local understanding about 
how to work with the inmates and how to get them to work too. 
Culture is part of the rehabilitation, and local context assists in 
providing relevant services. But the Sask Party keeps making 
the same tragic mistake of closing the smaller centres and 
adding more inmates to bigger centres where unfortunately 
people are falling through the cracks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party cut a lot of Justice and Corrections 
programs in this budget, programs that are supposed to keep our 
streets and communities strong and safe. Mr. Speaker, with all 
of the evidence calling for investment, why is the minister 
closing facilities like the one in Buffalo Narrows? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said earlier, 
this decision, these decisions that we end up having to make are 
very, very difficult and they are not easy. And all of the staff, 
please . . . It is never about the quality of the staff within our 
facilities. 
 
The member opposite fails to recognize the Whitespruce facility 
in Yorkton. This was a young offender facility that was 
converted into a low-risk offender and what it’s supposed to do, 
what it is going to do, and what it will produce are skills 
training for offenders. Mr. Speaker, while culturally sensitive 
programming is important, it’s not just about that. It is about 
making sure that they have jobs, that when they are released 
into the community — and they will be, Mr. Speaker — that at 
least they have the jobs that are needed to provide for their 
families, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have done a number of initiatives over the time. I’m going 
to draw the attention of the member about the healthy families, 
Mr. Speaker. We are focused on reducing demand into our 
system because I do know on this side of the House that if we 

continue to do things the same way, we’ll end up with the same 
result that we have today, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 37 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2016 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I move Bill No. 37, The 
Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2016 be now introduced and 
read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Premier that 
Bill No. 37, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2016 be 
introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — [Inaudible] . . . Deputy Premier. When shall 
this bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting of the House. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 32 — The Automobile Accident Insurance 
(Benefits) Amendment Act, 2016 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I am pleased to rise today and move second reading of 
the automobile accident insurance amendment Act, 2016. Mr. 
Speaker, these amendments will impact all of Saskatchewan 
auto injury programs, be it no-fault, tort, or reduced no-fault. In 
total there are more than 30 changes. I’ll touch on a few of them 
now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When an impaired driver causes a collision and is killed, the 
family impacted will now be able to sue the estate of the 
deceased impaired driver for pain and suffering or bereavement 
damages. The list of offences that trigger the ability for an 
innocent party to sue has also been expanded to cover criminal 
negligence causing death or bodily harm, criminal negligence 
causing bodily injury, flight from a peace officer, and 
dangerous operation while street racing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition there are many changes that improve 
coverage for those needing specialized cars and recreation 



548 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2016 

equipment, rehabilitation benefits, and counselling for 
immediate family members. Mr. Speaker these are very positive 
changes and they’ll help improve the quality of life for people 
who have been seriously injured in a collision. Mr. Speaker, we 
have decided as a government to defer — and I say defer — 
two of the more financially significant injury programs: 
changes to the living expenses, and the CPP [Canada Pension 
Plan] benefit. Mr. Speaker, I want to emphasize that these 
changes remain a priority for our government and will be 
implemented when it is financially prudent to do so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing, I want to thank the many interested 
parties who influenced these changes through the consultations 
in 2014 and ’15. With that, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading 
of the automobile accident insurance amendment Act, 2016. 
 
The Speaker: — The Deputy Premier has moved Bill No. 32, 
The Automobile Accident Insurance (Benefits) Amendment Act, 
2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? I 
recognize the member from Batoche. Or sorry, Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Give us 
a couple of more years and you’ll be able to say that and look in 
this side of the House in terms of the member from Batoche. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I would like to point out that as the member 
of the opposition, I want to be able to give some very brief 
comments about The Automobile Accident Insurance Act that is 
being presented today by the minister as it relates to the Bill No. 
32. I think the amount of pages that are in the actual bill itself, 
Mr. Speaker, run to about 181 pages of some of the changes 
that are going to occur under this particular bill. And that’s why 
it’s important that as the opposition or the official opposition, 
that we take the time to scrutinize these bills as some of the 
changes that are being identified in the actual bill itself are 
fairly comprehensive. 
 
There’s a number of the sections of the Act that are being 
changed as to certainly address the issue that the minister 
alluded to as it relates to death caused by accidents that are, that 
can be prevented as a result of somebody’s, as the example 
being used, the drinking and driving issue. 
 
So I think it’s really important, as the official opposition, that 
we make sure that we look at all the wording that is being 
presented in this particular bill. We obviously want to seek out 
some of the families that have been impacted by this bill and 
see certainly some of the changes that they would support. And 
we also want to be able to talk to the legal community, people 
that have a lot of knowledge and background in terms of how to 
deal with the tragic event of a death, and in the case of SGI 
[Saskatchewan Government Insurance] getting involved with 
that particular aspect of dealing with the pain and suffering as a 
result of that accident. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, a lot of the legal community needs to be 
contacted. And some of the people that are involved in this 
particular discipline when it comes to practising law, they 
certainly have a lot of perspectives and a lot of advice for a 
number of people that they might work with, but also for the 
official opposition and the government. 
 
So as we look at some of the changes, it’s 181 pages of some 

change. And while the focus is on the issue around accidental 
death, Mr. Speaker, as a result of negligence, we still want to be 
able to ascertain as to what the changes are as it relates to the 
effectiveness of supports to families, whether there is an 
effective settlement for some of the families that may lose a 
loved one as a result of the accident. These are all the different 
angles that are really, really important in this particular bill that 
we have to investigate. 
 
So one of the things that’s really important as we sit here in the 
Legislative Building is to give the legislators, the lawmakers if 
you will, give them the opportunity to study the bill, not only 
from the government perspective, but more so from the official 
opposition and more so from the neutral parties, if you will, in 
terms of the lawyers that might be looking at this particular Act 
and some of the families that have been impacted by some of 
the issues that this Act brings forward. 
 
So I think it’s really important, Mr. Speaker, that as the official 
opposition we have the bill. We are going to read very carefully 
through the bill. And as I mentioned in my preamble on a 
number of other bills that were presented in the past few days, 
we have some very capable legal people within our official 
opposition caucus that can look through these bills and certainly 
decipher some of the terminology that we often are accustomed 
to as lay people when it comes to the application of law. And I 
can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that we always look forward to the 
very sound advice and sage advice of those that have taken 
training in law, so that they’re able to assist us in this regard. 
 
So again to all the families out there that are impacted by this 
law, as the official opposition we want to do what is right for 
you. We want to make sure that we seek your advice, and that’s 
part of the process of understanding this bill. To the lawyers 
that might be specializing in automobile accidents, Mr. Speaker, 
they also need to be able to look at the bill and see what 
changes are being heralded, what changes are being proposed. 
And if they can add or take away some of the more aggravating 
aspects of the bill, if there are any, Mr. Speaker, then we need 
to make sure that they are given the opportunity to do that. And 
of course, Mr. Speaker, as the official opposition, we would like 
to invite those organizations and individuals and law firms that 
might be able to give us some very good advice on where the 
strength of this particular bill is and where the weaknesses are. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s always about, it’s always about oversight and 
to ensure that what is being proposed by the minister is, that this 
is exactly what the groups and organizations would like to see 
happening in the Act, and that there is no disregard for some of 
the opinions that other people have shared with them. This is 
really, really important and this is our job and our role as the 
official opposition. 
 
So we will certainly undertake a comprehensive review of the 
bill itself. We will also network with some of our own people 
that certainly have a lot of background in this. And more 
importantly, Mr. Speaker, we want to talk to the families that 
may be impacted by this to ensure that this bill meets the 
criteria that they have been expressing from time to time to the 
government or to any other organization in terms of the 
concerns that they might have as it relates to the bill itself. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have a bit of work to do on this bill. Like I 



June 15, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 549 

said, it’s 181 pages. We want to understand it very well, and 
we’ll undertake the research of this bill almost immediately. 
And following that, my other more learned colleagues within 
the caucus, the opposition caucus, will certainly have a lot more 
to say from the legal perspective as to what this bill means to 
the people of Saskatchewan. So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I 
move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 32, The Automobile 
Accident Insurance (Benefits) Amendment Act, 2016. I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 32, the automotive accident 
insurance benefit Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to agree with the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 33 — The Child and Family Services 
Amendment Act, 2016 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I move that Bill No. 33, The Child and Family Services 
Amendment Act, 2016 now be read for the second time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the renewal of our province’s child welfare 
legislation is a key priority for the Ministry of Social Services 
and its child welfare transformation strategy. The Child and 
Family Services Amendment Act, 2016 includes proposed 
amendments to existing provisions regarding the Indian child 
welfare agreements, disclosure of information, and several 
minor amendments to update language and titles of legislation 
and conform to current legislative drafting standards. 
 
The first major change is to the Indian child welfare agreements 
and is reflected in revisions to section 61 and a new section 
62.1. Section 61 allows the minister to enter into agreements 
with the First Nations Child and Family Services agencies for 
the purpose of administering services under the Act on behalf of 
the minister. In the subsection 61(1), the word “Indian” is 
replaced with “Aboriginal.” The Constitution Act, 1982 
describes Aboriginal as Inuit, Métis, and First Nations. Using 
the term Aboriginal rather than First Nations or Indian provides 
the minister with flexibility to enter into agreements with any 
agency to provide child welfare services to Aboriginal 
communities in the province as was the original intent of 
section 61. 
 
A new provision, section 62.1, is included which enables a 
termination-with-notice right of the minister for Aboriginal 
welfare agreements where in the opinion of the minister it is in 
the public interest to do so or where existing agreements do not 
include a fixed contractual termination period, and includes 
criteria by which Aboriginal child welfare agreements will be 
developed, reviewed, and terminated. When the minister’s 
authority under the Act is delegated to any agency, it is 
imperative that the entity be accountable to provide services in 
compliance with the Act. 
 
[14:45] 
 

The overall purpose of the new provision is to bring consistency 
to terms of the delegation agreements to ensure that children 
and families are provided equivalent supports and services 
regardless of where they reside in the province, on or off 
reserve. The new provision will also give the minister the 
power, where it is in the public interest to do so, to terminate 
and end an agency’s delegation agreement by providing 90 days 
written notice of intent to do so. This is standard contractual 
language. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second major proposed change are to the 
legislative provisions which support disclosure of information. 
In 1989, provisions regarding disclosure of information were 
proclaimed in The Child and Family Services Act, CFSA, and in 
1992 in The Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy 
Act, FOIP. The amendments to provisions governing 
information sharing, including regulation making, are being 
advanced now due to the need to align the Act with similar 
amendments being proposed for other provincial 
information-sharing legislation. Current legislation limits the 
disclosure of information to circumstances where disclosure is 
required in order to carry out the intent of the Act to promote 
the well-being of children in need of protection. 
 
Subsection 74(1)(b) is amended to by adding enabling authority 
to describe criteria regarding disclosure of information in 
regulation. 
 
The regulations will provide clarity regarding disclosure and 
allow ministry staff to participate in common and in integrated 
service tables where goals are to improve the coordination of 
services for children and their families. 
 
The circumstances under which disclosure is permitted will be 
set out in regulation pursuant to new provision 80(r.5) and are 
intended to enhance clarity regarding disclosure of information 
collected pursuant to the Act; enhance integrated case planning 
and service coordination, example for the Hub and the healthy 
families initiative; to strengthen the ministry communication 
and relationships with families, stakeholders, service providers, 
and community; to encourage overall efficiency; and to 
improve services to children and youth and their families. 
 
The new provision 74(5.01) will permit the disclosure of 
confidential family information if necessary without consent or 
if there is no active Social Services involvement with the 
family, to enhance the ministry’s ability to contribute in an 
effective, efficient, and meaningful way in integrated case 
planning and service coordination. 
 
As mentioned earlier, the remaining changes include the 
replacement throughout the Act of “department” with 
“ministry” and the children’s low Act with the children’s low 
Act, 1997. 
 
The proposed amendments outlined today are a demonstration 
of government’s commitment to improve the lives of vulnerable 
families, children, and youth who receive child welfare services 
in the province. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Social Services has moved 
second reading of Bill No. 33, The Child and Family Services 
Amendment Act, 2016. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 



550 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2016 

I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to once again get up and respond to Bill No. 33, The 
Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2016. And, Mr. 
Speaker, as the minister alluded to, she described various parts 
of the bill that they want to work towards and certainly the 
consultation that is necessary to incorporate some of the players 
when we . . . Shouldn’t say players; it’s a very bad word to use. 
But some of the partners, I guess, Mr. Speaker, some of the 
partners in caring for our children and being there to support the 
families that are struggling. 
 
With a wide variety of issues, Mr. Speaker, a lot of these 
partners, Mr. Speaker, offer a great service to the people of 
Saskatchewan and to the government. I can certainly attest that 
there are organizations out there that have through the years 
provided a great degree of good, solid advice but more so, Mr. 
Speaker, good, solid support in critical times as the minister has 
a great amount of responsibility in terms of strengthening 
families and supporting children. 
 
One of those partners, Mr. Speaker, of course is the First 
Nations communities. There are some Métis agreements 
throughout the province, Mr. Speaker, but not to the extent that 
we have with the Indian Child and Family Services partner that 
the First Nations certainly have provided in terms of support 
and input over the years to the Ministry of Social Services. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as you look at the bill itself, it creates a 
framework through which the ministry can terminate an 
agreement with the First Nations Child and Family Services 
agency or other prescribed agencies, Mr. Speaker. We have to 
be very careful as we look at some of these agreements. The 
Indian Child and Family Services agreements are very, very 
valuable in a sense that we have First Nations language, First 
Nations culture, First Nations involvement, their valued input as 
to what decisions are made around many First Nations children 
that are in need of care, either foster care or certainly the better 
alternative, and that’s the adoption process, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As you look at the continuing challenge of providing good 
service to the many children and youth that may need 
intervention and supports, as a province I think we should really 
pay very close attention to that challenge and what role we can 
play to complement what the child and family services 
agreements or the partner communities are also doing to help 
the situation better. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other part of the bill that I want to pay a bit of 
attention to is the . . . It allows the Social Services ministry to 
disclose certain information under certain circumstances under 
the rules set out in the regulations. Now this is certainly 
something that’s really, really touchy, Mr. Speaker, in a sense 
that there’s a lot of confidential information. As one could 
certainly surmise and certainly, you know, with a great degree 
of certainty, could probably hypothetically understand there’s a 
lot of very special situations and circumstances and some very 
troubling evidence or some very compelling testimony of 
children that, as members of the Assembly and certainly the 
minister would know this well, that many ministerial staff are 
subjected to. And she may be, from time to time also you know, 
come into contact with certain information or certain case 

studies in which there are some troubling and some very 
challenging issues that need to be dealt with. 
 
And this is the whole question behind that particular section of 
the bill, Mr. Speaker. Those regulations in terms of how she 
shares the information publicly, they aren’t released yet. Again 
I go back to the whole premise that, as you’re dealing with 
these confidential family matters, some very compelling, 
confidential family matters, that you know there certainly you 
have to have the aspect of confidentiality. I think it’s the 
cornerstone of our professional service, not only as the 
government, but certainly the people that are working within 
the government. That is a key, crucial component of what we 
would expect of all civil servants and departments within our 
governments. 
 
So I think it’s important that we don’t compromise that in any 
way because there’s obviously some very, very, as I mentioned, 
some very touching and traumatic issues that will come up from 
time to time to the attention of the ministry officials. And how 
we deal with that — whether it’s in the best interests of the 
ministry, the best interests of the public, the best interests of the 
family, the best interests of the child — these are all things that 
have to be weighed. And obviously we’ve been hearing on a 
regular basis that the best interests of the child, and rightfully 
so, should trump any of the previous partners that, you know, 
that I made reference to. 
 
So I think it’s important that we look at the changes that are 
being proposed in the Act. The wording changes, while it may 
be innocuous in the sense of changing certain words from 
department to ministry, for example The Children’s Law Act to 
The Children’s Law Act, 1997, or the word “Indian” to the word 
“Aboriginal,” these are some of the things I think are 
housekeeping issues. And obviously we would want to update 
our Acts and certainly bring them into modern language, if you 
will, on a continual basis, and more applicable language as in 
the case that I identified a few seconds earlier. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that again we look 
through the bill, we seek the advice . . . One of the issues that 
was raised in this particular bill relates around the Indian Child 
and Family Services agreements with many First Nations child 
and family services agencies. There is language in there to 
terminate some of these agreements. We need to know what 
that means, what exactly is required by the department where 
you’re able to, with authority, terminate certain agreements. We 
want to find out the basis and rationale and logic behind making 
that change, changes to this particular bill. 
 
So on that note, Mr. Speaker, like many of the bills before me, 
we are going to take the time to have other of my colleagues 
come along and certainly read what is being proposed in the 
bill, take their own position, and seek advice from many of the 
people that they network, and bring forward some of those 
concerns to the Assembly as those concerns come forward. So 
on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 33, The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 
2016. I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 33, The Child and Family Services 
Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 



June 15, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 551 

adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 34 — The Provincial Lands Act, 2016 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, at 
the end of my remarks I will move second reading of The 
Provincial Lands Act. 
 
I am pleased to speak today about amendments to The 
Provincial Lands Act. Saskatchewan’s vast land base is critical 
to our economy. Our province spans 161 million acres. More 
than 100 million of those acres are Crown land either located in 
agriculturally productive areas or in forest- and resource-rich 
parts of Saskatchewan. It’s our responsibility through the 
ministries of Agriculture and Environment to take care of this 
land with proper legislation. With changes to the PLA [The 
Provincial Lands Act], we will ensure Crown land is protected 
and productive for generations to come. 
 
In 1930 Canada transferred the responsibility for Crown lands, 
mines, and minerals to the province but, Mr. Speaker, as you 
know, a lot has changed since then and parts of this legislation 
have been living in the past. The entire PLA is largely 
unchanged from 1978, with clauses and language dating back to 
the 1930s. Portions of it are no longer used and some are 
inconsistent with other pieces of legislation. As the legislator, 
government is held to a higher standard by the courts. The new 
Act ensures we reduce any potential risk by clarifying language 
and standards. 
 
Across government we are committed to modernizing 
legislation for the people of Saskatchewan. That is good 
government. We need the PLA to reflect today’s uses of Crown 
land. We need it to be efficient and accountable to protect the 
land for generations to come. Revising the PLA will allow our 
province to benefit from an improved investment climate. The 
legislation will have the potential to increase investment and 
economic development in Saskatchewan. Where appropriate, 
longer term leases would be allowed on Crown land. This 
would ensure potential investors — whether in oil and gas, 
potash, or wind farms — have the opportunity to create 
long-term projects.  
 
Modern development on Crown land is important. We want 
Saskatchewan to be an appealing place for investment. When a 
new use such as wind turbines is identified, the Act was silent 
on how that development could occur. That creates difficulties 
for industries to reach agreements on projects and puts 
opportunities for development at risk. We want to ensure this 
land is available for long-term investments. We want to make 
sure that Saskatchewan does not miss out on any opportunities. 
 
We recognize some projects require longer term tenure of land 
to secure financing or to justify the economic investment 
required. By offering longer leases and potentially increased 
access to Crown land, businesses will be more willing to make 
investments in Saskatchewan and, Mr. Speaker, as you know, 

investments in our province have an amazing ripple effect. 
When Saskatchewan is an attractive place to do business, our 
people benefit. Revisions to the PLA would also allow 
government to manage Crown land in a way that is more 
responsive to the people using Crown land. For example, this 
would let us adjust rates and lease terms to create different 
categories of leaseholders such as grazing, cultivation, or wind 
farms. 
 
The PLA would also provide clarification around the use of 
Crown land leases as collateral when our lessees try to secure 
financing. Updates to the PLA would allow the value of the 
lease to be used as security. That would give farmers and 
ranchers more opportunities to access funding to expand their 
operations. It would also provide financial institutions with 
assurance that they will be notified if the lease is in jeopardy. 
With the updated Act, it may become an option to use Crown 
land leases as security when applying for financing, something 
that the Ministry of Agriculture has not done in the past. This 
would encourage growth in the agriculture industry and lead to 
economic benefits for both agriculture and the province as a 
whole. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also recognize the importance of 
Saskatchewan’s land base for our future and need to protect it. 
Changes to The Provincial Lands Act would give the 
government the ability to respond and take action when land is 
being misused. If there is an issue jeopardizing the land, such as 
illegal drainage for example, the government could step in 
immediately and issue a stop work order. Without these 
changes to the Act, action would be delayed as only a court 
order or cancellation of a lease is available as remedies. Both of 
those options take time and could create a situation where the 
land is misused for weeks or months before action is taken. 
Amendments to the Act would let the government immediately 
step in to ensure the land is respected and protected for the 
future. 
 
While the government is focused on protecting the land, we also 
recognize its importance to the many people of Saskatchewan 
and, in particular, our First Nations and Métis communities. 
Revisions to the Act will not impact those communities and 
their ability to exercise treaty or Aboriginal rights or carry out 
traditional uses. The duty to consult was triggered in relation to 
these proposed amendments, and the province met its legal duty 
to consult and accommodate. The Treaty Land Entitlement 
Agreement remains unchanged. Amendments to the Act will 
not affect that agreement or have any effect on its process. The 
government will continue to meet obligations and commitments 
under the Treaty Land Entitlement Agreement. 
 
A revised PLA would create more opportunities for the 
industrial and recreational use of Crown land. There will be the 
option to create special management zones of land. This allows 
for specific policies to be put in place for certain lands while 
still allowing portions to be open for public use and 
development. Vacant Crown land could be categorized to allow 
for different uses on the same piece of land. For example, the 
public and local communities could benefit from the ability to 
use a portion of non-occupied Crown land for activities like 
camping, snowmobile rallies, or quadding, while the rest of the 



552 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2016 

parcel of Crown land could remain under restrictions for such 
things as caribou management, for example. 
 
Without the creation of these special management zones, 
decisions are made by creating land use plans that apply to large 
parcels of land. Land use plans can be time consuming and 
restricting. We also recognize the diversity of Saskatchewan’s 
Crown land base. No portion of Crown land is completely the 
same. It’s inefficient to treat land like it is. These special 
management zones would allow us to be specific and accurate. 
They would ensure the best possible direction for diverse 
parcels of land. 
 
Changes to the PLA would also remove some of the 
administration burden for small land transfers between 
ministries. These small parcels of land could include 
decommissioned roadside campgrounds or rest sites, for 
example. The owner of that quarter section of land adjacent 
may be interested in purchasing the small parcel, but before that 
can happen the land must be transferred to the Ministry of 
Agriculture and the ministry can then sell to the owner directly. 
Without these amendments, an order in council is required to 
transfer land between the ministries of Environment and 
Agriculture. The PLA would now have a clause allowing 
transfers of up to 1 section of land or 640 acres or less between 
ministries without an order in council. That is a more efficient 
process and would reduce red tape and government process. 
The PLA would also provide a modern avenue to transfer 
forested lands with no agricultural potential to the Ministry of 
Environment. 
 
Before we proposed these revisions, we completed an extensive 
consultation process. It started in 2013. Throughout the process, 
we have met with and engaged with key stakeholders, including 
the public, lessees, and First Nations and Métis groups. During 
these in-depth consultations, we had a lot of feedback. Many of 
our stakeholders told us they were concerned about 
environmental issues like the care and conservation of land. 
They needed clarity on who to contact for administration of 
Crown land, and they wanted to eliminate red tape and 
confusing language in the Act. 
 
We took everything we heard seriously when working on the 
amendments. Then this spring we returned to those who 
previously had provided feedback, and again connected with 
lessees, stakeholders, and First Nations and Métis groups. All 
the information we heard was taken into consideration when 
updating the legislation. 
 
The revisions to the PLA will bring this document into the 
present day. We know the people of Saskatchewan want 
up-to-date legislation that keeps our land protected and 
productive now and into the future. So that is what we present 
here today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Both the ministries of Agriculture and Environment support 
modernizing the PLA. We do not want outdated language open 
to misinterpretation. We do not want legislation that is silent on 
key issues. We want legislation that is accurate and modern. 
With these changes, the PLA will better represent how the 
Government of Saskatchewan does business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I propose that amendments to this Act be passed. 

Updating The Provincial Lands Act would result in economic 
benefits for the province, public benefits for Saskatchewan 
people, and a more efficient government process. The 
alternative would leave the province with outdated legislation 
that is not forward looking and does not reflect the current and 
future needs of Crown land management. Therefore, Mr. 
Speaker, I move that The Provincial Lands Act be read a second 
time. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has moved 
second reading of The Provincial Lands Act, 2016. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We are 
going to be paying a very, very . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cox: — Mr. Speaker, request leave for introduction, 
please. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my pleasure to introduce in your gallery a very courageous and 
dynamic young man, a good friend of mine, Curtis Weber. Give 
us a wave, Curt. Curtis joins us after giving the keynote speech 
today at the Farm Progress Show where he shared his story of 
triumph over tragedy and spoke about importance of workplace 
safety. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when Curtis was 17 years old, he survived an 
electrical surge of 14 400 volts three times. It had been his third 
day on a job with a crew building steel grain bins when the 
accident occurred. Curtis had been holding two support beams 
of a hopper when the crane attached to the hopper hit a power 
line. Curtis had been given a zero per cent chance of survival. 
After months and months of medical procedures and years of 
recovery, Curtis overcame the accident and persevered and 
rebuilt his life. 
 
Today Curtis is a motivational speaker. Since the accident, 
Curtis has devoted his life to raising awareness about workplace 
safety. He has travelled all across North America to share his 
story of triumph over tragedy. And Curtis lives now with his 
wife, Lori, and I understand three kids now — Curtis, recently? 
Congratulations on that — in the Battleford area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in spite of all of that, to me Curtis is still most 
famous as being one of my stars on my novice hockey team — 
many, many years ago, Curt. So, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all 
members to join me in welcoming Curtis to his Legislative 
Assembly and thanking him for his continued devotion to 
workplace safety. 
 



June 15, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 553 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 34 — The Provincial Lands Act, 2016 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
again I apologize to the member from The Battlefords, as he did 
ask to get up and introduce a guest, and I just simply forgot. But 
I’d also point out, Mr. Speaker, that we too, on behalf of the 
official opposition, welcome Curtis. It’s all about triumph of the 
human spirit and to say that your words are very much 
necessary in this modern day and age. So we would encourage 
you to continue your fine work and Godspeed on your attitudes 
and your support for many people that would face challenging 
times if the awareness was not there. So please continue your 
great work. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would point out that Bill No. 34, The 
Provincial Lands Act, there’s a lot of organizations that are 
going to be paying very close attention to this particular Act, 
Mr. Speaker, as I know that the bill represents an overhaul of 
The Provincial Lands Act. And there are many organizations at 
one time, Mr. Speaker, came to the government and gave them 
some, in no uncertain terms, some of the grief that they wanted 
to express to the current government on what they were trying 
to do to The Provincial Lands Act. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the government did the consultations in 2013, 
and the changes were widely criticized. There was a lot of 
organizations that basically told the government, what do you 
think you’re doing here? And the government backed down, 
Mr. Speaker. They backed down because it was convenient at 
the time, and there was an election on the horizon, Mr. Speaker. 
So over the period of a year, year and a half, they simply 
backed down, sat on their hands and hoping all the issues that 
were raised by the stakeholders as a result of their initial 
consultation would simply vanish and go away, Mr. Speaker. 
But they didn’t. Those criticisms came, and they’ll continue to 
come as to what the minister is trying to propose under this 
particular Act. And earlier this year, the government decided to 
restart this whole process and a consultation phase. And, Mr. 
Speaker, these consultation phases didn’t last for three months. 
They didn’t last for six months. They didn’t last for a year, Mr. 
Speaker. The consultations were, quite frankly . . . The time 
frame for all the consultations on this, Mr. Speaker, was 21 
days. Three weeks and that was it. 
 
So I’m telling all the organizations out there as far as we can, is 
this bill is going to take a lot of the opposition’s time in 
understanding what exactly the minister is trying to do when he 
uses the terminology, protected for generations to come. 
Protected from whom, Mr. Speaker? That’s the biggest question 
that, you know, that we have. And then he talks about investors 
coming to our communities and looking at modern development 
of land, Mr. Speaker. Well what does that mean? Illegal 
drainage, well what does that mean, Mr. Speaker? We already 
know that there’s a huge problem with illegal drainage 
throughout the entire province. And then he talks about special 
management zones. Well people want to know what is up with 
all this terminology and this particular bill. 
 

And what kind of gets me, Mr. Speaker, is that I think it should 
be the Minister of the Environment doing this kind of particular 
bill, not the Minister of Agriculture. Again I go back to my 
earlier point that the Minister of Agriculture is primarily 
involved with agriculture, not land disposition, Mr. Speaker. 
But if you look at what’s occurring across the way, the Minister 
of Agriculture is leading the Minister of the Environment — 
who should be looking after provincial lands — by the nose 
around this particular bill. 
 
And I would say to the people of Saskatchewan, the wording 
and the terminology attached to this bill is worrisome. We need 
to make sure what the minister’s intentions are around The 
Provincial Lands Act, Mr. Speaker. And it’s not about updating, 
Mr. Speaker. We think there is a lot of worry right now as you 
look at what they’re trying to do with this particular bill around 
land disposition and control of land. 
 
And there are a lot of organizations. The FSIN [Federation of 
Sovereign Indigenous Nations] was quite angry about the time 
frame of three weeks. I know that the Métis people throughout 
the province were also very concerned about this three-week 
time frame. Industry as well, Mr. Speaker, they’re also very 
concerned about the time frame. And, Mr. Speaker, the people 
that want to protect the land for generations to come, the 
environmental groups and organizations that take that 
responsibility very seriously, well they weren’t even consulted 
by the minister, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So here is it in a nutshell. Basically we have a government who 
is making provincial lands disposition decisions through the 
Minister of Agriculture. The consultation phase is 21 days for 
anybody that’s concerned. They went through this process once. 
They got extreme grief. Now they’re back at it after the last 
election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And now the people are asking, what’s all in this bill? What 
concerns should we have? And this is the reason why we’re 
going to pay very close attention to this particular bill, because 
quite frankly, from my perspective, we do not trust the Sask 
Party government to do land dispositions fairly, Mr. Speaker, 
because they have not offered consultation, they have not 
accepted criticism, and they have not engaged the proper 
stakeholders to the extent and level that they should be engaged, 
Mr. Speaker. And I say, shame on them for that. 
 
And this is the reason why I think if there’s any bill that we’re 
going to pay very close attention to, it’s going to be this bill, 
Bill 34, because quite frankly we don’t think the minister knows 
exactly what’s going on when it comes to a number of 
organizations that do have aspirations around land ownership 
and management, Mr. Speaker. And we don’t think that the 
current minister has a clue of the different organizations and 
different people that have all this interest on how land is being 
managed. And he ought to take the time to consult. He ought to 
take the time to consult, Mr. Speaker, because quite frankly, in 
their first round of consultation, it was a miserable failure, Mr. 
Speaker. And now they’re doing a time frame for three weeks. 
 
That doesn’t take away from the argument that their 
consultations didn’t provide any consensus and didn’t provide 
any direction for them to undertake. All they got was criticism 
and fairly so, Mr. Speaker, and now we have three more weeks 



554 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2016 

to complain about how they’re doing the land disposition in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And I can tell you that a lot of 
organizations are paying attention to this lands Act. 
 
[15:15] 
 
The opposition is going to be paying attention to this lands Act, 
and we’re going to make sure that every organization that is 
involved and concerned get a copy of this bill and give us the 
information that they’re concerned about, because we think that 
there’s an agenda over there, Mr. Speaker. And we’re going to 
expose that agenda when the time comes. And we’re going to 
tell the people of Saskatchewan exactly what is being proposed 
by that minister from that government on this particular bill. 
 
And until that time, Mr. Speaker, when we’re going to get all 
the information back to the Assembly, I move that we adjourn 
debate on Bill 34, The Provincial Lands Act, 2016. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — There’s a movement to 
adjourn debate on The Provincial Lands Act, No. 34. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt that motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 35 — The Small Claims Act, 2016 
Loi de 2016 sur les petites créances 

 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of 
The Small Claims Act, 2016. Mr. Speaker, this bill will repeal 
and replace the existing small claims Act and make numerous 
changes to enhance and modernize processes and procedures at 
the small claims court. 
 
The Ministry of Justice developed the justice innovation agenda 
in 2014 with a vision to create understandable, timely, and 
affordable justice for Saskatchewan citizens. As part of that 
agenda, the ministry is reviewing the way justice services are 
delivered and what improvements can be made to ensure 
Saskatchewan citizens have access to these important services. 
 
Last year the Ministry of Justice conducted a review of the 
small claims process in Saskatchewan. During that review, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, a consultation paper was released to the public 
to gain feedback and identify potential changes and 
enhancements to the small claims process. The ministry 
received responses from various groups and citizens, who 
provided meaningful feedback and demonstrated widespread 
support for enhancing the small claims process in general. 
 
The first recommendation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that was 
implemented as a result of review, occurred this past February 
when regulatory amendments increased the small claims 
monetary limit from 20 to $30,000. 
 
This bill will implement additional legislative changes that were 
identified during the consultation and that review process. First 
the bill will expand the court’s authority to award costs to be 

paid from one party to another. In particular, the changes will 
grant the court authority to award costs where a party fails to 
attend or purposely delays any step in the proceedings. 
 
Additionally, the court will be granted authority to award 
general costs at the conclusion of a matter based on factors such 
as the behaviour of the party. By discouraging disruptive and 
uncooperative behaviour by the parties in court, these changes 
will help provide timely and cost-effective dispute resolution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this bill will also require all defendants to file a 
reply to a claim. Under the current rules, a defendant is not 
required to file a defence unless they are ordered to do so by the 
court. In practice this means that a claimant may receive no 
notice of a defendant’s defence until the day of the trial. 
Requiring all defendants to file a copy of a reply to the claim 
will ensure that claimants have early notice of the defence that 
will be made. This change is intended to encourage parties to 
actively engage in an early stage in the proceedings and 
promote a timely resolution of the matter. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, where a defendant fails to file a reply and 
does not attend proceedings, the bill will clarify the powers of 
the court to award a default judgment in favour of the claimant. 
In particular, the updates will address the court’s authority to 
award a default judgment at the earliest stage of a proceeding, 
otherwise known as the first appearance. Existing protections 
will remain in place that will allow defendants to apply to 
overturn a default judgment where a defendant demonstrates 
that they have had a reasonable excuse for not appearing and 
have a valid defence for the claim. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to the changes that I have noted, this 
bill will grant the court authority to cite individuals for 
contempt in appropriate circumstances. It will provide judges 
express authority to question parties in order to obtain all 
necessary facts and details of a case, and it will implement 
additional housekeeping and administrative changes to 
modernize the Act. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, access to justice remains an important 
issue within the legal community as well as the public at large. 
This bill will make important changes that will enhance access 
to justice for Saskatchewan residents by providing timely, 
cost-effective, and citizen-centred dispute resolution through 
the small claims process. 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second 
reading of The Small Claims Act, 2016. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 
that Bill No. 35, The Small Claims Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 
recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I almost 
called you “his honour.” But one of the points I would raise, 
Mr. Speaker, as a result of listening to all the legal jargon 
attached to this particular bill, it’s really important that, again as 
I mentioned in my previous comments, that some of the 
changes being proposed in Bill 35 . . . And obviously we’ll hear 
the consequential amendments Act component as well in Bill 
36. Mr. Speaker, there is a significant overhaul of The Small 



June 15, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 555 

Claims Act, and again what’s important is any time you have 
what we . . . [inaudible] . . . to as significant overhaul, there are 
a number of changes that we have to really pay close attention 
to. 
 
Obviously, as we mentioned in the other comments from the 
legal Act perspective, we have to do all we can to make our 
justice system more effective, more affordable, efficient, but at 
the same time not compromise the integrity of our justice 
system. And that’s constantly what you would call a 
work-in-progress with any government across the country, Mr. 
Speaker. Because obviously it’s a very, very complex service 
delivery system, and there’s so many different parts of the 
justice system that intertwine with a lot of our lives and a lot of 
the issues that we deal with on a day-to-day basis. So it’s 
important that we understand it as best we can. 
 
Now anytime you have an overhaul of any particular aspect of 
justice — in this case The Small Claims Act — we have to pay 
very close attention to make sure that the judicial system 
remains neutral, that it’s not construed to be benefiting one 
party over another. As we always know, justice is supposed to 
be efficient and fair. And part of the efficiency and fairness, 
certainly one would suggest that being neutral on some of these 
issues is a key building block to dealing with people’s issues, 
especially when it comes to, for example a single person taking 
on a large corporation under, say for example they purchase a 
vehicle and they don’t feel that they’re dealt with fairly. Then 
they’d have the recourse of small claims court afforded to them, 
but that process cannot favour the other party to the extent 
where justice is compromised. 
 
So these are some of the bases that we would certainly want to 
go forward in terms of researching this bill. If there is a 
comprehensive overhaul, as suggested in the language, then we 
would look at that as being a comprehensive overhaul. So it’s 
important that we go through the bill entirely and thoroughly to 
see what kind of changes are being proposed. And if some of 
those changes are in effect putting one party at a disadvantage 
over another, well that’s not fair and that’s not efficient. And 
that’s not consistent with the theme around justice, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I would certainly want to point out that we would have more 
learned colleagues in our caucus that would look at this and 
determine what changes may occur, as they would understand 
the basic difference legally between very simple wording. As an 
example I would use, sometimes wording in our provincial Acts 
would say “shall” and another word would be “will” or “may.” 
These words have different meanings in law, and they certainly 
have different meanings in some of the Acts that guide our 
companies or guide our towns and villages or guide businesses 
overall, Mr. Speaker. So it’s important to watch the terminology 
and to understand what the wording is intended to do. And 
sometimes you do need some legal people to guide you through 
that process, and our caucus certainly has those individuals 
available to help us along the way. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we look at this. It’s a comprehensive change. 
The Small Claims Act is going to be overhauled. We need to 
pay attention to this as well. So on that note, I will make the 
motion and move that we adjourn debate on The Small Claims 
Act, 1997 and Bills No. 35 and 36, The Small Claims Act, 2016 

and The Small Claims Consequential Amendments Act, 2016. 
Oh sorry, sorry, Mr. Speaker. I would move that we adjourn 
debate on Bill 35, The Small Claims Act, 2016. I so move. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 35, The Small Claims Act, 
2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 36 — The Small Claims Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2016 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I now 
rise to move second reading of The Small Claims Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2016. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the purpose of this bill is to make 
consequential amendments to non-bilingual legislation to 
accompany The Small Claims Act, 2016. In particular, 
references to the current small claims Act, 1997 will be updated 
to refer to the new Act. These changes are entirely 
housekeeping in nature and will not have a substantive impact 
on the legislation that’s being amended. 
 
Mr. Speaker, updating the small claims process is an important 
step toward enhancing access to justice for the residents of 
Saskatchewan. And so with that, Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased 
to move second reading of The Small Claims Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2016. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 
that Bill No. 36, The Small Claims Consequential Amendments 
Act, 2016 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for 
the question? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again, 
not wanting to take shortcuts, Mr. Speaker, following my very 
brief comments on this particular bill, Bill 36, The Small Claims 
Consequential Amendments Act, 2016, I will certainly move 
that we adjourn debate because obviously this bill is tied to Bill 
35. They’re a complementary piece of legislation that obviously 
has to be undertaken if you want to change the original intent of 
35. The consequential amendment Act attached to Bill No. 36 is 
also a complementary piece that follows. 
 
So I’ll point out the comments are pretty similar to my earlier 
comments around Bill 35. Mr. Speaker, these consequential 
amendment Act changes are really important to assess as well. 
Don’t forget the premise is that under Bill 35, that there is an 
overhaul of the small claims court system. We have to pay 
attention to that, and this consequential amendment Act is part 
of the process as well. So while the Acts are separate, they are 
certainly tied at the hip, if you will, in terms of the whole intent 
behind overhauling our small claims system. 
 
So it’s important that, as I mentioned, we focus on Bill 35 and 
the complementary role of Bill 36 is also focused on by the 
opposition and people that we network with. And that’s why it’s 



556 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2016 

important we take the time to understand it and to study it. 
 
So on that note I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 36, The 
Small Claims Consequential Amendments Act, 2016. I so move. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — We’ve asked for 
adjourned debate on No. 36, the small claims consequential 
Act. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 21 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 21 — The 
Growth and Financial Security Repeal Act be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
enter the debate on Bill No. 21, The Growth and Financial 
Security Repeal Act 2016. Mr. Speaker, this is a very brief Act, 
basically with one section that repeals the government’s growth 
and financial security plans basically, or Act, which winds up a 
fund in which there’s actually nothing currently in it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
My colleague from Saskatoon Nutana . . . I’d like to start with a 
little bit of a history. My colleague in Saskatoon Nutana, the 
Finance critic, laid out a very good history of where this bill 
came from, a little bit about what has transpired over the last 
several years. And I’d just like to go over that a little bit, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So the story of this bill. So when this government came into 
power in 2007 there was a rainy day fund of about, I 
understand, about $1.6 billion, close to $2 billion. And what 
happened, starting in about 2007 with this current government’s 
first Throne Speech, they laid out a plan for their version of a 
rainy day fund, Mr. Speaker. So how does this . . . 
 
[15:30] 
 
So in December of 2007 this government’s first Speech from 
the Throne, page 4 of Hansard on December 10th, 2007. I’d 
like to outline what was said there: 
 

My government and its growth agenda will be built on a 
foundation of . . . [solid] financial management. That is 
why my government will introduce The Saskatchewan 
Growth and Financial Security Act. 
 
This Act will require that the budget of this province be 
balanced each and every year, instead of every four years 
as current legislation dictates. This new Act will also set 
out a formula for allocating budgetary surpluses — half to 
securing the future by paying down debt, and half to 

investing in the future through economic growth initiatives. 
The Saskatchewan Growth and Financial Security Act will 
also ensure the size of the public service will not grow at a 
rate faster than the population it serves. 

 
So from the time of that Throne Speech in 2007 there were high 
hopes about this Act, Mr. Speaker, about balanced budgets, 
about putting money away for future use, Mr. Speaker. And we 
can fast forward to 2016, and I will get to that part of the record 
here in a little bit, Mr. Speaker. So that was some high hopes 
back then. 
 
So in 2008, a bill was introduced in this House on March 10th, 
2008, Mr. Speaker, so about eight years ago. So I’d like to read 
from Hansard on page 231 of the March 10th, 2008 where the 
Minister of Finance had this to say about his particular Act that 
we’re now repealing, Mr. Speaker: 
 

This Bill reflects that this government and its economic 
growth agenda will be built on a foundation of sound 
financial management. It recognizes that sound financial 
management requires more than just fiscal stabilization. 
Sound financial management will be achieved through 
balanced budgets, the establishment of the Growth and 
Financial Security Fund, the establishment of a Debt 
Retirement Fund, stipulations on the use of annual 
surpluses, and ensuring efficient government services. 

 
He goes on to say: 
 

Mr. Speaker, in this Bill the government is required to plan 
for and achieve a balanced budget each and every year 
with exceptions only in the event of natural disaster or war. 
To ensure long-term planning, each year a financial plan 
and a public debt management plan for the next four years 
are required to be tabled. 

 
I just want to draw your attention, Mr. Speaker, to a report 
actually from 2013, a special report that the then provincial 
auditor did that actually points out that this high hope of no 
deficits, Mr. Speaker, has not been achieved under a 
government who actually likes to talk about running surpluses. 
 
I will draw your attention to the auditor’s 2013 . . . It is called in 
fact the 2013 special report, The Need to Change — 
Modernizing Government Budgeting and Financial Reporting 
in Saskatchewan And that is the provincial auditor’s report. If 
you look to section 4.22, there’s a chart there that points out in 
2010 this government ran a $409 million deficit. In 2011 again 
they ran a $13 million deficit. In 2012 they ran a $105 million 
deficit. And we know that we’ve just wrapped up a fiscal year, 
Mr. Speaker, and there is another deficit, and they’re projecting 
a deficit this year as well, Mr. Speaker. So that’s five deficits in 
this government’s life in the sunniest times that Saskatchewan 
has ever seen, Mr. Speaker, thank you to our natural resources. 
 
So and what did they also do in that time? This is a government 
who has taken unprecedented wealth, drained down to zero, Mr. 
Speaker, the short-term . . . the rainy day fund, as well as not 
put a single cent away for your children, grandchildren, their 
children, their grandchildren, Mr. Speaker. That is the record of 
this government. 
 



June 15, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 557 

So we can go back to 2007 and 2008 in the heady days of this 
government and high hopes of a government who is going to be 
fiscally prudent and do good things for the people of 
Saskatchewan. In fact they’ve gone exactly the opposite. This is 
a government who boasted about reducing debts and not 
running deficits. I remember the billboards from just a few 
years ago, Mr. Speaker. But it’s not me, Mr. Speaker, talking 
about deficits. It’s the auditor of Saskatchewan who has pointed 
out that this government’s own track record has been one of not 
being a great fiscal steward in this time of record revenue, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I think, as the member for Saskatoon Riversdale, I have two 
former premiers on whose wisdom I have the occasion to draw 
sometimes, Mr. Speaker. I have a little bit more access 
sometimes just because I’m filling some pretty big shoes, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I know Mr. Romanow. I’ve had this conversation with him on 
many occasions, and I’ve heard him tell this story on many 
occasions. So in 1991, Mr. Speaker, when you come into power 
as a social democratic government, you want to do good things. 
It’s about levelling the playing field. It’s about recognizing that 
treating people the same or equally is not the same as being fair 
— they’re very different things — that we don’t all start at the 
start line. In fact some people, because of race, class, gender, 
those kinds of things, there are people who unfortunately are 
pulled back from the start line. 
 
So generally, in principle, Mr. Speaker, we want to be able to 
give everybody that opportunity to get to the start line and have 
an opportunity to fulfill their potential and contribute as they’d 
like, as I think every citizen in Saskatchewan wants the 
opportunity to fully contribute and be an active and involved 
citizen. 
 
So my conversations with Mr. Romanow . . . This isn’t once 
he’s told this story, it’s not twice, it’s not three times. I’ve heard 
this story in small groups, Mr. Speaker. This isn’t him standing 
on a platform talking about this. But the day in 1991 when he 
and his government learned that there was literally no money, 
Mr. Speaker, and far from having no money, there was a huge 
amount of debt and our public policy was at risk of being 
created by bond raiders, Mr. Speaker, because we were in such 
poor financial state. 
 
I know Mr. Romanow laments the fact or Premier Romanow 
laments the fact that his legacy — instead of being one of 
creating those opportunities for generations, those universal 
programs, that levelling of the playing field, making sure that 
that start line is the same for everybody, Mr. Speaker — instead 
of that getting to be his legacy as a social democratic premier, 
his legacy is instead one of fiscal stewardship, of setting the . . . 
making difficult decisions and getting Saskatchewan’s finances 
on track. And you know, I think it’s a really good thing that that 
happened. 
 
And then we had Premier Calvert who . . . Many of the changes 
to our royalty structure, Mr. Speaker, come from the NDP that 
allowed some of the growth that we saw here in Saskatchewan. 
So it was about dealing with a really awful mess, getting the 
books in shape, and being able to set the stage for growth, Mr. 
Speaker. But I think it’s incredibly sad. Again, just I’ve heard 

Mr. Romanow truly lament the fact that that is his legacy, 
financial stewardship, just financial stewardship in getting 
things on the right track rather than being able to take more 
people and get them to that start line, Mr. Speaker. So that’s 
some of the conversations I’ve had with Mr. or Premier 
Romanow. 
 
Premier Calvert actually, it’s interesting. He tells a funny story 
about oil, about $50 a barrel being fantasy, Mr. Speaker. About, 
there was a day, Mr. Speaker, that there was a time when 
reaching $50 a barrel was unheard of, Mr. Speaker. The 
revenues in this province were not nearly what they are right 
now. I think I cast your mind back to the last NDP 
administration in 2007, Mr. Speaker, and it was, it was about $8 
billion, where this government now has about $14 billion at its 
disposal, Mr. Speaker. That’s a vast difference, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Saskatchewan became a have province, crossed that threshold 
in about 2005, Mr. Speaker, and in fact . . . the member from 
Walsh Acres is heckling, but it’s actually, it’s interesting 
because he also doesn’t remember that there is, Mr. Speaker, 
the reality is there is a lag time. The Premier has recognized 
there’s a lag time between transfers from the federal 
government to the provincial government. So that is a previous 
off-the-record conversation that the member from Walsh Acres 
and I have had. And there is a lag time. Saskatchewan became a 
have province in about 2005, Mr. Speaker, under the former 
government. 
 
Anyway the point is this government has had unprecedented 
revenue. Unprecedented revenue. And what have they done 
with it? They have drained the rainy day fund, the short-term 
saving account to zero, Mr. Speaker, to zero. Have they saved a 
single dime for your grandkids? They haven’t saved a single 
dime. They have . . . In fact, I would argue that services are not 
better under this government as well. As the Health critic, I can 
tell you I hear story after story about difficulties people have 
accessing services, and I know my colleagues can tell you 
stories in their respective critic areas as well. 
 
So that has been the legacy of this government, Mr. Speaker. So 
what did they have an opportunity to do, Mr. Speaker, and an 
opportunity they should have pursued? An opportunity they 
should have pursued. 
 
So in the 2000 election, the NDP ran. One of our platform 
planks was on a sovereign wealth fund, establishing a sovereign 
wealth fund. And the Premier recognized after that campaign 
that that was a good idea. And you know what? He 
commissioned the former president of the U of S [University of 
Saskatchewan] to write a report about a sovereign wealth fund. 
So this is a . . . I’d like to take you to a little bit about what a 
sovereign wealth fund is and what Mr. MacKinnon’s report 
said. 
 
So in the introduction of that report, entitled A Futures Fund for 
Saskatchewan 2013: A Report to Premier Wall on the 
Saskatchewan Heritage Initiative, so Mr. MacKinnon writes 
that: 
 

The concept is a futures fund — not a rainy day fund, a 
reserve to be tapped opportunistically, or a source of 
money to finance projects in Saskatchewan in the absence 



558 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2016 

of capital and operating commitments to pay for them. 
 
So it’s not a short-term political tool, Mr. Speaker. In fact he 
goes on to say: 
 

It is a permanent fund for saving a portion of the revenues 
from non-renewable resources to be invested for the 
benefit of future as well as present residents of our 
province for generations to come, hopefully forever. 

 
Mr. Speaker, and we can look around the world. There are 
many governments who have taken that approach. We can look 
to Norway that has close to $1 trillion, Mr. Speaker, $1 trillion, 
Mr. Speaker, for future generations. And you know what? It 
was interesting. The day after the budget, I heard the Finance 
minister. I heard the Finance minister on CBC [Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation] the next morning, and he talked 
about natural resources fluctuating and this is why we need to 
approach transformational change. Well this government has 
been in power for almost a decade, Mr. Speaker, and they’re 
just realizing now that natural resources fluctuate? It was 
actually a bizarre interview, Mr. Speaker. I found it quite 
unusual. 
 
So the creation of a sovereign wealth fund, so you think about 
when the day comes when . . . so every day that we draw down 
on our natural resources, that takes us a day closer to when we 
won’t have them any more. Also the reality is natural resources 
fluctuate, Mr. Speaker. We’re part of a global economy, and 
that is the cold, hard reality that we don’t control those kinds of 
things. We don’t control the price of potash. We don’t control 
the price of oil. We are part of a larger economy in the world 
that we have to accept what comes that way in terms of prices. 
So the good thing about a sovereign wealth fund too, not only is 
it about future generations, but it’s about, hey, if oil drops to 
unprecedented levels . . . and I have to add that the prices now 
aren’t unprecedented levels. I can tell you that previous 
governments governed under these as regular, everyday levels 
of oil, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I want to read into the record a little bit more about what Mr. 
MacKinnon wrote: 
 

For this purpose to be realized we must guard against 
temptation. History teaches us that readily available 
sources of large amounts of money are temptations for 
government, advocates of special interests or projects, and 
others. Governments seek relief from budgetary pressures 
of the day, and there is no shortage of competing claims 
and ambitions. We owe it to our children and 
grandchildren, and to their children and grandchildren, to 
resist this temptation. We need to remind ourselves that our 
natural resources will not last forever and that provincial 
budgets should not be unduly dependent on them to fund 
the annual, ongoing expenditures of the province. 
Experience tells us that as markets change, an overreliance 
on non-renewable [resources] . . . can lead to painful cuts 
and punishing debt accumulation. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly where we are in 2016 — 
painful cuts, many little cuts. I mean, we heard today a closure 
of a correctional facility, Mr. Speaker, $1 million dollars. It’s 
not a big cut; it’s an incredibly painful cut. The cut to the 

employment supplement, I think it’s $2.5 million. I stand to be 
corrected on that. That’s not a huge cut on a budget of $14 
billion, but I can tell you it’s an incredibly painful cut for those 
families who have children who are between 14 and 18, who 
are low-income workers, who are working their butts off to 
make a living, Mr. Speaker, and to ensure that their families 
have what they need. So these might not be big cuts, but they 
are painful cuts. 
 
We can talk about the increase in seniors’ drug costs. That’s not 
a cut, but it’s an increase. And I can tell you, hearing from 
constituents, that that is a painful cut . . . or a painful, painful 
thing to experience. When you have multiple drugs and you’re 
on the tipping point or the . . . you don’t qualify for any other 
programs . . . You’re not getting rich as a senior on most 
pensions, Mr. Speaker. And the thing about being a senior, most 
seniors don’t have the capacity, or many seniors don’t have the 
capacity and shouldn’t have to take on a job or a second 
opportunity to earn more money so they can pay for their 
medications, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So exactly what Mr. MacKinnon talked about, that painful cuts 
will happen and punishing debt accumulation, we’re at this 
place right now, Mr. Speaker, where debt by the end of this year 
in Saskatchewan will be close to $14 billion under a 
government who has had record revenues at their disposal. 
They have run deficit after deficit after deficit — five, as a 
matter of fact, it will be. And that’s not me saying that, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s the auditor of Saskatchewan. And again, 
services are not better. I can tell you story after story about 
people’s experience with health care here in Saskatchewan. 
 
[15:45] 
 
I know the minister has talked about putting money . . . well 
wouldn’t you pay down your credit card before you start saving 
money? I know in my own household, Mr. Speaker, the things 
that I have to do. So I have an 18-year-old who’s heading off to 
university in Quebec here in three months, which is really 
exciting. I’m incredibly proud of her. She got into McGill, 
which is wonderful, but it’s not the U of S. She can’t live at my 
house and her tuition will be quite expensive as an 
out-of-province student. But you know what her dad and I 
started doing when she was born? We put just a little bit of 
money away every month, Mr. Speaker, not a lot. I think 
initially it was $100 a month which, in those days, I was an 
at-home mom and that was a lot of money to try to set aside. 
 
Did we stop paying our mortgage or did we feel like we had to 
pay our mortgage before we had to start saving for Hennessey? 
No, Mr. Speaker. And had we taken that approach, Hennessy 
would not be going to McGill this year. Because I can tell you, 
we don’t have enough money to pay for her four-year degree, 
but we do have enough to get her through the first year and a 
half. She wouldn’t have been able to get student loans, Mr. 
Speaker. She was in a position where she wouldn’t be getting 
student loans and she would not be able to go to McGill, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So the reality is, you have to pay down debt and you have to 
save money for the future. That’s what Saskatchewan families 
know you have to do. And it isn’t always easy, but that’s what 
you need to do, Mr. Speaker. And this is the opportunity that 



June 15, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 559 

this government missed. 
 
So because they weren’t able to meet their requirements or 
obligations under this legislation, we see them repealing it 
instead of fixing it, Mr. Speaker. So there’s a gap. There will be 
a gap in legislation. The Minister of Finance has talked about 
putting forward a bill at some point to deal with some of these 
things, but we don’t know when that bill is coming, if that bill is 
ever coming. So we have a huge gap here, Mr. Speaker, when it 
comes to holding the government accountable, when it comes to 
financial stewardship, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I think it’s incredibly disappointing that after almost a 
decade in power, the people of Saskatchewan have experienced 
a lost opportunity because of this government’s 
mismanagement. Five deficits, not a single penny saved for the 
long term. They’ve taken a short-term savings account and 
drained it to zero, and they have not improved public services, 
Mr. Speaker. I think that that is an incredibly sad legacy of this 
government. 
 
But we will have an opportunity in committee to dig into this a 
little bit more. I know my colleague from Saskatoon Nutana, 
the Finance critic, will have many questions for the Minister of 
Finance. But at this point, so I would just like to let you know 
we will be letting this bill move to committee. Thank you for 
your opportunity to speak. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The member has moved 
that Bill No. 21, the growth and financial securities Act, goes to 
committee. To which committee shall it go? 
 
This motion . . . The question before the Assembly is to adopt 
this motion. Is it agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — When shall this bill be 
read again? To which committee shall this bill go? I recognize 
the House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I designate that Bill No. 21, The Growth and Financial 
Security Repeal Act 2016 be committed to the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 22 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 22 — The 
Income Tax Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the 
Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair of 
Committees. Good to join the debate today here on Bill No. 22, 

The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2016. You know, a number of 
interesting measures certainly contained in this piece of 
legislation, some of it good, some of it not so good, some of it 
kind of ugly, Mr. Speaker. But it’s interesting to look at these 
things over the long haul and see how some of these things 
evolve through time. 
 
Certainly I recall in the 2007 election where a fresh-faced 
young member from Swift Current, heading up the official 
opposition at the time, ran on the active families benefit and 
then later expanded that to include cultural activities, but 
certainly the way that that looked to address the fees around 
sports for families to make sure that families were active. And 
certainly, Mr. Speaker, having had the pleasure of being hauled 
to any number of hockey games and ball games and swimming 
lessons and so on by my mom and dad, I’m sure that they 
would have found something like that to have been helpful. 
 
And then later when the active families benefit was expanded to 
incorporate cultural activities, you know, again, Mr. Speaker, 
the myriad of piano lessons and violin lessons and art lessons 
and the things that go on out there in terms of what kind of 
activities we try to put in front of kids and to enrich their lives 
and to provide them with new opportunities and new 
experiences, again the active family benefit seemed to be of 
interest in that regard. And certainly at the time when this was 
part of the 2007 election campaign, there was some questions 
raised from our side of the aisle in terms of, you know, is this 
going to be meeting the targets that it sets out? Is it going to be, 
you know, something that helps folks that don’t need the help? 
You know, we’ve got entities such as KidSport or Creative Kids 
that can certainly play a meaningful role in helping lower 
income kids pay the bills to get out there on the football field, 
on the hockey ice, or pick your opportunity there, Mr. Speaker. 
At the time that was the cry was simply, you know, negative 
thinking, and you know, that this was the way forward and why 
not proceed with the active families benefit. 
 
And again this was something that built very much on a 
measure that had been introduced by I believe the federal 
Conservatives in the 2006 federal election and the way that that 
had unfolded in a campaign that started before Christmas, ran 
through January. And certainly I can remember being in a 
hockey rink at the time there and that particular proposal being 
talked about and different folks saying, you know, wouldn’t that 
be a nice little bit of help for our family in terms of paying the 
fees for hockey? So that it became part of the 2007 election was 
not surprising. But certainly the arguments that were put 
forward for it, in terms of this is something that we have to do, 
and you know, the very framing of it around active families 
and, you know, but for this tax benefit, you know, it might not 
happen. 
 
And anyway the members opposite of course won the argument 
at the time. And it’s been interesting that now, lo these many 
years on, in the train moved by the Justin Trudeau federal 
Liberal government having come in at the federal level and said 
that, you know, the active families benefit, was that a tax 
benefit that was really working in terms of getting folks out into 
different sports or cultural activities? Who was that serving? All 
the different kind of analysis that comes with a new government 
coming in, as is certainly the case with the Trudeau Liberals. So 
that they should proceed with a move like that was certainly not 



560 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2016 

surprising. But the fact that now after the budget, or in the 
budget speech, that they moved to eliminate the active families 
benefit — this provincial government, Mr. Speaker, having 
campaigned on it not in one election, not in two elections, but in 
three elections, Mr. Speaker — that so soon after this third 
federal election where these members have formed government, 
that they would then move to take it out, this is pretty 
interesting. For one, it’s interesting that, you know, there’s a lot 
of guff that goes on in terms of the way that these . . . You 
know, sometimes they like the Trudeau Liberals. Sometimes 
they don’t. But I guess on this one they’re quite happy to follow 
the path blazed for them by the Trudeau Liberals. So interesting 
enough, Mr. Speaker, but it’s certainly not . . . They’ve come a 
long way from 2007 when this was first campaigned upon. 
 
When that particular measure gets to committee, we’ll of course 
be interested to hear about the analysis that was undertaken by 
the folks that work in Finance in terms of who is benefiting, 
who is taking advantage of this particular measure, what the 
annual tax expenditure had been — in short, the different things 
that you’d expect a government to be doing all along and maybe 
even talking about before an election, especially since it had 
been one of the great, shiny measures put forward in 2007 and 
then again expanded in 2011. 
 
But you know, not so, Mr. Speaker. The case remains to be 
fleshed out in terms of what this government, what kind of 
analysis was undertaken and how that actually was being 
availed of, or how Saskatchewan people were taking it up or 
not. But again, Mr. Speaker, having seen the way, the long and 
winding road that’s gone with this active families benefit, it 
certainly generates a number of great lines of questions for, you 
know, that kind of detailed examination that can take place at 
the committee level when you’ve got the officials there and you 
can get that complex analysis undertaken. 
 
In terms of other measures in the piece of legislation, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s another interesting point, certainly one of the 
things that members opposite campaigned on. And it was 
certainly, you know, acknowledged that, in different of the 
statements we have opportunity to make in this House in terms 
of interventions and budget speeches or budget speech debates 
or in Throne Speech debates . . . but certainly the move around 
the graduate retention plan enabling the use of some of those 
credits to be eligible for helping out on a down payment on a 
home and again reaching out for those unable to take 
opportunity with the first-time homebuyers tax credit. 
 
That’s interesting as well, Mr. Speaker, and Lord only knows 
what maybe next year will bring for this particular program. 
Because of course, Mr. Speaker, when members opposite first 
campaigned on this in 2007 it was alongside a similar measure 
from the then NDP government where it was a non-refundable 
tax credit being proposed by the members opposite versus the 
tax credit that had been proposed by the then government of the 
day, of which I was a part. 
 
And so in terms of the non-refundable tax credit, it certainly 
involved a bigger expenditure, no question about it. It was a 
more lucrative benefit for folks. It didn’t address the front-end 
part of the equation in terms of accessibility and affordability 
getting into school. But certainly on the back end of graduating, 
it was a more lucrative benefit than what had been brought in 

by the government of the day in terms of the tax credit on the 
one side versus the non-refundable tax credit on the other side. 
 
[16:00] 
 
And certainly we heard a lot of self-congratulation over the 
years from members opposite. There wasn’t enough attention 
paid on the front end of things. You know, you can increase the 
Saskatchewan advantage grant all you like but if tuition is going 
up at the same time, then what you’re giving with the one hand 
gets taken with the other. And we get to a place where of course 
right now Statistics Canada says that on average our tuition is 
second highest in Canada. And because the attention hasn’t 
been paid on that side of the equation, it makes these back-end 
measures all the more important. But certainly it shouldn’t be at 
the expense of front-end measures. And I would submit that this 
government has got a lot of work to do in that regard. 
 
But in terms of what’s happened with the non-refundable tax 
credit that was at the heart of the graduate retention program, 
Mr. Speaker, of course last year’s budget saw that they . . . 
Before the election we saw that that graduate retention program 
was changed from a non-refundable tax credit wherein it’s 
operated like a grant and it wasn’t dependent on income. You 
didn’t have to earn income to be drawing on the benefit. It was 
changed from that back to a tax credit. 
 
And it’s interesting. I never thought I’d see the day, Mr. 
Speaker, but of course if you stick around long enough I guess 
all that is old is new again. So be darned if it wasn’t something 
that bore a striking resemblance to the graduate retention 
program that was in place in 2007 in terms of being a tax credit 
versus the non-refundable tax credit that these members had 
operated on for close to two terms. 
 
So that was very interesting, Mr. Speaker. And of course, you 
know, the fact that it didn’t kick in until income was being 
earned and the different sort of less advantageous aspects of the 
program of course got glossed over by members opposite in 
terms of how this was presented to the public was pretty 
interesting. But again, that they would run on something that 
was fundamentally, you know, building upon an NDP initiative, 
it’s never any shortage of irony in public life, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So and then what the . . . Making the move in terms of allowing 
a certain portion of the graduate retention program to be eligible 
for first-time homeowners, you know . . . And again a fine 
measure, but it’s sort of like the track record with tuition and, 
you know, back-end measures that are all fine and good in and 
of themselves, but are they really addressing the more acute 
problems that are presenting throughout the sector? And 
certainly folks that are looking for that, you know, putting 
together that down payment on a first home, this will come as a 
welcome measure. And certainly I’ve heard that from different 
folks throughout the province, and that is fine and good. 
 
The program of course is administered by the Saskatchewan 
Housing Corporation and got off to a bit of a rocky start in 
terms of the inclusion of personal information. And that’s been 
referred to the Information and Privacy Commissioner and 
we’ll await with interest to see how that is adjudicated, Mr. 
Speaker. But you know, certainly it wasn’t a minister stepping 
forward to apologize for that. It was of course an official, which 



June 15, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 561 

tends to be another tendency of this government. But there you 
go. 
 
In terms of what need this is meeting in terms of the housing 
situation throughout Saskatchewan, again this is a fine measure 
in and of itself but I can’t help but wonder if we aren’t going to 
arrive at a point down the future where after the ballyhoo of an 
election campaign is long ago in the rear-view mirror and you 
get around to the analysis, and it turns out that in parallel to 
arguments that were made around the active families benefit, 
whether or not those were actually valid arguments. 
 
And in terms of who’s going to benefit from this, does this 
really meet the most acute needs out there in the housing 
market? All of which are questions that you’d presume there’s 
been some analysis gone into the program and again which 
lends itself to the more precise questioning that can be 
undertaken at the committee level. But you can’t help but 
wonder that it will not reach a point in the future where the kind 
of hype and faith that is placed in approving things through 
proclamation as opposed to argumentation or rationale that we 
see go on with this government, you can’t help but wonder if it 
isn’t going to eventually hit a similar destination as we’ve seen 
in this very piece of legislation with the active families benefit, 
where of course it was ballyhooed at the outset and now here 
we are. 
 
And again, maybe emboldened by the Trudeau federal Liberals, 
this government is moving to eliminate the active families 
benefit altogether on the argument that it’s not targeted enough. 
It doesn’t meet needs in a way that they present more acutely 
out in the community. And again we’ll see how this works with 
the graduate retention programs and the changes that have been 
made to that in this particular budget. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to see that the 
fundamental component of this program is a tax credit which, 
again in Saskatchewan’s immediate history, found its origin 
way back in the midst of the early 2000s in different forms. But 
certainly there was in the budget of 2007 a fairly advantageous 
tax credit that was brought forward. That wasn’t good enough 
for members opposite so they had the non-refundable tax credit, 
but lo and behold they eventually came around to the tax credit. 
And so again, how this all works out, what the projections are, 
what the analysis is that has gone into this, who this will serve, 
will all be questions that we’ll look to get some kind of a 
response to in committee. 
 
Moving along in the bill, Mr. Speaker, and again there are a 
number of tax measures that are wrapped up in this particular 
piece of legislation. But it’s interesting to note and certainly 
there are things where they are literally following on the heels 
of the federal government to make changes to certain measures 
in the tax code, and again, in this case, not just being inspired 
by the federal Trudeau liberals apparently, but actually 
prompted by the federal government in terms of the small 
business tax rate and the changes around the taxation of 
dividend income, the change of dividend income. Referencing 
the minister’s second reading speech, “. . . automatically 
impacts the provincial taxation of that income.” And again 
holding the line for the government to take a step that holds the 
line on small business taxation, small- and medium-sized 
enterprises being so crucial to the fire of the economy and what 

makes an economy go. You know, again, a fairly good measure 
in that regard. 
 
But again, we’ll be interested to see how measures that are 
taken here responding to federal changes, how those work into 
the broader agenda of this government, a government that, you 
know, in the not-too-distant past was talking about reducing 
corporate income tax. And of course we see nothing about that 
in the speech, from the budget speech. We see nothing about 
that in the years to come. We know from questions asked 
previously that it has been regarded as outstanding business on 
the part of members opposite, but certainly it’s nowhere here. 
 
And it’d also be interesting to know the trade-offs that will be 
involved in terms of, if you’re going to be doing these 
measures, what’s the total tax expenditure involved? What’s the 
impact throughout the sector? And how does that impact your 
tax room and perhaps curtail other possibilities around tax 
measures. 
 
In terms of the, you know, following in the train of the federal 
moves on the taxation of trusts, again a similar thing. We’ll be 
interested to see with that closer questioning that’s possible at 
committee level just the magnitude of the tax expenditure 
involved and how this will change going forward, and again 
how it affects the other taxation rates around trusts. We’ll be 
interested to see how that goes as well. 
 
Moving on, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the manufacturing tax 
incentives and the head office tax incentive that this 
government has put forward in the past and the way that this is 
now being brought forward, in the years to come it will be very 
interesting to see again what sort of oversight is given to the 
effectiveness of these tax measures. Who is availing themselves 
of these tax measures and what the net benefit or not, how that 
is maintained. So we’ll be watching for, you know, better 
explanation of how this is working out and how this is playing 
out on the ground. 
 
It was also the new tax incentive to encourage capital 
investment in primary steel production. Again, Mr. Speaker, I 
grew up in north Regina. Certainly it was always . . . I had a 
bunch of friends whose primarily fathers worked at IPSCO. 
And certainly I have the privilege of representing a number of 
steelworkers to this day in Elphinstone. And in terms of how 
this advantages what is now Evraz steel, we’ll be interested to 
see. 
 
But how the steel sector generally in Saskatchewan has been . . . 
It’s fine to put an advantage on the one side of the equation, but 
if you’re not paying attention to the way that other jurisdictions 
are advantaging their local economy and local steel-producing 
sectors, and then at the same time playing Boy Scout to the 
country and the world in terms of the refusal to take up trade 
measures to ensure that that Saskatchewan benefit is there. You 
can spend a lot of money on the one side of the equation, but if 
it’s all sort of drifting out on the other, what good does that 
accomplish? So in and of itself, this looks like a fine measure, 
but what that broader sort of front of activity that needs to be 
undertaken, we’ll of course have some questions about that as 
well to ensure that this is in fact a benefit to those who produce 
steel in Saskatchewan. 
 



562 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2016 

I guess I’ve not got many more comments than that, Mr. 
Speaker, to add at this time, but certainly the . . . Again to 
recap, we’ll be watching the changes to the graduate retention 
plan and the tax expenditure there. We’ll be watching for the, 
you know, what the broader story is around the active families 
benefit being eliminated, again this being a measure that played, 
you know, a fairly significant part in not just one but certainly 
two campaigns. They were a little quiet on a bunch of stuff last 
campaign, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ll be interested to see how the changes in the manufacturing 
and processing export or hiring incentives are actually working 
or not. We’ll be looking for the impact of the clarification of 
definition for the primary steel production rebate. And of course 
with the housekeeping measures following in the train of the 
federal government making changes to tax code, we’ll be 
interested to see how that provides stability to our taxation 
situation here in the province. 
 
[16:15] 
 
But with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move to conclude my 
remarks on Bill No. 22, an Act to amend The Income Tax Act in 
order that it might move on to committee so that we might 
undertake a more detailed and closer examination of this piece 
of legislation. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
the motion by the Minister of Finance that Bill No. 22, The 
Income Tax Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
designate that Bill No. 22, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 
2016 be committed to the Standing Committee on Crown and 
Central Agencies. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 23 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 23 — The 
Liquor Retail Modernization Act/Loi de modernisation du 
commerce des boissons alcoolisées be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 
is a pleasure to get up and speak on this bill. I know it’s an 
important one. It’s one that the government wants to move 
quickly on and, as I said, they campaigned on that. 
 
But I do want to put a few words onto the record on this 
because it is one that clearly impacts a lot of people. And it’s 
one that we’re looking at carefully and we’ll have lots of 
questions in committee because it’s one where we worry about 
the unintended consequences of this. And we do support the 
modernization of how we do our . . . deliver and maintain our 
liquor systems in the province. But it is one that we want to 
make sure that it fits the communities, that we know that not 
every community is like each other community. 
 
And I just want to say, it was an interesting story yesterday 
when my colleague from Nutana got up and talked about her 
grandfather who was the local pharmacist but also sold the local 
booze in Lafleche. And that was an interesting scenario for her 
to grow up in. Whereas where I grew up, in Mortlach, 
Saskatchewan — if you know, that’s a community 30 miles 
west of Moose Jaw — it essentially was a dry, dry community. 
There was no bar. There was no hotel. There was no place to 
buy any liquor at all. And so that had an impact on the 
community for sure. And you either had to go 30 miles further 
west at Chaplin to go to the hotel there or into Moose Jaw onto 
River Street, which always provided some interesting 
excitement, or you went to Coderre to the south, or you went to 
Keeler. Now if you see those communities now, Keeler and 
Coderre, they’re in pretty rough shape. But I can remember a 
few visits to the Keeler hotel and it was interesting times. 
 
But it was something that was . . . the way that liquor was 
viewed in our community, and I don’t think we were overly 
religious. You know, we just didn’t have that stuff happening in 
our community. We were a vibrant community. We had a bank. 
We have banks. We did have hotels at one time, but it was all 
pre-World War II. 
 
And then post-World War II, things, the community started to 
change. People started to travel more. Of course they would 
travel to the larger centres for more selection and more choice. 
 
And of course that was interesting when you went into Moose 
Jaw, into the local liquor board store. And what you actually 
had was all the liquor was in the back, and you wrote down 
your selection on a little piece of paper and you hoped that you 
got it right. And of course the . . . And I can remember as a 
young adult, you know, the glaring eyes of the clerks to make 
sure you were of correct age and that you weren’t doing 
something untoward. And they’d slip that bottle into a brown 
paper bag and out the door you would go. And that was our 
early experiences with buying liquor. 
 
But now that’s changed. It’s changed an awful lot. And we have 
wine stores and, you know, specialty stores and that type of 
thing. And it is exciting to see what’s happening with the 
development of local craft beer and growlers. It’s just pretty 
neat to see and it’s an exciting, exciting time. 
 
And of course we want to make sure things are fair and that 



June 15, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 563 

there’s, there is a level playing field. But you know, I always 
have to say that. You know, whenever you hear that phrase, 
level playing field, you have to be careful. You have to check 
because that seems to be code for something else and not 
necessarily a level playing field, but somebody’s going to get an 
advantage. 
 
And you know, we’ve grown accustomed in Saskatchewan that 
SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority] is a good 
Crown corporation and has provided services and has provided 
a source of income to the provincial treasury. And we don’t 
want to see them disadvantaged. So if it’s a level playing field, 
fair enough. That is fair enough. But we want to make sure that 
it’s there, fair right across the board, that it’s not something that 
is untoward or disadvantaging or creating barriers. 
 
We know, for example, this government for many years has 
created barriers for the local liquor board stores to really 
become more modern and has disadvantaged them in a way to 
see that people then would demand better services. And they 
thought, they associated poor services with the local board, 
liquor board store and that they thought that only a private store 
could provide that kind of service. And actually the liquor board 
store could provide that service if it was given a half a chance. 
 
And I saw that particularly in our own store on 1st Avenue in 
Saskatoon where they had an incredible wine selection. And it 
was really interesting to go in and see what that store on 1st 
Avenue was offering in terms of wine, and what the French 
wines were, what the organic wines were. It was kind of neat. 
But then all of a sudden, one time I went back into the store and 
all the wines were back, mixed in, and you just had to figure it 
out yourself. There was no wine expert there any more. There 
was no interesting selections or marketing. It was just back to 
the plain old store. 
 
So I mean this is the kind of thing when you talk about a level 
playing field, is it really going to be a level playing field? Are 
the liquor board stores going to be disadvantaged and those 
good jobs at the liquor board stores are going to be at risk 
because we’re seeing a drive? A level playing field is often also 
known as bottom of the barrel, you know. And there you go, the 
wage is the bottom of the barrel. And so are we seeing a drive 
to the bottom of the barrel in terms of wages? And this is a 
concern, Mr. Speaker. And you know, when you see . . . 
[inaudible] . . . coming from the government, what do they 
really, really mean? 
 
So modernization, we’re definitely for it and we can see other 
competitors involved. But we do want to see that the liquor 
board stores, SGLA, are given a fair chance to be part of that 
market because people are expecting them to deliver dividends 
to or resources to the provincial treasury. And that is really, 
really important. 
 
And I do want to say . . . And when the minister talks about, 
most importantly these changes, and I quote, “most importantly 
these changes will provide consumers with more choice, more 
convenience, and competitive pricing.” And fair enough. But 
you know, when we hear and particularly . . . Some 
communities really are having some significant challenges with 
alcohol in their communities, and I’m thinking of Prince Albert 
for one. And I was just talking to my colleague about, you 

know, now in Prince Albert they have two drive-throughs in a 
community that size to buy liquor. And you wonder why does 
the community need two drive-throughs to pick up their liquor. 
Now maybe there’s a rush at suppertime for a bottle of wine, 
but you know, at the same time we really do need to think 
about, is there a balance in terms of what kind of communities 
we want to have in our province. 
 
We do want to see competitive pricing. We do want to see a 
modernization of the rules. And we don’t have a problem with 
buying a bottle of wine and making it easier. We are excited 
about supporting local, especially local companies developing 
their own markets, particularly when it’s coming to wine and 
beer. 
 
And I’m thinking of particularly a couple of wineries, one down 
in Cypress Hills who does a great job, has a great wine product, 
and one outside of Saskatoon. And I get into trouble, Mr. 
Speaker, because I pick up the odd bottle of rhubarb wine. And 
I kind of like that rhubarb wine that is out there. Now you 
apparently have to have a particular taste for rhubarb wine, but I 
happen to have it. But it seems to work. It seems to work, so 
I’m glad that we’re getting modern in Saskatchewan. It says it 
all, rhubarb wine. 
 
I haven’t quite got to the choke . . . But I do remember the good 
old days. Now maybe this isn’t so modern, chokecherry wine 
and the stories that can go along with that. And maybe the 
chokecherry wine was more interesting because I did live in 
Mortlach, where you could not go to a hotel and buy anything. 
 
But at any rate, I digress. And I do think that we want to make 
sure that we take a close look, a very close at this bill because, 
as I say, it’s not . . . I mean when you come out with 
catchphrases like more choice, more convenience, competitive 
pricing — good idea at first blush. 
 
But really when you dig down to it, we want to make sure there 
are no unintended consequences, both for the business people 
who are putting a lot of money and resources into making sure 
they have a product and they want a level playing field. But 
they want to make sure that . . . We also have a consumer that 
we have to be careful about because we know the whole issue 
around the impacts on community, the impacts on families, the 
impact on your health. 
 
We have to have . . . There has to be a balance, and we expect 
that we will have an educated approach to this, that it won’t be 
completely the wild, wild west and, as I said, a race to the 
bottom. And so I really do worry about that and if this is the 
opening the floodgates. I hate to use that word when we’re 
talking about liquor, but maybe that is, that’s the scenario that 
we’re talking about, that we have to make sure that we take a 
look at all these regulations. 
 
And I’m not an expert on the regulations, far from it. But I do 
want to make sure that we look at these and really consider 
these fully in a way that we are recognizing that they are 
complex and we don’t want to have unintended consequences. 
And it isn’t as easy as saying we just want to level the playing 
field because, Mr. Speaker, there is a reason for 
well-thought-out legislation, particularly when we come to 
legislation.  



564 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2016 

We do recognize that the government did run on many of these 
issues when it comes to changing the liquor system. Of course 
we agreed with the terms of modernizing our stores and also the 
kiosks and different approaches to it. But we will look forward 
to hearing more about this in committee. With that, Mr. 
Speaker, I am ready to move this to committee. Bill No. 23, The 
Liquor Retail Modernization Act, I so move. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the member that Bill No. 23, The Liquor Retail 
Modernization Act be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I designate that Bill No. 23, The Liquor Retail 
Modernization Act be committed to the Standing Committee on 
Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
[16:30] 
 

Bill No. 24 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 24 — The 
Liquor Retail Modernization Consequential Amendments Act, 
2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I always 
appreciate following up. And when you talk about the 
consequential amendments, these are really straightforward, and 
they follow the bill that I was just talking about. And of course I 
imagine we’ll be talking about these at the same time, with the 
same committee, so that will be consistent. 
 
But at this point, Mr. Speaker, I know that I will have to talk a 
bit about this. So, Mr. Speaker, it’s very important that we do 
take some time to really think about this. And as I said, for 
different communities these kind of bills are very important that 
we think of the consequences for different communities. When 
we have these kind of regulations and rules, we have to think 
about the impacts, you know. 
 
As I said, when I was growing up in Mortlach there was no 
liquor at all. But I think that’s changed over the last 40 or 50 
years; now they do have a place where you can buy a wine or a 
beer with your meal. But even now, I tell you, some of the 
old-timers have a hard time dealing with that. They give you a 

bit of a second look and go, that’s kind of odd in Mortlach. We 
don’t do that kind of thing. We don’t have a beer in the 
afternoon in the hotel and yes, you know, we just don’t do that 
type of thing. 
 
And then that may be kind of quaint, but we have to really think 
about the impacts in other communities. We know communities 
like Prince Albert are wrestling with that kind of thing. And as I 
said, the issue of having two drive-throughs, why do you have 
to have two drive-throughs in a community that’s, I think, about 
30 or 40,000? And you know, the community is really wrestling 
with how do you have the kind of legislation and who makes 
that kind of rules. Is it the province that allows the city to do 
that type of thing or is it the city? Do they have the power to 
make those kind of regulations? 
 
And so with that, you know, we look at these two bills and we 
talk. And we will be asking about, is this the kind of thing . . . 
Have they gone out and done the proper consultations? What 
does this mean for a province like Saskatchewan, that while we 
are becoming more and more urban, we are still remaining very 
much a rural community? 
 
So we do need to take some time where we’ll be asking and 
making sure that there has been proper consultations. And with 
that though we need to really take a good, good, solid look at 
this bill. And so it seems to be very much similar to the other 
one. The two will go hand in hand, and we’ll have the same 
kind of questions about the impacts that . . . We don’t want to 
have a race to the bottom of the barrel. That’s not the issue that 
I think the government should be striving for. We hope not. 
And as I said, we don’t want to set up a situation where they 
talk about an uneven playing field, but yet they create an even 
more uneven playing field that disfavours our own provincially 
owned Crown, SLGA. And so that’s really, really important. 
 
And so we’ll be having lots of questions in committee, and I 
know the folks want to move on that as quickly as possible. 
This is a budget bill. And so with that, I’m ready to move this 
bill to committee. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the member that Bill No. 24, The Liquor Retail 
Modernization Consequential Amendments Act, 2016 be now 
read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I designate that Bill No. 24, The Liquor Retail 
Modernization Consequential Amendments Act, 2016 be 
committed to the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies. 
 



June 15, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 565 

The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 25 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Docherty that Bill No. 25 — The 
Wakamow Valley Authority Amendment Act, 2016 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, 
I’m really excited to be talking about this bill. This is the first 
bill that I’ve stood up and talked about in the House here. So 
Bill No. 25, this one is a really important bill for me, The 
Wakamow Valley Authority Amendment Act. I’ve already talked 
about, you know, how I’m disappointed with all the cuts to the 
urban parks in our province here. And I think like this is just a 
really dismal suggestion in our budget, you know, because these 
urban parks are really important and we really need to invest in 
those. 
 
And I was really disappointed that there was no consultation 
with the municipal governments with regards to this and there 
was nothing mentioned about this before the election. So I think 
people might have had a different response if they’d known that 
their urban parks were going to be attacked within this bill. 
 
But you know, when I say about some of the other urban parks 
that are also being cut, that includes, you know, there’s 
Wakamow Valley of course, Moose Jaw, but it also includes 
Prince Albert and North Battleford, Weyburn, and Swift 
Current. All of these parks are being attacked with regards to 
this. 
 
But getting back to Wakamow Valley. You know, Mr. Speaker, 
I want to tell you a little bit about Wakamow Valley. So 
according to the Wakamow Valley website, Wakamow Valley 
is a park for all seasons with 20 km of great trails, walking and 
hiking paths, park grounds, playgrounds, picnic areas, cycling, 
and canoeing and kayaking, which I find is really interesting. 
We don’t have many urban parks in our province here where a 
person could go canoeing or kayaking, you know, so that’s why 
I think it’s really important that we look at keeping and helping 
Moose Jaw keep this park. 
 
And so when you think about the money that’s been put in this 
budget, the amount of money that they’re taking away from 
Wakamow Valley, like it’s minimal. You know, but even 
though it’s minimal for the provincial government, it’s huge for 
the city of Moose Jaw. You know, so it’s important for us to 
realize that many parts of this Wakamow Valley are 
provincially owned Crown land and it’s not all city. So we’ve 
got to recognize that when . . . That’s why the province has a 
responsibility to, you know, also contribute with this. 
 
And so what this Act is saying is they want to take the $127,000 
away from what they provide Moose Jaw with — help with 
keeping this park vitalized, you know, helping with cutting 
lawn and the upkeep and what they have to do with 
infrastructure costs — $127,000, that’s a big chunk of what this 

park costs, you know. And so also the government used to give 
$30,000, so when you add that together, that’s $157,000 that 
Moose Jaw is losing, you know. And when this government 
says that revenue sharing is a main reason of being able to take 
this money because they’ve increased the revenue sharing, well 
from last year’s budget to this year’s budget, the increase in 
revenue sharing for Moose Jaw is $170,000. So when you take 
$157,000 of that away, you’re just leaving them with $13,000, 
you know. 
 
And when you take into account inflation, you take into account 
wage increases for staff that are taking care of that park and you 
take into account the power increases that this government is 
looking at increasing, like 10 per cent increase in power, that’s 
going to impact the city of Moose Jaw big time. The power 
from their hockey rinks, power from all the other city facilities, 
like that $13,000 really isn’t going to get them very far, you 
know. And so basically this is a cut for funding for Moose Jaw, 
which is really disappointing, and also disappointing that I 
haven’t heard from the members across from Moose Jaw about 
supporting this. So that’s really disappointing as well. 
 
But, you know, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about why 
is it important to have urban parks, because urban parks are so 
important in our cities. So like one thing, and one thing that I 
think should be really a particular interest to the members 
across, is the investment in the local economy growth with 
urban parks. So when you have urban parks, oftentimes the 
property values increase. People want to live around where 
there’s parks, you know, because that gives them more 
activities to do with their family. The green space is beautiful. 
In the backyard of my place there’s a nice park and I always say 
it’s great to have all that lawn that I don’t have to mow. Like 
you know, it’s beautiful. And when I look at the park outside 
this building itself, like it’s beautiful, and I don’t have to weed 
anything out there, you know, and I get to just enjoy the whole 
area. So the property values will increase, you know, and so 
when you’re looking at buying a house, you think about, is 
there a school nearby, is there a park nearby. So that’s 
important. 
 
Jobs. You know, when you have urban parks, you have people 
working in them. They have to maintain them, you know, and 
so that provides employment in your communities. And when 
we talk about diversifying the economy, that’s one area, is 
making sure we have parks. 
 
Also tourism. When you go travelling and you’ve got little 
ones, Mr. Speaker, like don’t you guys like to stop at a park and 
play for a little bit? And it gets you into the city. It gets you 
involved. Then you might even go and have a meal at the local 
restaurant and check things out. And I know I go to Moose Jaw 
at least two or three times a year. And I love their mineral spa, 
and so I go to the mineral spa and then I take a little walk in the 
parks that they have there too, you know. And so that’s one of 
the things I really enjoy about it, all the trees and all the 
greenery they have in that community. So those tourism dollars 
are big, you know. 
 
Another reason why, you know, you want to have urban parks 
is to improve health. And this is a tough budget, and we all 
recognize this and so there’s been cuts, you know. So when we 
look at trying to promote things, promoting healthy living is 



566 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2016 

really important. So there’s a real correlation between easy 
access to green spaces and the likelihood to exercise. Like you 
know, on my lunch hour, I’d love to go for a walk out there 
outside this beautiful building because it’s so gorgeous there. It 
makes me want to go for a little bit of walk a little bit better, 
you know. You always see people playing football or having a 
lot of fun out in the greenery there. So like exercise is really 
important. You know, Mr. Speaker, obesity is a real issue in this 
province and so it’s important, this solution in reducing obesity, 
which is associated with public health costs. So then we could 
reduce our public health costs. 
 
Also the physical activity . . . When you’re in wildlife and green 
spaces, there’s a real correlation on how being out in wildlife 
helps with your mental health also, you know. So there is . . . 
Direct exposure to nature reduces your stress. Physical health 
and strong relationships improve mental health. When you’re 
out in these parks you’re meeting with people. You’re 
connecting with some of your neighbours and such. And so 
making those connections and having those relationships also 
helps with your mental health, right? 
 
You know, and so . . . Also urban parks, they help with our 
ecosystem, Mr. Speaker, and we really need to pay attention to 
our ecosystem. So urban trees, they remove air pollution and it 
also improves our public health. It improves the quality of air 
that we have in our cities. And you know, we really need to pay 
attention to that. That will help with, you know, respiratory 
issues and such. 
 
So we also know that unpaved ground absorbs water, you 
know, and so trees and grass are more efficient and less 
expensive than sewer systems. And so if we have the greenery 
around, then that will just absorb the water and then hopefully 
we don’t have floods in our cities and such . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Yes. 
 
[16:45] 
 
Also it’s oftentimes these parks are the centre of our 
communities, you know, and so we have neighbours who 
interact with each other. When you’re new in a city sometimes 
you go to the parks and stuff and you get to meet new people, 
you know. 
 
And so it’s a great space for events. You know, I know a lot of 
times we’ll have events in Prince Albert, and we’ll be like, 
where should we host this? We can’t afford to have a facility 
that costs a lot of money. Well why don’t we go have it in the 
park? Like everybody loves to go to the park, you know. And 
so it’s a great place to have some of your events and socialize 
with the neighbours and meet new people, engage in 
recreational activities. 
 
I mentioned how Wakamow Valley . . . You can go hiking, you 
can go walking, you can go biking, the kayaking and canoeing 
— all of these physical activities to do. And you know, for 
some people, you don’t have really a lot of money, so just to go 
out and take a walk in the park, that’s a great way to keep in 
shape, you know. And so also like if you are hiking or you’re 
biking or you’re canoeing, you’re buying those things from the 
local stores, right? So you’re promoting business there. 
 

So you know, it’s really important to keep these parks. Also 
urban parks are so important for our kids, you know. And you 
know, parents bond with their children at the park. You forget 
all about your household chores. You take the kids to the park. 
You go swinging. You put the kids in the swing and you just 
play. You just spend that activity to each other, you know, and 
you’re not distracted by all the things that get distracted at 
home, you know. 
 
And like a lot of childhood memories are made in parks. Like 
when I think about all the fun I had with my friends and such, 
oftentimes it was in our neighbourhood parks, you know. And 
the things that I did with my parents, it was at some parks. And 
so we’ve got to, you know, make sure that we have these parks 
because of the impact of the development of children, and we 
want to make sure the general happiness of everyone in the 
community is acknowledged. 
 
And so there’s also a lot of studies that show that regular time 
in nature improves children’s ability to learn and reduces 
symptoms of ADHD [attention deficit hyperactivity disorder]. 
Like look at all of these things that these urban parks do, you 
know. And they have a direct correlation with a lot of the other 
services we provide, you know . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
Well the member across, we’re not shutting down the parks, but 
when the cities can’t afford these parks, they’re going to have to 
make tough decisions too, you know. 
 
So like we have to think about the consequences of our 
decisions and the rollback that has. So think about like when the 
schools . . . Like I know a lot of the schools, the teachers will 
take their kids to the urban parks and they teach them about 
ecosystems and such within their classrooms, you know, and so 
when there’s been cuts to classrooms and they have to make 
decisions on maybe buying books, well then the teachers can 
take the kids to the parks and teach them things. You know, 
sometimes they can’t go for excursions, so then they go sliding 
at the park, or they go canoeing or kayaking, or whatever they 
can do, you know, to find activities and use these parks. 
 
I don’t think these parks are being underutilized at all. Like 
they’re regularly utilized in these communities, and they’re 
important. And again I stress, like for the amount of money 
that’s being invested in these parks and other areas that this 
government chooses to support, it just doesn’t make a lot of 
sense, you know. And it seems like these are big losses for 
these small communities and these small cities. They’ve been 
faced with a lot of losses, you know. Like they really feel that 
they’re not getting the support they need from this province, 
you know. And they need this province to help them, help them 
build. And so when we take money from things that are such an 
economic advantage for these communities, it can be huge, you 
know. 
 
And so we look about how economic advantages, when we 
think about the health advantages of these parks, the ecosystem 
advantages of this park, like it just doesn’t seem to make sense, 
you know. And so, Mr. Speaker, I don’t understand why we 
want to make these changes to this Act, you know. And 
Wakamow is very important and we really hope that this 
government reconsiders this. But I’m ready for this bill to 
proceed to the committee, and so thank you for listening. 
 



June 15, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 567 

The Speaker: — There’s a lot of conversation going on and I 
missed the member’s moving of second reading. So the 
question before the Assembly is a motion by the member that 
the Bill No. 25, The Wakamow Valley Authority Amendment Act 
be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I designate that Bill No. 25, The Wakamow Valley 
Authority Amendment Act, 2016 be committed to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. To facilitate the work of committees later this day, I 
move that this Assembly do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved a 
motion of adjournment. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This House now stands adjourned 
until 10 a.m. tomorrow, on Thursday. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:53.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 537 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 537 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 537 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 537 
  Reiter ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 538 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 538 
  Belanger ............................................................................................................................................................................. 538, 539 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 538 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 538 
  Hart .................................................................................................................................................................................... 538, 539 
  Phillips ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 539 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 539 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 539 
  Lambert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 539 
  Fiaz ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 540 
  Cox ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 552 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 540 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 540 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 540 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 541 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Farm Progress Show 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 541 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 541 
 Global Wind Day 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 541 
 Governments to Fund Nipawin Water Treatment Plant 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................... 542 
 Readings From Saskatchewan Book Award Winners 
  Lambert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 542 
 Warman and Martensville Business Excellence Awards 
  Buckingham .............................................................................................................................................................................. 542 
 Prince Albert Citizens Support Project Triple Play 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................... 542 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Carbon Capture and Storage Project 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 543 
  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 543 
 Funding for Education 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 544 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 544 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 544 
 Proposed Potash Project 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 545 
  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 545 
 Closure of Correctional Facility 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 546 
  Tell ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 546 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 547 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 37 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2016 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 547 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 32 — The Automobile Accident Insurance (Benefits) Amendment Act, 2016 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 547 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 548 



 

 Bill No. 33 — The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2016 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 549 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 550 
 Bill No. 34 — The Provincial Lands Act, 2016 
  Stewart ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 551 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 553 
 Bill No. 35 — The Small Claims Act, 2016/Loi de 2016 sur les petites créances 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 554 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 554 
 Bill No. 36 — The Small Claims Consequential Amendments Act, 2016 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 555 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 555 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 21 — The Growth and Financial Security Repeal Act 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 556 
  Cheveldayoff (referral to Crown and Central Agencies Committee) ................................................................................... 559 
 Bill No. 22 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2016  
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 559 
  Cheveldayoff (referral to Crown and Central Agencies Committee) ................................................................................... 562 
 Bill No. 23 — The Liquor Retail Modernization Act/Loi de modernisation du commerce des boissons alcoolisées  
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 562 
  Cheveldayoff (referral to Crown and Central Agencies Committee) ................................................................................... 564 
 Bill No. 24 — The Liquor Retail Modernization Consequential Amendments Act, 2016  
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 564 
  Cheveldayoff (referral to Crown and Central Agencies Committee) ................................................................................... 564 
 Bill No. 25 — The Wakamow Valley Authority Amendment Act, 2016  
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 565 
  Cheveldayoff (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) ................................................................... 567 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 




