






















































Hansard: November 07, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 37B  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 7, 2016, 19:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (Ind.) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10; Independent (Ind.) — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1173 
November 7, 2016 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

EVENING SITTING 

The Deputy Speaker: — It now being 7 o’clock, I’ll call the 
Assembly to order. We’ll resume adjourned debates. 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

Bill No. 8 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 8 — The Summary 
Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To join in 
on Bill No. 8, The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment 
Act, 2016, I’m just going to give you, I guess, a small word on 
this bill actually. 

What it actually is, it’s a bill that allows a police officer to 
submit a statement by faxing it where the case by the Crown is 
proceeding but with a summary offence, versus it’s not going to 
be as harsh that this offence is going. So there’s some leeway 
by a police officer to fax in his statement to the prosecutor. 
which maybe cleans things up. And I know further on as we go 
down I’ll explain why, and I guess some of the changes they’re 
making. 

The other change that they’re making to that at the same time is, 
right now if you were given a fine you would have to actually 
pay that fine, and you have a time that the courts will give you. 
If you go before the courts, they give you a deadline on paying 
the fine, from my understanding. I guess the other side of that, 
if you get a fine, there’s also a voluntary option to pay that fine 
before you go to court. So I assume if you are not going to pay 
the fine, and you go to court, you go before a judge. The judge 
may say you’re guilty, or you may say you’re innocent of the 
charges. But let’s just say . . . My understanding — and it’s, 
you know, my understanding; I’m no lawyer — you would be 
found guilty of it. They would give you a fine amount that you 
would have to pay. But there is also a date that then the court 
would order that you have to pay this fine by. 

So having said that, that you would have to pay the fine by a 
certain date, now later on, let’s just say for whatever reasons, an 
individual could not pay that fine. Maybe there is some 
hardship, I don’t know, some circumstance that come why an 
individual couldn’t pay the fine. They can go back to court and 
ask, from my understanding, and ask the judge if they can 
actually have an extension to pay that fine. And it goes through 
our courts, but that’s tying up the courts. And that’s one thing 
that’s in here; it’s, you know, the court time is very valuable, 

and the work that they are doing. 

So this would give an opportunity for an administrator, 
somebody who would administrator that provision now, where 
they could actually give you an extension so it wouldn’t be 
going before a court, a judge and going to court. 

You would apply. I’m not sure how that works. And it is an 
interesting question. I mean I don’t know if it is going to be an 
administrator, if it is going to be somebody in the courthouse 
that will look at this, somebody within Justice, I’m not sure. I 
know, you know, for ourselves, we’ll have some questions to 
clarify that. 

But one area where I want to talk another bullet and point that it 
refers to in the legislation and making this, there’s giving more 
powers to cabinet. And I’m not sure, you know, to make . . . 
And I don’t know if it’s a change, the amount of fines, so 
cabinet will have that ability, the minister I guess will have the 
ability to raise fines. So I know that just as soon as I seen that 
and I was thinking to myself, well what exactly does that mean? 
And I know we’re going to get some opportunity to ask more 
questions in committee on this one. 

But having said that, I just want to . . . We never know where 
these changes are coming in for amendments to legislation or 
changes, if somebody has been consulted or if somebody has 
brought it to the minister or the ministry, to their attention, that 
there’s a bill change, or it could be one of the members that 
they’re, you know, that they want those changes made. So I’m 
not sure in this case where that comes from, and I don’t think, I 
didn’t see anything that said they were consulted . . . [inaudible] 
. . . and maybe they were. But I know, you know, having said 
that, we can show a lot of examples of where you give powers 
to the minister and the ministry to take over certain things that 
used to be the powers of the . . . And my colleagues have said 
that, and I’ve listened to them many times talk about sometimes 
giving away too much or the authority to the minister. And it 
just, with the stroke of a pen, can do some changes. 

And we’re seeing some of that stuff in legislation, not only with 
the changes of this but with regulations that are so easily 
changed just by government of the day decides it wants to 
change it. Minister, stroke of a pen, changes the regulations and 
rules. And that is sometimes concerning because you wonder, 
well who will be consulted? Who will be impacted by those 
decisions? 

And it’s easy to just say, oh yes, we’ll just do that. It makes 
sense. And sometimes on this side we think, well you know, 
that makes sense. And it might sound like, you know, a good 
plan. But sometimes, having said that, we’re giving away 
powers from the . . . I don’t know if it would be going through a 
committee, going through more discussion in this House or in 
committee, that you would get those type of . . . to make sure 
that things are followed though. And legislation and rulings and 
changes and regulations that impact Saskatchewan residents, we 
want to make sure that their best interests sometimes are being 
taken care of. 

And sometimes we rush everything, and sometimes 
unfortunately the government doesn’t have it right, and they’ll 



1174 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2016 

introduce legislation. And we’ve seen that, where they’re just 
not ready for it and they’ve got to change things or they amend 
it real quick. And sometimes I think it’s important that we make 
sure we get it right. 
 
And I know I’m going to be able to talk on other bills in the 
next while. There’s a few of them that really got my interest, 
and I’ve had people comment on those bills. And I’ll get a 
chance to put that on the record for those individuals who’ve 
asked me to say something on a few of these bills that they’re 
concerned with and want to make sure the representative, being 
it myself or other members of . . . And you know, I’ve said this: 
like there is a lot of work to be done. And it might sometimes 
be members opposite, and I don’t know, we refer to all 
members in here, and some we’ll refer to them as backbenchers. 
And that’s fine; I understand that. They say that because they’re 
not part of cabinet. 
 
But I’ve always said this too, and I think I’ve said it in the 
House, from our side of it, saying it is important that even those 
members that are not part of cabinet, that they ask some tough 
questions because cabinet and decision making by a small 
group impact the whole caucus. It’s not just . . . So those 
members I hope will remember as I say this to you: hold your 
cabinets and your colleagues to task on some of the impacts that 
are going to impact not only your riding, but your grandkids 
and impact students and community members and not only my 
grandchildren, but their grandchildren. 
 
So I know I’m going to get a chance to talk a little bit more 
about that when some of these bills come up. And we know 
what the government is trying to do on some of the bills that 
they’re proposing. And I think about, you know, trying to 
privatize our Crowns, that’s another one where you give powers 
away. And I know I’ve heard from so many people that are very 
concerned whether . . . It doesn’t matter where you go, people 
just cannot believe. But I’ll make comments about that when we 
get there. 
 
So on this bill, you know, it’s pretty straightforward as you look 
at it, but I know my colleagues, and we’ll flush it out. They’re 
good at, you know, the critic will flush out the questions that 
she needs to ask. I know she’s always reaching out to 
community members and finding out those individuals out 
there, and she gets around to talking to those individuals to see 
how this will impact them. So I know as critics, and that’s our 
role, we’ll do some of that where we’ll make sure that we’re 
checking on what’s going on, what’s happening, what’s not 
happening. And you know, did somebody propose this? Is it 
good for the majority of people? Are there issues with it, and 
should we be concerned about it? And that’s where in 
committee you can get some direct question and find out. 
 
So actually thinking about that and giving you a little bit of 
information that I wanted to share, I don’t really have any more 
comments on this bill. So at this point I’m prepared to adjourn 
debate, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 8, The Summary Offences 
Procedure Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

Bill No. 9 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 9 — The 
Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 
2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’exécution des jugements 
canadiens be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this evening to 
speak to this bill, Bill No. 9, The Enforcement of Canadian 
Judgments Amendment Act, 2016. Mr. Speaker, in summary, 
this bill is intended to allow for easier enforcement of tax 
judgments by Canadian courts in jurisdictions outside of 
Saskatchewan which, Mr. Speaker, seems to be a reasonable 
aim for this legislation. And I know this came out of a couple of 
different bodies asking for similar legislation in Canada to make 
enforcement of those judgments, particularly tax judgments, 
smoother and easier to enforce, certainly within the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In the minister’s comments going back to May of this year, the 
minister noted that these amendments were proposed by coming 
out of the Uniform Law Conference of Canada, Mr. Speaker, 
which certainly I will defer to their judgment on this matter. 
 
It’s also noted that the Supreme Court of Canada has confirmed 
that courts in each province need to recognize that tax 
judgments from other jurisdictions in Canada . . . And certainly, 
Mr. Speaker, I can see where it would be important that if these 
judgments are being made in other jurisdictions and the people 
who are subject to those judgments move provinces, that it 
would be reasonable that we have mechanisms to enforce those 
judgments regardless of residency or current location of people 
who have had those judgments made against them, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some of the other remarks that the minister made in introducing 
this bill back in May noted that whether they’re issued this 
legislation will be retroactive, Mr. Speaker, so not just for tax 
judgments that are made once the bill comes into force, but 
once the bill comes into force, any outstanding judgments that 
have not been dealt with. So that seems reasonable and gives 
this bill some retroactivity, which seems to be in keeping with 
what came out of the Uniform Law Conference and also in 
keeping with the direction of the Supreme Court of Canada, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
One of the things that this bill does — I’m just going to go to 
the explanatory notes — is that it provides further definition to 
“Canadian judgment” as had previously been noted in the Act, 
Mr. Speaker. And “Canadian judgment” refers to those 
judgments, for example civil orders, that are made in other 
jurisdictions but would have some hope of being enforced in 
this province and similarly in other provinces’ similar 
legislation. 
 
This bill proposes a new definition and adding “Canadian tax 
judgment.” Canadian tax judgment, the explanatory note goes 



November 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1175 

on to say “. . . includes a judgment for the recovery of money 
payable under a tax law in a Canadian jurisdiction other than 
Saskatchewan.” Again that’s in keeping with both the uniform 
conference and the Supreme Court of Canada. “It also includes 
a certificate of an amount payable under tax law, if the 
certificate is registered in a court of Canadian jurisdiction other 
than Saskatchewan and is deemed by the law of that jurisdiction 
to be a judgment of that court.” 
 
It goes a little bit further than that, Mr. Speaker, in that it 
removes, for some other judgments there is a need for 
jurisdictions to make application, and this removes that 
requirement in the specific case of tax judgments. 
 

Subsection 7(4) of the Act requires an application to the 
Court for directions respecting enforcement in certain 
circumstances. The amendment to Clause 7(4)(b) exempts 
Canadian tax judgments from this requirement. 

 
So therefore, Mr. Speaker, it removes one of those additional 
steps in order to enforce those judgments from other 
jurisdictions, and I would see if that is in place that it might 
remove some barriers and perhaps expedite being able to 
enforce those judgements from other jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think that on surface this seems to be . . . proposed some 
reasonable amendments and certainly clarifies and makes the 
process easier to enforce those judgments from other 
jurisdictions. Some questions that I have, and I note previous 
colleagues on this side of the Assembly have asked, you know, 
just what the current scope of the problem is. I would expect 
that there has been some difficulty in enforcing those judgments 
in Saskatchewan, and I would expect that this legislation is 
meant to remedy that, as well as to conform to the 
recommendations of the Uniform Conference, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[19:15] 
 
Again I don’t know how much of an issue this is in terms of 
both the number of these judgments that are not being enforced 
or having some difficulty being enforced in Saskatchewan and 
how much an issue it is in monetary terms, Mr. Speaker, with 
collecting those judgments and those assessments. So I know 
that there are, in addition to Uniform, some bright legal minds 
on this side of the aisle who would welcome the opportunity to 
look a little more closely at this legislation. Certainly as I’ve 
noted, on the surface it does seem if it is effective in achieving 
its desired outcomes, does seem to be reasonable, but I know 
that some other members on this side will have an opportunity 
to speak to this proposed bill and perhaps to delve a little bit 
deeper into both the intended outcomes, and they’ll be able to 
pass better judgment perhaps on whether this will be effective 
in achieving its desired outcomes. 
 
Certainly I am not going to stand here and argue with the 
direction of Uniform or the Supreme Court of Canada, but 
perhaps my colleagues will have something to round out that 
discussion. And certainly we’ll have the opportunity as well in 
committee, once this bill is moved to committee, to perhaps 
consult with stakeholders and to have a little more scrutiny and 
more of a discussion. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve exhausted my comments 

and my questions on the matter of Bill No. 9 that’s before us, 
and I will move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Regina Lakeview 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 9, The Enforcement of 
Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 12 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 12 — The Public 
Health (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure and honour to get up this evening and rise and speak to 
Bill No. 12, An Act to amend The Public Health Act, 1994. I’m 
thankful for my colleagues who’ve already spoken to this bill, 
as they’ve given me some ample reading material in terms of 
this bill and the changes that are located therein. 
 
From what I understand, this bill is updating the definition of 
clinic nurse to be in line with some bylaws of the Registered 
Nurses’ Association of Saskatchewan. And it also adds new 
reporting duties for nurse practitioners when treating patients 
with category II communicable diseases, as well as allowing the 
government to create new public heath registry systems similar 
to the one that’s in place for restaurants. I also understand that 
it’s creating a system to improve access to public health 
information, like I said, similar to the one that’s already created 
for restaurants which is . . . It seems like a very important thing 
to do, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Time and time again people are becoming more aware of public 
health issues, and people want to be more independently 
informed of any type of public health concerns that they may 
have or any public health issues that could be in relation to 
these public spaces, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So it makes sense to 
make that information as accessible as physically possible. 
 
Now I understand that they are changing the definition of nurse 
practitioner. They’re creating a new definition for the purposes 
of the Act and then, like I said, modifying the definition for 
clinic nurse to include nurses that have been granted certain 
rights and privileges to carry out testing, screening, counselling, 
and treatment for category II communicable diseases. 
 
Now I’m interested, and I know that my colleague the critic for 
Health will have opportunity to speak to this and ask questions 
in committee, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And at that time, I know 
she’ll be asking very important questions; she’s very well 
versed in this area. And I’m guessing she’s going to be wanting 
to know who has been consulted on this and how it affects 
different stakeholders in the health care field, and whether or 
not they’re supportive, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of these definition 



1176 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2016 

changes. Because sometimes it seems a little innocuous when 
you’re making changes to definitions in legislation, but it can 
actually have pretty serious real-world impacts. 
 
So I’m hoping that what was done here was thought through. I 
know that my colleague, the critic for Health, will have a lot to 
say about this, and we’ll have the opportunity to speak with 
stakeholders and deal with questions appropriately in 
committee. 
 
If anything, the critic for Health has been doing a very good job 
of lately, and basically her whole term as critic for Health is 
listening to the people who are in the health care field and 
actually finding out what’s going on and finding out what can 
be done better to improve it. 
 
If there’s something that this government seriously lacks, it’s in 
listening to stakeholders and listening to those in the health care 
field. So it would be good if the members opposite could take 
some lessons from my colleague, the critic for Health, in terms 
of stakeholders meetings and listening to the people who are 
experts in this area and people who are front-line practitioners 
in this field. 
 
So I’m hoping that through the creation of this legislation, some 
strong consultations were done both with RN [registered nurse] 
groups, but LPN [licensed practical nurse] groups as well, and 
any other type of front-line health care workers, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And I know my colleague will have a lot to say about 
that. And I have quite a few friends in the health care field, a lot 
of LPN friends actually, and they have a lot of concerns about 
where this government is going in terms of health care supports 
and what’s going on in health care in general. 
 
So, for example, we had spoken a few weeks ago about, or it 
might’ve been last week even, about some issues with respect to 
soiled laundry and soiled linen. And I’ve heard from friends 
that it’s actually been creating some serious backlogs and some 
serious issues in OR [operating room] surgeries, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that gowns and sheets had to be returned. That created 
delays, frankly, in the system, and that’s just one example why 
I’m talking about it with respect to this bill of why we’re 
concerned. 
 
We’re always concerned about exactly what the government is 
doing in terms of the health care field. So while this seems like 
potentially just some minor definition changes, I sure hope that 
the government has done its due diligence and has spoken to 
those who are experts in this area and the front-line workers 
because they are often feeling like they are being left out of the 
equation in terms of any type of health care decision changes in 
this province. 
 
So I’ll leave it with that at this point. I know the critic on our 
side, the critic for Health, will have a lot to say about this and a 
lot of great things to say about it, and I know she’ll have a lot of 
very great questions in committee. But I do also have other 
colleagues who also want to speak to this piece of legislation 
before we move it to committee, so with that I will adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 12. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Douglas 
Park has moved to adjourn debate on The Public Health 

(Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 13 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 13 — The Cancer 
Agency Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to join in 
on Bill 13, The Cancer Agency Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
There’s, I guess, a number of points that the legislation here is 
making some changes and proposed changes that are coming in 
to play. And I just want to . . . One I think is important is a 
name change. And I’m not sure, I’ll get into that why, but it’s 
going from “cancer care” to “cancer control.” It adds 
“palliation” to the mandate of the agency. 
 
It also allows the minister to disclose a patient’s cancer 
diagnosis, when someone is diagnosed with cancer, to the 
agency. And I have some questions on that, but I’m going to 
start out with I’m not sure why the change and if it was . . . 
Again I talk about government making sure that it’s consulting, 
and this could be a simple thing as the Cancer Agency or those 
that are diagnosed with cancer and taking care of those patients. 
 
And treatment, want it called cancer control. There might be a 
reason why; I’m not sure. But obviously, I mean I’m hoping the 
government’s done its work and it’s reached out to those 
individuals that this would impact and to make sure that, you 
know, they’ve got the information that they need to go ahead 
with making these changes. 
 
Now again, I say I hope the government has done their due 
diligence and has consulted. We’ve been saying all along how 
terrible the government has been at not consulting many people. 
Whether I think about the indigenous people, when I think 
about some of our seniors, and some of the challenge of our 
front-line workers, many community members, leaders, you 
know, do not get consulted when this government brings in 
legislation. It makes changes and then tries to say, oh yes, it’s 
consulted. And then later you find out that maybe they didn’t 
consult as good as they’re thinking they did or they’re going to 
say that they have. So we have differences of opinion on that 
side and this side when it comes to the duty to consult and 
accommodate individuals. 
 
Having said that, the mandate goes a little further and it makes 
some changes to the agency. And I’m not sure exactly what 
those changes will affect. And it’s going to be interesting to see 
what will those affect. And I know we’re going to have some 
questions in committee. 
 
But the one area where I really am concerned . . . and I’m not 
sure. And this might be a simple thing, that in committee we 



November 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1177 

can get those answers. And looking through some of the 
comments that I could see, they’re adding where the Ministry of 
Health can disclose a patient has cancer. 
 
Now there’s different ways, I guess, the ministry will find out 
an individual has cancer. And I guess maybe they go out of 
province for some type of a treatment. A diagnosis, it comes 
back. It’s found out: an invoice, a bill, or something to Sask 
Health, and maybe that is why they now realize that there is a 
patient that’s going through. And I’m curious to see how we’re 
going to work through that because I had some questions about 
that, and we always had. 
 
Certain individuals in our province have come to this 
legislation, and I think for all sides of government, with 
concerns about getting cancer treatment and type of a diagnosis, 
and treatment where they want to go. And they feel that they 
should go for that. And I guess sometimes it’s a matter of life 
and death to those individuals, getting a response. So I’m not 
sure where this will sit. And I’m curious to see some of the 
questions that we’ll have and to flush out exactly how and what 
examples. And I’m hoping that, you know, the ministry and the 
officials with the minister can give us some of the details and 
examples of what’s happened and why, why we’re bringing this 
forward now where they want to disclose to the Cancer Agency 
in Saskatchewan that someone has been diagnosed or a bill’s 
come in. And that’s what I’m saying. I’m unsure of that. And I 
asked a few questions and I’m not sure. 
 
So I know that we have more work to do on this. I know my 
colleague will ask a lot of questions and we’ll get an 
opportunity to clear the . . . But having said that, I guess, you 
know when I think about it, cancer touches so many people in 
our province, in our families, you know, members on this side, 
members on that side. It is a serious issue. And you know we 
wish those that are suffering, that they have, you know, a 
healing and a journey of that. And you know our hearts goes out 
to those that are suffering. 
 
But it is a serious issue, and I’m not sure if those individuals 
will have to sign anything off when they say they’re being 
diagnosed with cancer and the Ministry of Health finds out, and 
it automatically then sends to the Cancer Agency that that 
person has cancer. If it’s in Saskatchewan, maybe there’s 
something they sign. And I’m not sure about that. And I think it 
has to be, we have to make sure we’re covering off the patients 
and making sure their privacy is not being breached. 
 
[19:30] 
 
And you know, we’ll ask those questions. And if it isn’t, then 
that’s fine. If my colleagues ask those questions and it comes 
back it’s something that we’re comfortable with, I’m sure this 
will go ahead. If not, then maybe we’ll hear from people saying 
they’re not comfortable with it, and maybe, you know, we can 
relay that message through our critic or any of our members. Or 
members opposite can relay that to the minister and the 
Ministry of Health, that there are issues and concerns that 
people have with this information. 
 
So having said that, you know, I really don’t have any further 
comments on this bill, and I’m prepared to adjourn debate on 
this bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 13, The Cancer Agency 
Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 15 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 15 — The 
Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s an 
honour to stand here today and talk about Bill No. 15, The 
Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2016. This was brought 
forward in the spring session by the Minster of Justice and the 
Attorney General. Like I said before, there’s a lot of Ministry of 
Justice bills coming forward so obviously that department has 
been very busy going through all of their legislation. And when 
I was deciding whether I wanted to go into social work, I was 
considering going into law, and with doing all these bill reviews 
I am happy I chose social work. But this has been really 
interesting going through this legislation and I’m learning more 
and more every day so I’m very honoured to be able to do this. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this bill has a lot of different 
information on there. And basically The Provincial Court Act 
establishes the powers, the duties, procedures for the operation 
of the Provincial Court in Saskatchewan. And so this is a very 
important piece of legislation. It really defines a lot of what our 
provincial courts can do and so it’s really important to take this 
quite seriously and review it. 
 
And so some of the recommendations here . . . I’m going to 
start by quoting a little bit about what the Minister of Justice 
said when he brought forward this bill: 
 

This bill will authorize the Minister of Justice to directly 
establish the list of temporary judges, including those from 
other jurisdictions, as recommended by the chief judge of 
the Provincial Court. That list would be published in the 
Gazette. Currently this process requires an order in council. 

 
So the changes to this legislation would change that. It will 
create the list of temporary judges and have that in the Minister 
of Justice’s hands so that he has that information more readily. 
So I think that’s important. I think that’s something that you 
want to make sure you have that list and it’s available and if it 
is put in the Gazette then the public is also well aware of that. 
 
Also I’m going to have another quote of what the Minister of 
Justice said here. There’s a lot of discussion in this bill with 
regards to the Judicial Council. So the Minister of Justice said: 
 

The Judicial Council is comprised of representatives from 
all levels of the judiciary in Saskatchewan as well as 



1178 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2016 

members of the bar and government appointees under the 
chairmanship of the Chief Justice of the province. 

 
And so the Judicial Council is a really important group. And so 
some of the changes in this legislation will be in regards to that, 
and one of them says, right here it says to “dismiss the 
complaint without further consideration by the council if the 
complaint is found to be frivolous, vexatious or wholly without 
merit.” So that’s something new that they’re wanting to put in 
this bill. 
 
And to be honest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m concerned about the 
language of that. And that could be based on perception, so who 
decides whether that’s a frivolous complaint or not? Most 
people, we have the right to file complaints, and they have the 
right to be processed. So will this maybe allow for people to 
make a decision of what they deem as being frivolous? And for 
other people, they would think that that’s a really important 
concern, and they deserve to have that taken seriously too. So I 
hope there’s a lot of discussion within committee about that 
language and about how that’s going to be considered and 
what’s going to be the determination of that, what’s the 
definition of that, and how could someone make that decision. 
 
Also this will allow the Judicial Council to have one member 
respond to a complaint rather than the whole council. So again, 
my understanding is the Judicial Council was created because 
then you have a group of people who are making these 
decisions from different angles. They look at the situation from 
different perspectives. And when you bring it down to one 
person making that decision, is that going to still have the same 
merit as when you have a group of people making that 
decision? 
 
And why do they want to make it so that it’s only one person, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker? I’m not completely understanding that, 
what the rationale for that is, but I’m sure there will be a lot of 
discussion with regards to that at committee, and why they feel 
that that would be a better way to make decisions when people 
bring concerns to them. And I’m sure they get their fair share, 
you know, but again people deserve to have that outlet. 
 
So another thing that . . . another piece of this legislation that’s 
going to be new is it looks like there’s going to be some 
changes to the rules of court-appointed lawyers by introducing 
new restrictions. So when I look at the amended Act, it says, 
“Court-appointed counsel — application required.” So: 
 

. . . the court shall not appoint a lawyer to represent a 
person in any legal matter unless the court is satisfied that 
the application and notice requirements of Part III.1 of The 
Constitutional Questions Act, 2012 have been met. 

 
I realize that there is application processes and those are very 
important. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they also have to take into 
account that a lot of times people who are involved with the 
legal system might have some issues with literacy or they might 
have some language restrictive issues, so I think sometimes we 
can’t just make a blanket statement. We have to look into all 
these other options. And why isn’t the application filled out, 
and is that going to restrict some of our most vulnerable people 
from receiving legal representation that they so rightfully 
deserve and have a right to. 

So I hope again that there is a lot of discussion with regards to 
this: what was the reasoning for having this placed into the 
amended Act, and is there a way to make sure that some of 
these people won’t fall through the cracks and possibly be left 
with no legal representation, which we definitely don’t want. It 
makes the court systems much more harder to manage. 
Sometimes people choose to represent themselves because of 
some of these barriers and it can provide issues with regards to 
some of the processes. 
 
So I know there will be quite a bit of discussion in committee 
with regards to this and so . . . And I also know that I have 
colleagues here that will be interested in putting more 
information onto the record with regards to this bill and the 
proposed amendments. So with that, Deputy Speaker, I’m going 
to move to adjourn this debate. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert 
Northcote has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 15, The 
Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 16 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 16 — The 
Adoption Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur 
l’adoption be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is my 
privilege, as always, to enter the debate on Bill No. 16, The 
Adoption Amendment Act, 2016. I think I want to start my 
remarks by just referencing the minister’s second reading 
speech and pointing to a line she says here: “It is felt by 
stakeholders providing feedback on the legislative proposals 
. . .” So the minister in her remarks references that clearly they 
have done some consultation, but she doesn’t say with whom 
they consulted in working on this bill, which actually has many, 
many changes to it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I think that that’s always one thing that’s important to ask: 
who is consulted? How were they consulted? Are all voices 
who need to be consulted, who are impacted by the legislation, 
were they part of the process as well, Mr. Speaker? So I know 
when our critic gets to committee with respect to this bill, that’ll 
be one question I’m sure that she’ll be following up on. 
 
So Bill No. 16, in terms of some of the changes that it makes, 
there are some very simple changes like changing the term 
“Crown ward” to “permanent ward.” And this is because 
“Crown” is an outdated term and not referenced in any other 
child welfare legislation here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It removes the term “simple adoption” from The Adoption Act 
in 1998. There’s another . . . so a simple adoption, from what I 
understand, is an adoption that allows some of the legal bonds 



November 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1179 

to be carried on between the birth family and the adoptive . . . 
and the child. But from my understanding and reading a little 
bit about this, Mr. Speaker, the simple adoption is not 
something that had really been used here. I’m just referring 
again to the minister’s second reading speech where she says, 
“There is little to no documented history of simple adoption in 
Saskatchewan.” 
 
So with respect to this particular area, Mr. Speaker, this bill 
removes section 28, “Simple adoption orders,” and all 
references to section 28. This is because requirements for 
simple adoptions are incompatible with legal requirements for 
intercountry adoption, as they do not require the severing of 
parental ties or informed consent by the birth parents and do not 
prevent birth parents from applying to revoke their consent to 
this type of order. So we’ll talk a little bit about intercountry 
adoptions here in a moment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another piece around this is this bill modernizes language to 
use the child’s best interests. So just looking at the explanatory 
notes here, Mr. Speaker, this is around, this is around the piece 
around best interests used to be a time when religious . . . I’m 
just going to look at my notes here. This is when you take too 
many notes and shuffle your papers around, Mr. Speaker. But 
the piece around a child’s best interest, it changes 
considerations for “the religious faith, if any, in which the child 
has been raised” to “the child’s cultural and spiritual heritage 
and upbringing” when determining what is in the best interest 
of the child, which I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, makes very 
good sense.  
 
And I think it’s also important when we think about that 
cultural and spiritual heritage. I think that that’s more modern 
language, for one, but also we can only look back to the Sixties 
Scoop, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the importance of a child’s 
own history and sense of identity. Speaking to children who 
have been adopted, I think that that’s one piece that’s really 
important for them. As much as they love and they love their 
adoptive family, it’s always good to know where you come 
from as well. And so that emphasis on the child’s cultural and 
spiritual heritage and upbringing I think is a good move in that 
respect, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This bill also increases the amount of time parents can revoke 
their consent to an independent adoption or voluntary committal 
from 14 days to 21 days, which is in line with many of the other 
jurisdictions. In reading . . . well the minister’s second reading 
speech and in the explanatory notes, so in 1988-89, 
Saskatchewan actually reduced its revocation period from 30 
days to 14 days. And at that point the rationale for this 
reduction was that a longer period of time would possibly 
unnecessarily put a child’s future in doubt. And now in more 
recent times the focus has been since shifted to the needs of the 
child to remain connected to its birth family and for birth 
parents to have sufficient time to consider this very important 
decision. 
 
It is a very important decision and often giving up a child is not 
a decision made lightly I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I 
think 14 days is a short amount of time to make a decision that 
will impact you for the rest of your life and your child for the 
rest of your life or his or her life. 
 

[19:45] 
 
Looking at what other jurisdictions are doing: 
 

At present, only Saskatchewan and Prince Edward Island 
have a 14-day revocation period. Alberta allows for a 
revocation up to 10 days after signing, and Nova Scotia 
does not permit revocation unless the court rules it’s in best 
interests of the child. In British Columbia, revocation must 
occur within 30 days of the child’s birth. [And] New 
Brunswick and the Northwest Territories and Nunavut 
provide birth parents with 30 days after signing to revoke 
their decision. [So] Manitoba, Ontario, Newfoundland, and 
the Yukon provide 21 days. 

 
So moving to this 21-day period is in line with, more in line 
with other jurisdictions and I think tries to strike a balance 
between the 10 days, the 14 days, and the 30 days, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
This bill allows assisted adoption benefits to continue to 
subsequent legal guardians if both adoptive parents pass away, 
Mr. Speaker. So obviously if a child is adopted and both 
adoptive parents pass away, of course those in assisted adoption 
cases, it makes sense to pass those benefits on to ensure the 
child or children still have what they need, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
This bill, Bill No. 16, also allows the minister to enter into 
payment agreements directly with the young person, a youth 
between the ages of 18 and 21 if that youth is engaged in an 
educational or vocational plan. This agreement-making with a 
youth recognizes a young person’s independence from the 
family unit and allows the minister to support a transition plan 
if the adoptive parents pass away after the youth turns 18. 
 
Some of the other things that this bill does, it “restricts the 
court’s ability to hear/take into consideration a child’s voice in 
court to age seven and up.” So this is quite a departure, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, just looking at the minister’s second reading 
speech. Previously children under seven could’ve participated 
in this, in having input and the minister points out that: 
 

. . . The Adoption Act, 1998 gives the judge the discretion 
to order that a child of any age be interviewed before the 
court to hear their understanding and wishes regarding 
their adoption. The judge may also appoint a third party to 
interview the child and report their findings to the court. 
These provisions do not have any regard for the child’s 
age, nor do they identify what information should be 
obtained from the child or who should be able to file a 
report with the court. The proposed legislative amendments 
[will now] define the age parameters for a child and enable 
the establishment in regulations of guidelines for 
completion of the interview with the child. 

 
So the minister in her comments actually talks a little bit about 
child development theory. 
 

The amendments are neither intended to change the 
practice nor to require the completion of a third party 
report in every adoption case. The court currently requests 
a report only in exceptional circumstances, for instance if a 
birth family member objects to the placement and the 



1180 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2016 

judge requires a child’s point of view to be provided by an 
impartial report. The proposed changes are not expected to 
increase the number of reports required. 
 
[So these changes will mean that] the court will no longer 
be able to interview or order a report being completed for a 
child under . . . seven. 

 
And this is where the minister had referenced feedback by 
stakeholders on the legislative proposals that the age of seven 
would be an appropriate one for optional reports to be ordered 
by the court. 
 
So those will be some questions I’m sure that our critic will 
have just around this piece. Obviously it sounds like this 
decision has been made around a developmental theory and 
where kids are at when they’re under the age of seven, but I 
know that our critic will have some questions around that. 
 
This also, this bill introduces a new section, section 27.1 that 
lays the foundation to support cases involving the adoption of a 
child from a country that is not a signatory to the Convention on 
Protection of Children and Co-operation in Respect of 
Intercountry Adoption. 
 
This new legislation is consistent with the requirement for any 
type of adoption granted in the province. It also ensures that the 
penalties resulting from the release of identifying information 
on an adult adoptee’s birth registration are consistent with the 
penalties found within the updates made to The Adoption 
Regulations 2003. And it introduces a new section 35.1 that 
allows the minister to apply for a court order against any person 
who is not complying with any provision of the Act, the 
regulations, or a decision or order issued because of the Act. 
 
So this is quite a lengthy bill. I’ll continue here, Mr. Speaker. 
The bill removes provisions regarding family service boards. 
This is because family services boards were never established 
according to The Child and Family Services Act, and thus 
repealing the provisions aligned to The Adoption Act, 1998 with 
current practices. And obviously that makes sense, Mr. Speaker, 
if they’ve never been established. But I think that might be a 
question for the critic to inquire as to why the history around 
that, why the family services boards were never established. 
 
This bill also provides regulation-making authority that 
describes who can complete a report for the court with respect 
to a child is proposed for adoption as well as what information 
the report shall contain. And it supports applications 
recognizing simple adoption orders made prior to the coming 
into force of The Adoption Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
So that in a fairly large nutshell, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is Bill 
No. 16, The Adoption Amendment Act, 2016. So as I said, I 
know our critic for Social Services will have many questions 
when this bill gets to committee, but with that I would like to 
move to adjourn debate for now. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 16. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 17 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 17 — The Power 
Corporation Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure and honour to rise this evening to speak to Bill No. 17, 
An Act to amend The Power Corporation Act. 
 
Now this Act that the amendments in the bill are, they seem 
fairly innocuous. Most of them seem fairly innocuous, but 
they’re sandwiching what are essentially two very concerning 
items in this amendment that I’m going . . . or this bill that I’m 
going to speak to mostly. 
 
But first of all, the innocuous portions of the bill essentially just 
make a number of housekeeping updates: first of all to change, 
for example, “his” to “his and her”; include gender-neutral 
pronouns or some gender-neutral references; and then also to 
remove some unnecessary plurals that are in the bill. 
 
But I want to speak to the portions of the bill that are far more 
alarming. And this is why it’s really important that we have 
these second bill debates and that we have these second bill 
discussions, because oftentimes government will table what 
seems at first like a fairly innocuous legislation, but they also 
. . . but they often contain therein some very concerning pieces 
of amendments. 
 
The first one that I want to speak about with respect to this bill 
is clause 5, section 8. And I’m just going to look at the 
explanation that has been provided by the government. They are 
recommending: 
 

. . . that clause 8(1)(i) be amended to clarify that 
SaskPower’s authorized powers and purposes include those 
that are connected with or incidental to the purposes and 
powers set out in any other statute that prescribes purposes 
and powers for Crown Corporations . . . 

 
Now they say in the explanation that the intention is not 
necessarily to add powers. But as has been stated by my 
colleagues who’ve spoken to this bill already, it’s always a little 
bit concerning, first of all, when government seems to feel the 
need to clarify certain things in legislation. And sometimes 
when things are clarified, they’re actually expanded. And what 
is stated as explicit intention is not always the result. 
 
And as has been seen, for example in bill 40, not always does 
government and do the members opposite think about the full 
consequences of the legislation they table until after they’ve 
tabled it, which is again why it’s important to have these second 
reading debates and important to have these bills go to 
committee, so these issues can be brought to light and discussed 
and hopefully changed. 
 



November 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1181 

Now it’s very worrisome to see that there is this need for 
clarification and also that they’re granting the ability of cabinet 
to designate purposes and powers as it considers necessary or 
desirable. Now I’m always concerned, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
when I see legislation being amended to provide authority to 
cabinet to make further decisions after the bill is passed. What 
happens in cabinet and what happens in terms of changing 
regulations don’t necessarily have to go through the same 
rigorous process as legislative change has to. And that’s the 
concerning thing, is that once this is passed, cabinet can 
essentially do what it feels it needs to in terms of designating 
purposes and powers as it’s stated in the Act, and what that 
means, may not come through this House again and may not be, 
opposition may not be given the opportunity to speak about it or 
shed some light on some concerns or figure out or be able to 
highlight to the public and to the people exactly what’s going 
on with respect to these changes or respect to any type of 
powers or purposes that cabinet may deem necessary in the 
future. 
 
And that’s always the concerning thing for me, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, when essentially the democratic process is being taken 
away in terms of providing more, more authority to cabinet and 
less opportunity for us to have a democratic discussion and 
debate. So that’s one of the main concerns that I have with 
respect to this bill. And I know colleagues have also, opposite 
spoken about their concerns with respect to those changes can 
be to this bill as well. 
 
And the other alarming concern, also sandwiched in between 
what seems to be fairly innocuous amendments, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is the change in clause 17 and the change to section 
43, which increases SaskPower’s current borrowing limit of $8 
billion to $10 billion, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Now my colleague 
the member from Lakeview has spoken to this bill already and 
laid out essentially what this means and what this has meant for 
SaskPower and for government since the borrowing limit was 
increased in the past few years. This is a worrying trend and a 
constant trend with this government. From what I understand, 
the legislation was last amended in 2013 to raise the borrowing 
limit from $5 billion up to $8 billion. And now they want to 
raise it again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, up to $10 billion. So that’s a 
jump of $5 billion total since 2013. 
 
Considering that we recently discussed in the House the request 
for government itself to increase its borrowing limit, and now 
SaskPower to continually increase its borrowing limit, I think 
this should create a lot of red flags for the people of 
Saskatchewan and for taxpayers in terms of how our finances 
are really doing, what’s actually going on in terms of the state 
of our finances, and what hasn’t yet been fully disclosed by this 
government in terms of first quarter report in terms of what the 
actual deficit is. 
 
But there’s sure a lot of hints in terms of what’s actually going 
on. And that’s, you know, you look at this, this change, the 
request for the increase to the borrowing limit. And you look 
for the one that we noticed in the order in council recently, the 
request to increase in that borrowing limit, and it’s really, it’s 
really creating some terrifying concerns, frankly, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And we worry about how we’re ever going to be dig 
ourselves out of this mess, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I know that 
NDP [New Democratic Party] governments have had to do that 

in the past, and you know what? I know the members on this 
side are more than ready and willing to do that again. We just 
hope that the mess isn’t too big by the time in 2020 when we 
get to take over, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
SaskPower has been stating that one of the reasons for the 
increase in this deficit is, or the increase in this borrowing limit 
is because of the need to improve aging infrastructure, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
[20:00] 
 
And another one, in terms of their goal to move to 50 per cent 
renewables by 2030. Now boy, that sounds exciting — 50 per 
cent renewables by 2030. However we haven’t really seen a 
whole lot of action in terms of this government actually moving 
towards it. We see the need to feel absolutely married to 
nothing else but the carbon capture project, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, but there sure isn’t a whole lot of innovation or 
discussion about how we’re going to expand it. And so I hope 
that the goal is actually to increase it by 50 per cent at 2030, but 
I sure haven’t seen a whole lot in terms of action yet, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And it’s not just the concerns about the aging infrastructure that 
are creating this need to increase the borrowing limit, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. I think another huge concern is the failed 
projects and the wasted money that’s happened, both within the 
government generally but also some of the problems that have 
occurred in recent projects in SaskPower, the smart meters 
being one of them for example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the 
carbon capture project being another in terms of a project that 
was told to work at a certain time, by a certain time, and hasn’t 
quite delivered as government once promised. 
 
So we’re very concerned about two particular main things with 
respect to this bill. First of all, like I said, the increase to the 
borrowing limit, always very concerning. Always worried about 
how we’re going to deal with this in the future, always worried 
about government trying to evade questions about a growing 
deficit by moving or hiding it in our Crowns, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And also concerned about this extra power that they’re 
giving cabinet, to essentially clarify, as they say, or clarify what 
would be purposes and powers of SaskPower as it deems 
necessary. Always, like I said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, very 
concerning when we’re moving things to cabinet and to 
regulations and not putting it through legislation like it should 
be because it changes the way, the level of discourse that we are 
able to have in this House, which is always quite concerning. 
 
Now I know my other colleagues are going to want to have a 
discussion about this bill. I know the critic for SaskPower is 
going to have a much more eloquent discussion about this bill 
than I could, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I know there’ll be 
questions at committee, but with that, at this time I think I’ll 
move adjournment on debate for Bill No. 17, The Power 
Corporation Amendment Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Douglas 
Park has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 17, The Power 
Corporation Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 



1182 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2016 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 19 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 19 — The Film 
and Video Classification Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to introduce into the debate on Bill No. 19, An Act 
respecting Film and Video classification, repealing The Film 
and Video Classification Act and making consequential 
amendments to other Acts. 
 
Or in this case, for the Sask Party, “How I shrunk the film 
industry” here in Saskatchewan. And they wrote the book on 
that, how they killed the film industry. And I know many 
people were so disappointed . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
And we hear them saying that that was one of the worst movies 
ever, “How I shrunk the film industry,” starring the member 
from Martensville, who feels she wanted a speaking role. You 
know, at least we thought it might be silent film over there, but 
they all want to talk to it. They all want to talk to it. That was 
one of our proudest moments when they killed the movies in 
Saskatchewan. That’s right, that’s right, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
You know and so . . . They start with privatizing SCN 
[Saskatchewan Communications Network]. That’s where it all 
started. And they were very, quite happy with that, quite happy 
with that. And here you know for many people it was a sad, sad 
end to the week, sad end to the week when we did see Corner 
Gas sets get knocked down. And I know the member from 
Moose Jaw North though is going to be very happy because I 
understand parts of that are going to be in the Western 
Development Museum in Moose Jaw. And he’ll go there with 
his picture being taken and I was part of the destruction of the 
film industry here in Saskatchewan. I played a leading role. 
 
And I don’t know what those folks over there . . . But anyways, 
Mr. Speaker, I digress. Because this is a very serious bill before 
us, and it is. It is. A lot of people who really want to be creative 
and leave their mark in the world really look to the creative arts 
like film and video to do some wonderful things and tell some 
wonderful stories. It’s unfortunate that many now have had to 
leave the province and it’s unfortunate they get no sympathy 
from the folks over there because they just did a cold-hearted 
cut, cold-hearted cut, and it was on the cutting floor. And there 
you go. And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do think this is an 
important piece of legislation before us. 
 
I do have to say though, it is interesting. In their quest to be 
modern they still use the word “film and video.” And I was 
thinking about the IMAX. Now maybe I’m wrong; maybe they 
still use film . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well you know, the 
member from Moose Jaw North over there who beaks off, 
taking pride in the job cuts that happen, the layoffs that happen 
in Moose Jaw and he just washes his hands, washes his hands. 
And I can’t wait to see him lining up to have a picture taken 

with Corner Gas. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when these folks seek to be modern 
and clarify language like they are apt to do, you know, taking 
them some 61 years to recognize that we do actually have a 
queen reigning over us here in the domain of Canada. But I’m 
not sure if we actually have film anymore and they probably 
should’ve changed this film and video to the digital, some 
digital language. Because you know my son’s always giving me 
a hard time when I talk about tape recording and there’s no tape 
being recorded on. It’s all digital. The same with film and 
video. In fact we were just thinking the IMAX over at the 
Kramer theatre I think has been upgraded so it’s no longer using 
that great big wide film anymore. It’s all digital. It’s all digital. 
 
Now so we have . . . And this shows the dinosaurs across the 
way still with their Film and Video Classification Act, so . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . I don’t know this guy across the 
way. He’s . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . He really is. He really 
is. He still living in the days from when Tommy Douglas, that 
great movie that was made in this building here, you know . . . 
And here, excuse me, because I use the word “movie” because 
people are moving in them, you know, as opposed to those still 
photos where they’re over there doing the talkies. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this is a very important piece of legislation 
and I do think as my colleague from Nutana pointed out, there 
isn’t much that has been changed here and it is interesting that 
they have gone to redoing the whole Act while there’s very 
little to be changed. 
 
But I do want to be serious here because I think there are some 
parts here, you know, they go into the long, long definitions, the 
definitions that they’re very proud of. And I do have to say one 
of the things that I’ve been approached about, and because I live 
in a . . . I represent an area of the city in Saskatoon that has 
several groups who are in the film and video arts. 
 
And you know, we have this Nuit Blanche that happens every 
September. It’s a wonderful thing, and under the bridge, the 
Alvin Buckwold bridge, there were some films being shown. 
And it was interesting because the people responsible pointed 
out that none of these films were actually classified. They were 
made by artists and they were all done under the auspices of 
SaskCulture. It was Culture Days or culture nights. 
 
But the fact of the matter is, many of the artistic type of films 
are not classified actually, and this becomes a bit of a problem 
because people have said, don’t worry about classification; 
that’s really for the commercial theatre. But when we talk about 
theatres we don’t actually think about whether they’re 
commercial or not-for-profit. We think about galleries that 
show films and video projects but are not necessarily for profit. 
 
But we think about the exemptions that are here, and under 
section 13 of course, and I’ll read the exemptions, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker: 
 

This Act does not apply to: 
 
(a) a film owned or sponsored by: 
 

(i) a church or religious society, if the film is designed 



November 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1183 

for purposes of worship or religious instruction; or 
 
(ii) a university, school or other educational institution 
for which the minister responsible for the administration 
of The Education Act, 1995 is responsible, if the film is 
designed for educational purposes; 

 
(b) a film designed for the purpose of advertising, 
demonstrating or instructing in the use of commercial or 
industrial products; or 
 
(c) any other film or class of films, person or class of 
persons or advertising associated . . . that may be exempted 
in the regulations or by the director pursuant to clause 
14(6) . . . 

 
So if you go over the 14(6)(c) it talks about regulations as you 
would, prescribed criteria and that type of thing. 
 
So there are the exemptions and people think, well I just don’t 
need to apply and maybe, because I’m not a commercial theatre, 
and I’m not going to make a lot of money at it. And what could 
go wrong? Well a lot could go really wrong. If all of a sudden 
you have somebody who decides to take it at heart, the new 
Act, and decides to prosecute. 
 
And in the case of the prosecution, you know, I was actually 
quite amazed at the penalties here. For the first offence, in the 
case of an individual, to a fine not exceeding $5,000, and if it’s 
a corporation and not exceeding $100,000. So if this is a small 
arts group, but a corporation that files its papers every year, the 
fines can be up to $100,000. For a second offence, it could be 
up to $500,000. I’m quite amazed at that: $500,000. These are 
stronger than the OHS [occupational health and safety] 
penalties. 
 
And when we get into committee, I would really like to hear 
from the minister what rationale is it for those kind of fines for, 
you know, the . . . and what are the criteria for doing that? I 
mean this is really something that is quite severe, is quite 
severe. And you know, we have . . . And we understand when 
we get into the realm of pornography and that type of thing, but, 
you know, in terms of the galleries and in terms of the 
independent filmmaker, these could be quite damaging in terms 
of just putting these groups completely under. They don’t have 
any near the resources to pay a fine that approaches $100,000. 
Well no, some of them may. They may have the resources to 
pay that, yes. 
 
So I just think that what we need to do — and I would really 
urge the minister and people on the other side because I know 
some of the members on the other side have connections to 
film, independent filmmakers — to say, is there a way to have 
an exemption or something in the Act that recognizes the art of 
filmmaking as an exemption? They may not be tied to a 
university. They may not be tied to a school under The 
Education Act. They may not be tied to a church group but 
clearly they are a special category. They’re not a commercial 
theatre. They do not make any money off the films that they 
make. 
 
So I think this is something that really I would urge the minister 
. . . and I know they are writing the minister as we speak. And I 

would urge other members on both sides of the House, if you do 
have people or groups, small groups, independent filmmakers, 
to seek them out and ask their opinion about The Film and 
Video Classification Act and whether or not they feel they will 
be impacted by it. They might say that we don’t plan on 
applying ever to be classified, and I would say that’s maybe a 
little naive because as I said, you may be caught up in that. And 
that’s a problem. 
 
[20:15] 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think there’s a lot here that we 
need to talk about and I know I’ve talked to our critic about this 
and we’ll be following up and watching for this because I don’t 
think . . . This is again a classic case of unintended 
consequences where you say, okay we just want to modernize 
this, but there is an opportunity to take a look at what’s actually 
happening in the independent filmmakers’ group, the arts 
filmmakers’ groups, that are we not including them. 
 
And this could be a problem later on because we do all love 
those events where we can get together and celebrate the arts 
and we can watch an independent short film. I think of the 
National Film Board that did such wonderful things and, you 
know . . . But if, as I say, somebody decides to really prosecute 
to the full extent of the law and somebody hasn’t classified a 
film, and then all of a sudden we’re in a bit of a problem, a bit 
of a pickle. And that pickle can be quite expensive. 
 
And so with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move adjournment of 
Bill No. 19, An Act respecting Film and Video Classification, 
repealing The Film and Video Classification Act and making 
consequential amendments to other Acts. I do so move. Thank 
you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 19, The Film and 
Video Classification Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 26 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 26 — The Patient 
Choice Medical Imaging Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise tonight to speak to 
Bill No. 26, as was noted, the short name, The Patient Choice 
Medical Imaging Act. In more depth this is, this proposes to 
replace existing legislation, which is the previous An Act 
respecting the Licensing and Operation of certain Facilities 
providing Magnetic Resonance Imaging Services and making 
consequential amendments to other Acts. 
 
Now I understand the want of a slightly shortened tag for that 
bill but when I read the new longer title of this new bill, An Act 



1184 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2016 

respecting the Licensing and Operation of certain Facilities 
providing Medical Imaging Services, repealing a certain Act 
and making consequential amendments to certain Acts, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
There’s a lot that is said in the longer titles, but certainly I think 
more interesting is the short title and the notion of this being 
about patient choice, Mr. Speaker. Choice, I guess, is important 
when you’re looking at the context from which that choice is 
being made. This is a choice for some people to be able to pay 
for faster service. It is a choice that applies to some in this 
province but won’t apply equally to others. And possibly once 
exercising that choice to pay for these private services is a 
choice also to jump the queue again and receive quicker 
medical services, Mr. Speaker. So that is, a lot is obscured by 
that, that very sunny-sounding title about this being about 
patient choice. 
 
This is of course, the second go at this for this government. The 
previous legislation anticipated or contemplated MRIs 
[magnetic resonance imaging] and this one now adds CT 
[computerized tomography] scans and also, Mr. Speaker, leaves 
the door open for other imaging diagnostics as is seen fit. 
 
I know that there have been a number of groups going back to 
previous submissions around the changes to the MRI and 
privatizing that portion, and I would expect that those concerns 
hold true again for the CT scans, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m going to first start at some of the minister’s comments, the 
previous minister, Mr. Speaker, his comments when moving 
second reading of this bill. The minister noted that this Act will 
provide the option for patients to pay directly for MRI and CT 
services at licensed private facilities in the province. And this 
Act will set out quality standards and requirements of the 
facilities. Regulations will define specific categories of that 
licence. 
 
Of course, we don’t know what is in those regulations, Mr. 
Speaker, but that is something that will be of great importance 
to ensure that we have a full look at those regulations and to 
ensure that there isn’t more that we didn’t contemplate in those. 
 
Also, the minister went on to say, “In order to facilitate this 
legislative change, the existing MRI facilities licencing Act and 
regulations will be repealed at the same time . . .” as this bill is 
put forward. “It will also allow for other medical imaging 
modalities to be added in the future through changes to 
regulations.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find that quite concerning within this legislation. 
Of course this is not the first time that we’ve seen that. I know 
when the proposed changes to the SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor 
and Gaming Authority], not only privatizing the 40 liquor stores 
that were talked about during the election, it leaves that door 
open, with a lot less oversight and certainly a lot less debate in 
this Assembly, to privatize additional liquor stores. 
 
And certainly that’s concerning when you see that sort of a door 
left open which wouldn’t necessarily be able to provide the type 
of oversight and consultation that really is important in 
something as potentially game-changing as this legislation, and 
something that certainly does hack at the Canada Health Act 

and certainly the notion of universality and one of the basic five 
tenets of that very important Act that we know that people in 
this province, in this country hold dear. This is sort of a 
backdoor way around it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also in the minister’s comments he noted that reducing wait 
times and giving patients more choice over their own health 
care decisions is a priority for the people of Saskatchewan. 
Again I’ll note that this is one choice that has been proposed by 
this government, but there are other choices of course within 
health care. One would be providing a strong voice with the 
other premiers and demanding and requiring more input of 
resources from the federal government. That certainly is 
something that’s made more and more difficult when you, when 
you lack that kind of relationship with other premiers, and 
certainly when you lack a relationship with the federal 
government, but that would be one choice that would be 
available to this government. 
 
Concerns of course were raised previously with the MRI bill 
and again with this bill. One of those concerns revolves around 
the potential for these private clinics to poach staff from the 
public system, and I know that’s a concern that I have heard 
many times. And the minister noted that these applications . . . 
regional health authorities would be required to report on the 
expected impact of the facility on the public system, the public 
operations. Well that would be good to see what that report 
would look like and what the scope of that report would be, and 
have some scrutiny of those type of reports. 
 
Furthermore, facilities would be required to submit a human 
services plan that outlines how its staffing plan will not 
negatively impact the health region in which it plans to operate. 
Well certainly if I’m pitching something, I’m going to do my 
best to give a good report saying how this isn’t going to 
negatively impact, but I think you need something a little more 
objective than that, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that it doesn’t have 
some of those consequences. We certainly have heard stories 
from other jurisdictions that this has been the case with the 
introduction of private MRIs and private CT scans, Mr. 
Speaker. We also . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . You want me 
to read your whole speech? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government, the previous minister also noted 
that they would consult on the development of regulations with 
stakeholders. And I will read some of that into the record, some 
of the previous consultations and some of those concerns from 
previous stakeholders that I don’t think have been put aside and 
certainly have increased with the increase in or with the 
introduction of MRIs, and certainly are at least twofold, if not 
more, with the introduction of this legislation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister also noted, the previous minister, that his 
government “. . . is committed to innovative patient-first 
solutions that enhance access to the services and result in 
improved patient satisfaction,” Mr. Speaker. Well that’s a good 
goal, but we also know that people have a lot of satisfaction and 
a lot of concern for their public health care system in this 
country. And we’ve seen a slow and not-so-slow erosion and 
this bill certainly will, I’m afraid, add to that further erosion of 
that system. And that’s certainly something that I heard on the 
doorstep fairly frequently, both from people who work in the 
system but also people who traditionally maybe haven’t had a 



November 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1185 

lot of concerns to raise with this government, but certainly did 
raise that with me, people who worked in the system, people 
who had some very clear ideas about how the public system 
could be improved without resorting to the introduction of 
private clinics and all that that opens us up to, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of those people speaking out against this, I note Dr. Ryan 
Meili noted back in 2014 that there are ways of improving 
access to MRIs that don’t undermine the principles or 
confidence in the public system. Imaging is one of the most 
overused elements of our health care system, so making sure 
that those scans that are being requested are medically 
necessary, Mr. Speaker, is one important part of a solution that 
doesn’t rely on private clinics. And working to promote the 
rational use of technology is one way to make sure it is 
available for those who need it most.  
 
Other things that I’ve heard when I was working in the hospital 
certainly — and this is noted here — expanded hours of use, 
training programs for personnel, and the number of machines in 
the public system is another, Mr. Speaker. And I think that that 
bears some other scrutiny. When we’re talking about choice, 
this is another choice that could’ve been made by this 
government to invest in the public system, rather than resorting 
to this system that really does put our public system at risk and 
allows some people to jump the queue. 
 
I know that they’ve sort of paired the private MRIs with one 
being administered through the public system or one other 
person on the list being able to pay, Mr. Speaker, but I think 
that’s certainly, I am sure, welcome to that person is a bit of a 
diversion. This really is something that does have a strong 
impact on our public system, and I’m not sure that all of the 
consequences have been shown with the first piece of 
legislation. And now we’ve got this other piece including CT 
scans, and we’ve left the door open, should this bill pass, to just 
include as needed other forms of privatization of imaging 
technology. 
 
[20:30] 
 
One of the other concerns noted with this type of privatization 
is that these private clinics, and I just digress a little bit. I know 
it was a bit jarring. I was up in Saskatoon waiting at the bus 
station and I noticed a taxi wrapped with one of the private 
clinics and it, you know, got me thinking. You know, these 
clinics have to advertise, and there’s money that goes into that. 
It just got me thinking of how a well-funded and a 
well-supported public system, all of the funds go into providing 
the service. You don’t have to put the funds into advertising and 
to providing dividends to your shareholders. But I digress, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Anyway one of the concerns as noted in the Commission on the 
Future of Health Care noted that such facilities sort of take the 
easy, the cream off those services that can be easily and more 
inexpensively provided. So these private clinics take the easier 
procedures, those things that, well like MRIs, but leaves the 
public system to provide the more complicated and expensive 
services for which it is more difficult to control per case, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s one of the concerns when we’re looking at 
privatization, which this is introducing — well doubling down 
on now, Mr. Speaker — in our system here in Saskatchewan. 

The minister in his notes noted that there has been some 
increase in MRI scanners in Canada, but according to the 
submission that I have here, even with the increase to seven, we 
still are at or below what other jurisdictions are doing. So there 
would be another choice when we’re talking about choice, Mr. 
Speaker, would be investing in those public MRIs and ensuring 
that they’re running at the capacity that they could be and that 
we have proper training for people to be running them. 
 
One of the submissions to the previous Bill 179, which was the 
previous MRI facilities licensing Act, came from CUPE 
[Canadian Union of Public Employees]. And they noted that 
allowing this type of queue jumping through private-pay MRIs 
and now CT scans violates the accessibility principle of the 
Canada Health Act, and I think that that certainly is the case. 
For those who don’t know, Mr. Speaker, the accessibility 
portion of the Canada Health Act, the principle is that all 
insured persons have reasonable access to health care facilities. 
In addition, all physicians’ hospitals must be provided 
reasonable compensation for the services they provide. 
 
But the one that I’m as, if not more, concerned with, Mr. 
Speaker, is universality. And that is that all insured residents are 
entitled to the same level of health care. And I think when you 
are able to again jump that queue and, first of all, get your scan 
quicker, and then if you have something show up on that scan, 
get in line quicker for surgery or for treatment, I think that that 
really does call into question the universality of one of those 
main tenets of the Canada Health Act. So I think that that will 
bear some, warrant some more consideration and scrutiny in 
committee. 
 
Well the members opposite are talking about wait times. You 
know, that’s interesting. One of the things, one of the concerns 
that I have and has been mentioned by others is the efficacy of 
this type of legislation in reducing wait times. In fact there’s 
evidence to the contrary that this type of legislation actually 
increases wait times, and that’s one of the big concerns, Mr. 
Speaker, is that not only . . . Now we’ve enabled the previous 
legislation and now this legislation, and we don’t have a lot of 
evidence that not only is it helping, but we don’t really know 
the extent to which it’s doing harm to our system and improving 
wait lists. So that’s a big concern, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I know we did try to get some answers, and we had a 
freedom of information request that went through earlier this 
year. But, you know, it’s hard to get answers when you have 
page after page that is redacted, citing section 17(1)(a) which is 
the trade secrets portion of the freedom of information and 
protections Act. So I mean if this is such a good deal, then let’s 
put the information and the evidence out there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I hope that we will have a fulsome conversation about both 
what the impacts have been of the previous legislation and now 
again what we can anticipate with this legislation. And again, 
leaving that door open to further privatization within our health 
care system which is, as my colleague from Riversdale noted, 
this is a slippery slope, and we are going faster and faster down 
that slippery slope in this province certainly with regard to 
health care but elsewise.  
 
And you know, we could make some short-term decisions to 
relieve some budgetary pressures due to mismanagement and 



1186 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2016 

all other sorts of reasons, but they have long-term 
consequences. And not only do they have consequences for the 
people of Saskatchewan in terms of their health care but also 
long-term monetary consequences. 
 
And I think that this bill certainly warrants a lot of scrutiny. 
And I know my colleagues will want to speak further to it, and 
my colleague from Riversdale will want to speak to it, I’m sure, 
here and also in committee at length because this is important, 
Mr. Speaker. And it’s important that people of Saskatchewan 
have answers before we see this bill passed. And with that, I 
will conclude my remarks and move to adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 26, The Patient Choice 
Medical Imaging Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 28 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 28 — The 
Extension of Compassionate Care Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s my pleasure and 
honour to rise this evening to speak to The Extension of 
Compassionate Care Act. Well first I’ll talk about the changes 
in this bill that actually relate to the name of the bill, and then 
I’ll talk about all of the things that they included in the bill that 
have nothing to do with the name of the bill, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
So the first change is, you know, I think arguably, definitely a 
good change. It allows an employee to take up to 28 weeks off 
work in order to care for a family member who’s at a significant 
risk of death, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now I understand that this change is to allow for Saskatchewan 
to move in line with some changes that happened with respect 
to federal legislation. I believe we were originally at eight 
weeks, something around that, in terms of how much 
compassionate leave was allowed to be taken. So I’m happy to 
see that there has been an extension. We have an increasingly 
aging population, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and there will be more 
time where family is going to be called upon to assist their 
aging loved ones. 
 
I know personally in our family that we’ve had to experience 
that as well, and I’m sure we’ll have to experience it again in 
the future. Eight weeks simply isn’t enough. It’s good to see 
this change to 28 weeks to reflect the importance of family 
assistance. But it’s also incumbent on the health care system to 
also be providing these supports as well, and it shouldn’t all be 
placed on family members, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We need to 
make sure that we’re providing adequate home care supports so 

individuals who are aging can live in their homes for longer, 
and that that responsibility, although it’s an important one, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it’s not all on family members. In saying that 
though, it’s important, this amendment to The Saskatchewan 
Employment Act to increase the allowance for leave, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
I’m interested to know, “a significant risk of death” in the bill 
and whether or not that’s something that’s been changed or 
something that has always been like that, or whether or not 
that’s something that’s just been decided within the courts, what 
that actually means, and what the definition of that is, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. I’m assuming that this is in line with other 
jurisdictions and that there’s already some jurisprudence on this 
definition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that we’re not straying 
from decisions that have already been made in the courts with 
respect to what this definition could mean, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So I think those are some important things to be looking at. And 
those are things that I know that the deputy critic will be as well 
. . . or not the deputy critic, my apologies, the critic for Health, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh no, 
wait, it’s Labour. Right. And that’s the whole confusing thing 
about this whole Act. 
 
And that’s what I was going to go into next actually, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Because when I originally and I think when 
members on our side originally saw this bill, we thought oh, 
compassionate care Act. This is a health care bill; this changes 
some sort of thing within the health care field. But it’s actually 
a change to the employment insurance Act. It’s actually a 
labour bill. And so I think our critic for Labour thought he was 
getting off scot-free, but now he actually has to take a really 
good hard look at this bill. And I know he’s going to and he’s 
going to have some very important remarks to make with 
respect to this. 
 
Now from what I understand actually, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
that . . . and I thank my colleagues for providing this 
information to me. What it’s doing it’s lining up employment 
insurance benefits, job protection benefits now so that those 
who have to take leave will be protected from having their 
employment terminated as a result of their need to go care for 
aging family members, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now the more interesting thing to this bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
to me and one of the concerns about, I guess, when you try to 
look at the name of a bill and you think that the name of the bill 
is a good explanation for what’s in the bill, it often . . . 
Sometimes their government likes to hide little gems of 
surprises for you if you’re not careful in terms of reading the 
bill. 
 
It’s interesting to see that they’ve added some changes that also 
. . . some additional changes to The Saskatchewan Employment 
Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that actually have nothing to do with 
compassionate care, which is disappointing to see when 
government just actually tries to sneak these extra things in 
without any type of real disclosure or transparency to the 
public. So I will speak to some of those changes. 
 
Now what the bill also does in addition to the compassionate 
care changes is that it introduces technical amendments that 



November 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1187 

give a number of powers to the registrar from the Labour 
Relations Board, including the ability to select the adjudicator 
for a wage assessment and the responsibility to set the date and 
time of hearings before the Labour Relations Board and to serve 
papers upon the interested parties. 
 
So it’s always a little bit concerning to see powers being moved 
and powers being given. I’m not sure whether or not these are 
powers that have been consulted with by all stakeholders and 
whether or nor they’re supportive of this, whether or not this is 
a necessary change for the Labour Relations Board, if all parties 
that participate with the Labour Relations Board felt that these 
were powers that the board needed to effectively carry out their 
mandate. So those will be questions I’m sure that will be asked 
at committee in terms of whether or not, what spurred this 
change, why is it being changed and who is being consulted — 
always the most important things. 
 
Another interesting thing, and it makes it a bit difficult for us to 
even have this discussion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that the bill 
also requires the adjudicator to follow the regulations regarding 
the procedures by which the hearing will proceed. 
Unfortunately though, these regulations have not yet been 
released. And as I know regulations tend to have a different 
path that they follow in terms of being proclaimed and they 
have less of an oversight in terms of this House body, we have 
less of an opportunity to really speak to them, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
So I have no idea frankly what procedural hearing requirements 
are going to be instituted, what sort of things are going to be in 
there that the adjudicator must follow. So it’s very difficult and 
it’s frustrating as an opposition member to be able to discuss 
any piece of legislation when it references powers being set out 
in the regulations and we haven’t even seen the regulations yet, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
[20:45] 
 
So I guess all I can really say at this point is that I hope that the 
stakeholders have been consulted on this. I hope that the 
stakeholders are being consulted on this. I hope we’ll have the 
opportunity to review them and provide comments, and I hope 
the regulations come out in a timely manner and are in such a 
fashion that are agreeable to all stakeholders, all people that 
deal with the Labour Relations Board — and that’s a mix of 
people, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There’s often unrepresented 
individuals who are at the Labour Relations Board. There’s 
often . . . Then there’s often lawyers as well. There’s union-side 
lawyers or employer-side lawyers. There’s unrepresented 
employers who are at the Labour Relations Board as well. So 
it’s important that all of those individuals are consulted and that 
these regulations are such a way that are agreeable to all of the 
parties. 
 
Now another concerning portion of this bill is the final section, 
which allows cabinet to make wide-reaching regulations 
regarding the duties of the adjudicators, the rules for appealing 
decisions of the board, and any other rules related to hearings 
and appeals. Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, again it’s . . . As an 
opposition member, how am I supposed to comment or critique 
or speak to regulations that I haven’t even seen yet, regulations 
that don’t exist? And it’s very concerning when authority is 

granted away from legislation and into regulations. Because as I 
had said — I have had to say several times actually tonight, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker — it’s hard for us because the avenue is 
different, and it can often be done quicker, but without the level 
of scrutiny that bills require, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So that’s the 
thing that I’m the most concerned about. 
 
And any other rules related to hearings or appeals, for example, 
is a very broad thing to say and it encompasses a lot of different 
potential avenues. And it can, for example, it can make the 
process . . . for example it can make the process of appealing a 
Labour Relations Board decision for an unrepresented 
individual, be it an employer or an employee, very 
cumbersome. We don’t frankly know what they’re going to 
look like or what the process is going to be, but I sure hope that 
the regulations will set out a process that’s accessible for all 
people — not just lawyers, for example, but also unrepresented 
people. I often speak to the plight of the poor lawyers, but we 
also have to think about unrepresented people as well. And 
that’s the concern that I have. 
 
We want to make sure that this Labour Relations Board stays as 
accessible as possible. It’s supposed to be one of the board’s . . . 
And that’s the whole point of having administrative tribunals, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that they’re supposed to be accessible to 
the people and they’re supposed to be . . . The rules of 
participating in administrative-type tribunals, which the Labour 
Relations Board is, is supposed to be a little bit more fair or a 
little bit more, you know, flexible, depending on the people that 
are using that tribunal, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It creates a more 
accessible justice system. 
 
So I’m sure hoping that the members opposite are paying 
attention, and when they’re drafting that regulation that they’re 
planning on making sure that those regulations are following 
that. I got a couple nods, so I’m going to hold them to that in 
the future, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I know that the critic is going to have some comments on this, 
which we now know is the critic for Labour, and other members 
are also going to have some comments on this. So with that, I’m 
going to adjourn debate on Bill No. 28. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Douglas 
Park has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 28, The Extension 
of Compassionate Care Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 29 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 29 — The Justices 
of the Peace Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 
sur les juges de paix be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 



1188 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2016 

It’s a pleasure to enter into this debate on Bill No. 29, The Act 
to Amend The Justices of the Peace Act, 1988. And speaking of 
critics doing a lot of work, I do have to say our Justice critic has 
really got her work cut out for her this session, because there 
sure seems to be a lot of work coming out around the justices of 
the different courts, all of that type of thing. And again being 
not as familiar with the work that they do, and of course this 
relates to traffic safety, we’re counting on the good work of the 
folks in Justice to making sure they’re doing the right thing, that 
they’re known any consequences. 
 
You know, when I take a look at the minister’s second reading 
speeches, he talks about setting out for . . . providing for 
appointments with justices of the peace and setting out different 
categories and the respective powers and responsibilities. And 
this all . . . He talks about: 
 

The Saskatchewan Justice of the Peace Association has 
requested some amendments to improve and clarify the 
commission’s process. Making these changes will now 
allow the commission to make some additional 
recommendations . . . that it . . . [was not] able to make 
under the current Act. 

 
And so this all seems to be relatively straightforward. The Bill 
would make changes related to The Traffic Safety Court of 
Saskatchewan Act, 1988 and mentions that there hasn’t been a 
traffic justice appointed under the Act since 2006. So they’re 
going to repeal some of these amendments, and the powers 
formerly accorded to the traffic justices, which includes powers 
to require attendance at driver improvement programs, will now 
be made applicable to senior justices of the peace here in 
Saskatchewan and streamlining the whole process. 
 
So this seems to be relatively straightforward, but as I said it 
would have been interesting for us to have a bit of a bigger 
picture of how these things are all fitting together. I think that 
many of us who, you know, we’re familiar with the three 
branches of government and the judicial branch, and we respect 
and honour its role in terms of independence and what that all 
means. And so we don’t make ourselves as familiar as we might 
with the inner workings and how that all flows together. So it 
would have been interesting to see that, those kind of pieces and 
how they all flow together. 
 
Again, what was the real drive for this? Is there improvements? 
What are the consequences that we see this kind of work being 
done by the justices of the peace? Again, we are worried about 
how we see a slow movement within the Ministry of Justice and 
the Minister of Justice. Now we see the contracting out of the 
security in the courthouses, the beginning of that. And what 
does that all mean? And so what is the long-term vision here for 
that kind of work? 
 
You know, I was reading a document earlier today, and it’s the 
Justice ministry who runs sort of the peripheral parts of the 
courthouses in terms of the security, that type of thing. But it’s 
the judges who decide who gets what courtrooms and what the 
schedules will be, what justices will hear which cases. 
 
I would have liked to have heard more about the big, big picture 
and really what’s driving this, particularly when it comes to 
traffic safety. Is it because there is so much more work 

happening that they want to speed up the process? And why is 
that? Is this part of the whole issue around the photo radar and 
different infractions are being caught more and more by photo 
enforcement? 
 
So those are some of the questions I think that need to be 
answered, because we want to make sure that we all have a 
sense of justice that is fair and timely here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I really don’t have 
much more to add on this. I know that others will, and that the 
critic will have a thorough questioning of this when it’s in 
committee. But right now I’d move adjournment of Bill No. 29, 
The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The member from 
Saskatoon Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 29, 
The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 30 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 30 — The Freedom 
of Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The Chair recognizes 
the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To join in 
on Bill No. 30, The Freedom of Information and Protection of 
Privacy Amendment Act, 2016, I guess I’ll start out with a few 
comments and recommendations coming from the Privacy 
Commissioner and his office and some recommendations. And 
it refers to some of the changes, and in his report refers to time 
for an update, and I think he’s brought in some 
recommendations. And I’m not sure if this deals with all the 
recommendations that he brought forward in his report or 
identified, if government has moved on all those, and I can’t tell 
you for sure if they have moved on that. 
 
But I know some of the areas where . . . and why he brought 
this forward, to deal with some of the changes in information 
privacy protection of Saskatchewan people. We want to make 
sure that residents of our province have that protection when 
information they share . . . And it goes even further than that, 
even in our offices, you know, whether the ministry, the 
minister, the minister’s officials, the ministry of any 
department, and as far as that goes, MLAs [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] dealing with . . . 
 
And we know that he presented information to both sides, I 
believe. I know he did for our side, and obviously he would 
have went to the government side to present some of the 
information. And it talked about the rules, that how we gather 
information, even in the MLAs’ office and how we share that 
and who we can share that with that they’re aware of it. When 
they share that information, their information is protected. And 
he took that pretty serious. And he’s provided forms. He’s 
provided information and suggestions on how that should be 



November 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1189 

done. 
 
But having said that, it’s interesting to see why, why he had to 
go that far. And I think a lot of people will realize, and back in 
the day and I believe it came out of the Premier’s office, where 
the Premier had sent out information pertaining to an individual 
and his personal information was shared with the media. And 
the Premier’s office did that and shared that information, and I 
think that gentleman was Peter Bowden. 
 
Now having said that, this is going to go back, and there’s even 
some of the different recommendations that he makes in here. 
We talked about privacy, how important it is to protect 
information from people who share whatever information it is. 
And right now certain information can be used — social 
insurance numbers, date of birth — people get certain 
information. You know, just anybody can use that information. 
We’ve seen how that has happened. And then there’s health 
information. The list goes on when we talk about information 
that should be protected. 
 
And if somebody’s giving it to an agency where it’s part of 
legislation and part of an Act or rules, regulations that they have 
to give certain information to an agency or to government, I 
think the right thing is to make sure that that individual’s 
personal information is protected in the best way we can do and 
making sure we have the best regulations, legislation that 
protects. And I think that’s what is being done here is, you 
know, recommendations from the Privacy Commissioner and 
the good work he’s done and his staff have done as 
recommendations coming forward. 
 
Now some of the changes that we’ll talk about, there is a time 
where government, whether you request information, there’s a 
time limit. It used to be 30 days and I know that it’s been asked 
to be changed to shorten that, that 30 days even to try to receive 
information that’s allowed to be shared. And seeing what the 
Privacy Commissioner and following the rules when you need 
to share that, whether it’s opposition asking a question or 
anyone else asking freedom of information from government or 
a ministry department, whoever falls under the legislation. It 
could be a corporation, private. We’re not sure exactly who’s all 
. . . But this one refers it to 20 days instead of 30 days to 
making it faster that there’s . . . It needs to, and I think speed up 
that process nowadays with probably technology and who 
knows why. And that will be some of the questions we can ask. 
And moving it to 20 days, is that enough? And you know, 
obviously it’s the recommendations that were made. 
 
[21:00] 
 
So even changing with technology, and I talked about that and I 
think he referred to some of that. Today’s technology, it’s so 
quick. We’ve made other amendments to legislation where now 
you can sign documents digital for mortgages, is what they’re 
trying to move. So with that said, you know the different issues 
that will be . . . 
 
I know we will have more questions definitely in committee, 
and hopefully the commissioner and those that need to come 
forward to present to the committee and those committee 
members and ourselves and our critics, we’ll ask those tough 
questions and need to get the information. And does this go far 

enough? Or will there be, you know, better ways or suggestions 
that can be? 
 
And could ask the Privacy Commissioner, did the government 
act on all the recommendations you made, and then are you 
pleased with that? As that is his role to give independent advice 
to this Assembly and, you know, to make sure this Assembly 
adheres to the regulations and the legislation and to make sure 
that people have access to certain information that is a right to 
the public to have. Because sometimes, you know, we see the 
government trying to not share information that the public has a 
right to. When you look at the finances for the election, there 
was many things that went on that the public should have had a 
right to. You know, first-quarter reports, stuff like that that 
should have been shared with the public didn’t get shared, and 
should be. 
 
So when we think about that and stuff, you know, that before 
the election, a lot of things that this government’s doing now 
after the election did not share, unfortunately, with the public. 
And the public has a right to know. And we’re hearing it out 
there; they’re not happy. And there’s many people talking about 
it, you know, privatization and stuff like that. That’s something 
that — you know what? — they could have shared with the 
public. They didn’t have to hide. They didn’t have to have 
legislation to share that. They could have just been right out 
there, right upfront with Saskatchewan people, and saying, 
here’s what we’re proposing to do. This is what we’re going to 
do, should we get elected as a government. We’re going to go 
. . . But they chose not to do that. 
 
This, on the other note, is a different thing. Maybe someday we 
can have that where, you know, that can be dealt with at some 
point too, like you need to share certain things. And I know 
some of the information that we’ve tried in this Assembly day 
after day to get information for the public that’s asking. And 
there’s opposition from this government, and it’s so painful. 
This government doesn’t . . . [inaudible]. 
 
But I reassure this government the public is paying attention. 
They are paying attention. We’re being approached everywhere. 
It doesn’t matter where you go, people are talking about it, and 
they’re not pleased. They are not pleased with the government, 
the way it’s handling it. Some tough questions need to be asked. 
And you know, we’ve been calling for certain things, and I’ll go 
back to legislation, privacy. But they’ve been asking for a 
forensic audit, which we have been asking for. You know, 
there’s been people saying RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police] investigation. You know, everything . . . People are 
asking for things: is this being done? Is that being done? Is 
there a forensic audit, judicial inquiry? Are those things being 
done? 
 
Well we’re pushing that from opposition. All the government 
has to do is agree to that. And I know our colleagues on this 
side and our leader has been asking for that. Let’s get down to 
it. Let’s give the facts and be the facts. Let’s release some of 
those phone records that show everything. That’s not private. 
That doesn’t have to be protected. 
 
So there’s things that could be done but this legislation here 
makes some changes where . . . And maybe we’ll be able to get 
those answers within 20 days instead of 30 days or never 



1190 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2016 

getting them from them. It may be helpful. I’m hoping that it’ll 
help, but I don’t see that. I don’t see it will. 
 
And you know, the last thing I’ll say about this bill before I’m 
done: there’s many members on this side and that side of the 
House, 61. You know, they have a lot of backbenchers back 
there, and I’ve said this before. It’s time for the backbenchers to 
look around and ask questions of cabinet. You at the end of the 
day will be judged by your constituents. The ministers and 
cabinet makes the decision. Ask some tough questions. You 
have a right to those informations. You’re a part of the caucus. 
Like ask, what’s going on here? What about the GTH [Global 
Transportation Hub] land deal? What about these deals? What’s 
going on here? Ask those tough questions. You have a right to 
do that as you’re a part of the caucus. 
 
So I would say that we don’t need privacy to protect cabinet 
from backbenchers. They should have a right to . . . it’s the part 
of your colleagues to get that information. But maybe we’ll 
introduce legislation that says, you know, backbenchers and 
caucus members will have to . . . can get information from 
cabinet so they know what kind of deals that’s going to impact 
them when they’re door knocking and going home to deal with 
things. 
 
So with that, you know, there are some good recommendations. 
And I want to thank the Privacy Commissioner and his officials 
and his staff. They do a great job. And with that, I will say our 
critic will have more questions. I know we will be wanting 
more questions and making sure that process is done. And who 
they consulted with and all that is very important. So at that 
point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have no further comments. I’m 
prepared to adjourn debate on this bill. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The member from 
Cumberland has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 30, The 
Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment 
Act, 2016. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 31 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 31 — The Local 
Authority Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy 
Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 
to enter the discussion today about The Local Authority 
Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment 
Act, 2016. This is following on the heels of my colleague who 
just spoke about the sort of partner or companion bill, The 
Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment 
Act. They’re two different bills, but both dealing with freedom 
of information and the flow of information and the protection of 
privacy. 
 

And interestingly enough, I’ll talk a little bit about this in my 
remarks, but actually the Privacy Commissioner, when he had 
done his report, It’s Time to Update, in March 2015 actually 
recommended that these two bills be rolled into one. His 35th of 
35 recommendations was consolidation of the freedom of 
information and privacy protection Act and The Local Authority 
Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act. He says 
that “It is proposed the Acts be merged to eliminate confusion 
as to which Act applies and to address discrepancies between 
the two.” So here we are today speaking to two, so just seeing 
clearly one of the recommendations that this government didn’t 
follow out of the 2015 report. 
 
There are some that the government did take into consideration 
and are in this bill, and I’ll speak about that. But I think, just 
looking at the history of this Act, The Local Authority Freedom 
of Information and Protection of Privacy Act was passed in 
1993 and so is 23 years old this year, Mr. Speaker. And in that 
time, it has only had minor amendments. 
 
So Mr. Ronald Kruzeniski, who’s our Privacy Commissioner, 
had recommended 35 different items that he felt the government 
should move on. In the minister’s second reading comments, he 
points out that this particular bill, it will take, it does propose 
implementing some of those changes which include “. . . a duty 
to assist applicants for information, a duty to protect personal 
information, extension of the definition of the local authority to 
include police services, and creation of a new offence for 
snooping.” 
 
Some of the other amendments that are being made: “. . . to 
provide for the introduction of mandatory breach notification 
when personal information has been leaked that places an 
individual at serious personal risk.” It also addresses the 
recommendation around “. . . broadening the grounds for 
review by the commissioner to include reviewing complaints 
regarding fees, transfers of access applications, and improper 
handling of personal information . . .” which is one that I will 
go back to in a moment, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It also includes 
dealing with the rejection of frivolous and vexatious access 
requests, and recognition of electronic access requests and 
responses, and increasing the penalties for offences. 
 
But I just want to take you back to broadening the grounds for 
review by the commissioner to include reviewing complaints 
regarding fees, transfers of access applications and improper 
handling of personal information. That was actually 
recommendation no. 7, the summary of proposals that the 
Privacy Commissioner put forward, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it’s interesting, in my time here as an MLA, about five 
years ago, I submitted a freedom of information request to the 
Ministry of Social Services. And it came back, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, with a cost of $30,000 attached to it. And there was no 
way that I had the capacity to pay $30,000 for information that I 
felt was something that not only me as the opposition critic at 
the time, but the people of Saskatchewan wanted to know, but 
there was no process in place to review that. 
 
But I have to say to the deputy minister’s credit, at that point in 
time, I happened to run into him that same day that that letter 
saying it would be $30,000, the same day that that letter hit my 
desk. I was at an FASD [Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder] 



November 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1191 

conference with him. We had a brief conversation, and he 
committed to getting me the information so I did not have to 
pay that $30,000 fee. 
 
But I just want to take your attention back to actually just the 
spring, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where we can . . . I’m just looking 
at a CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] news story with 
a headline, “Saskatchewan government charging $180K for 
access to GTH land deal documents.” So these can be a way 
that . . . can be a way of putting a chill on people’s ability to get 
information. 
 
I have to acknowledge that obviously there is two sides to the 
coin here with this legislation. There is freedom of information 
and making sure that information flow is available and 
information for the public good is accessible, but there is also 
protection of privacy. It’s about striking a balance. And the 
minister, in his second reading remarks, says this, but I don’t 
know any thinking person who would stop for a moment and 
looking at a price of $180,000, thinking that that was fair or 
reasonable, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But we see why as more and more have . . . more and more 
information continues to come out around the GTH land 
scandal, Mr. Speaker, we see perhaps why the government was 
invested in not having that information come to light. But we’ve 
had opportunities to continue to push the question asking . . . I 
know the media and we in the opposition and people in 
Saskatchewan, quite frankly, want more answers, Mr. Speaker. 
They know there is more to this story than the government is 
willing to admit. And tomorrow morning in Public Accounts, I 
know Public Accounts will as a scrutiny committee take some 
due diligence, I trust, in trying to get to the bottom of this, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But with respect to . . . and, Mr. Speaker, I think that there is 
much more. The auditor’s report was . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . as members opposite at this point in time are 
heckling about the auditor’s report being the definitive body of 
work, but I think that the auditor’s report opened up more 
questions than answers, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But when we talk about the office of the Saskatchewan 
Information and Privacy Commissioner and these 
recommendations that have come forward, another area of 
interest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is when one of the . . . another 
recommendation that this government didn’t, one of the 
recommendations this government didn’t follow was 
government institution response time. The commissioner 
proposed the Acts be amended to reduce the government 
response time to access to information to 20 days for 30 days. 
 
For people in the general public who have maybe not done a 
freedom of information request, when you submit one . . . and 
it’s one of the tools that we in the opposition use. I think it’s a 
tool that people in the general public use to get further 
information, and the media uses the freedom of information 
request. So as it stands now at 30 days, the institution to whom 
the request is being made, the institution has 30 days to 
respond, and if they need an extension, they can apply for a 
30-day extension. But it’s our experience in the opposition that 
there’s been many, many freedom of information requests that 
have gone over those 30 days and, actually quite honestly in 

fact, over the 60-day period. 
 
I can cast your mind back a few years ago around seniors’ care, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. We can talk about seniors’ care and the 
CEO [chief executive officer] tours actually, which the 
government was reluctant to do in the first place. Actually they 
were reluctant that spring starting in question period when we 
started bringing in validators around seniors’ care, Mr. Speaker. 
And the government initially said there’s nothing to see here, 
and people continued to bring forward the issues or bring the 
issues to us and we provided them a venue to share their 
concerns. 
 
[21:15] 
 
And finally the minister at that point, in fact said, okay we’ll do 
a CEO tour. But ironically enough, those tours were done. And 
we did a freedom of information request to get those reports and 
30 days passed; we didn’t get those reports. There was an 
extension, Mr. Speaker, 60 days. And lo and behold, the day 
after the 60-day extension the government finally made those 
reports public, Mr. Speaker. And we know that history shows us 
that this government has refused to implement minimum quality 
of care standards and our most vulnerable seniors still suffer, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But with respect to this particular bill, that move to 30 days to 
20 days, the proposal by the Privacy Commissioner I think 
would have been one that was well worth looking at, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
When we look at one of the other proposals, number 33, the 
commissioner recommended that, thinking in fact that there’s 
been so few modifications over the years or amendments over 
the years to this particular bill. In fact, as I said, it’s 23 years old 
and there have been few changes in those 23 years.  
 
The commissioner recommended, “In order to ensure that the 
Acts are reviewed regularly, it is proposed the Acts be amended 
to make it mandatory every five years.” And that was a 
recommendation that this government didn’t choose to act on, 
Mr. Speaker. And I think that that’s a disappointment and 
something that could have served us all well, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, in terms of keeping legislation current and applicable 
to the world in which we live, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So although 
that there are some positive amendments, and I know the 
Information and Privacy Commissioner said it’s a work in 
progress and he’s happy with the changes, but he does have a 
report with 33 recommendations, many of them not . . . or 
pardon me, 35 recommendations, many of them that are not part 
of this new legislation. 
 
But I know that our critic will weigh in on this when it gets to 
committee and have many questions to ask, and I know that I 
have colleagues who will want to speak this bill as well. But for 
the time being, I will move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 31. 
Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 
31, The Local Authority Freedom of Information and Protection 
of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016. Is that agreed? 
 



1192 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2016 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Carried. 

 
Bill No. 1 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 1 — The 
Crown Corporations Public Ownership Amendment Act, 2016 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Prince Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m happy 
to be discussing Bill No. 1, The Crown Corporations Public 
Ownership Amendment Act, 2016 this evening. This was 
brought forward by the previous deputy premier in the spring 
session. And so there’s a lot of information within this bill 
that’s very concerning, I believe, and I have a lot of information 
that I plan on discussing with regards to this, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
This bill, in essence, removes Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority from the list of Crowns, and so I think that 
would be a great loss for the Saskatchewan people and very 
concerning. This will “. . . simplify and expedite the process for 
expanding the private retail system of alcohol in this province.” 
That was what the previous deputy premier indicated when he 
presented the rationale for wanting the amendments to this bill. 
 
The minister makes reference of a survey the government 
circulated. But I myself participated in that survey, and I felt 
that it was really quite misleading to be honest, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. So the results from that survey, I really question. 
 
So with regards to the reason why they want to remove the 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority off the list of 
Crowns, is so that we could sell some of our liquor stores. And 
it’s proposed to sell 40 of the liquor stores, and we have about 
75 that were publicly owned liquor stores, and so that would be 
more than half of them. And we know, of course, if this bill is 
passed that the other ones will be on the market. So this is just 
the start of them. 
 
So the 40 affected stores are: Battleford, Broadview, Canora, 
Carrot River, Davidson, Foam Lake, Gravelbourg, Gull Lake, 
Hudson Bay, Indian Head, Kamsack, Kelvington, Kindersley, 
Kipling, Lanigan, Leader, Lloydminster, Maple Creek, Melfort, 
Melville . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And the members 
across are complaining that I’m reading these out, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, but it’s really important that I do because these impact 
a lot of their areas — Outlook, Preeceville, Raymore, Regina, 
the Broad Street one; Rosetown, Rosthern, Saskatoon, the 20th 
Street West; Saskatoon Market Mall, Shaunavon, Shellbrook, 
St. Walburg, Stoughton, Tisdale, Unity, Wadena, Wakaw, 
Waskesiu, Watson, Wilkie, and Wynyard. 
 
So those are the 40 that were put forward to be up for sale for 
private realtors. And like I said before, we know that once 
they’re gone, they’re gone. And these are real people and these 
are real families we’re talking about that work in these areas. 
And a lot of these are impacted in smaller communities, which 

is really troubling. 
 
The reason for this was more choice, more convenience, and 
more competitive pricing, Mr. Speaker. And so I don’t 
understand why that couldn’t have been done in our own public 
liquor stores. We could look at different ways of expanding our 
public liquor stores and we could modernize them. And I think 
that that would have been a more important way of going about 
it. 
 
So prior to wanting to privatize some of these 
government-owned liquor stores, there was 75 locations that 
were government run. We had 450 locations of off-sales that are 
privately run. We had 190 privately run rural facilities, and we 
have four private, full-line stores. So we already had a 
complement of private and public stores. And I think that 
balance was good. And I don’t think going towards private is 
the option. 
 
When we say we want to have competitive pricing, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we know that when we have a combination of public 
and private services that does provide the competitive pricing 
because as a government, we can determine what prices we’re 
going to put down, and the private stores will have to match that 
because they don’t want to lose their business. But once all of 
these stores become private, they can do whatever they want, 
and they can charge whatever they want. 
 
And longer hours . . . Well I’ll talk about the social 
consequences of alcohol later, but the longer hours, I don’t 
understand. It seems like a really step back from a government 
that wants to stop drinking and driving to provide longer hours 
of availability for alcohol. That seems to really conflict in my 
mind. We know that a lot of the people who are out driving 
drunk are driving in those hours, so why would we provide the 
liquor there? 
 
Are people having a hard time accessing alcohol within our 
province? I don’t know one person who told me that they had a 
hard time finding alcohol in Saskatchewan, especially with all 
of these locations within our province. I think it’s pretty hard 
done by to not find alcohol. So with the reasoning of the more 
choice, more convenience, more competitive pricing, to me just 
doesn’t make sense. That could’ve been done . . . A 
government, their job is to review their services and to expand 
them if needed. 
 
So also when the previous Deputy Speaker brought forward 
this, when he was talking to the media, he said that a lot of 
communities were under-served communities. So that was why, 
with also privatizing the 40 stores, they’re adding 12 new 
private stores. And so the under-served communities, these also 
included Regina and Saskatoon. And I’ve had an opportunity to 
travel around both of those cities, and again I didn’t have a hard 
time finding alcohol in those cities. So I don’t think that those 
communities are under-served. 
 
The liquor system has actually, like I said before, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, been a hybrid of private and public for many years, so 
I don’t see why we would want to change something that is 
actually working. Also we know that we benefit a lot from the 
sales of the alcohol here. The sales of public liquor pays for 
Saskatchewan hospitals, schools, highways, and long-term care 



November 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1193 

homes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So when we sell these stores, 
we’re going to be draining millions in revenue from the 
Saskatchewan public coffers. And it would’ve been really nice 
if this government would’ve done an independent analysis and 
would’ve had the independent analysis review the financial 
impact because we should be making decisions within this 
province that are objective and evidence based. 
 
So I will give you some evidence here. So selling . . . Forty 
SLGA stores, they earned profits of 32.6 million in 2014, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. So that’s profits. And so closing those 40 
stores, that’s what we’re going to be losing. So also according 
to Donna Christianson, the Chair of SGEU’s [Saskatchewan 
Government and General Employees’ Union] Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority bargaining unit, she indicates 
here how much revenue will Saskatchewan people be losing 
and how much of this will be replaced. Or will families be 
facing cuts in services to make up for the lost income? 
 
And the members across are asking about research. Well 
provide me your research. Where’s your evidence-based 
research? We haven’t seen that. 
 
“Given the recent financial downturn, government has a 
responsibility to show the public what any potential changes 
will cost them,” she says. And I agree with her. That’s right. So 
out of all of these stores that are being closing, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, like I said previously, small town Saskatchewan’s 
going to suffer. It’s the rural areas. Thirty-five rural 
communities stand to lose their public liquor stores. They’re 
good, family-supporting jobs, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Employees in small stores live and work in their communities. 
They support local businesses. They pay local taxes. They send 
their children to local schools. Losing those jobs will hurt towns 
already struggling to survive, Mr. Deputy Speaker. When you 
lose those jobs in these small communities, there’s not many 
other options for work. 
 
So that’s 210 jobs that’ll be lost with privatizing these 40 stores 
and 148 of them are in rural Saskatchewan. So it is reckless to 
pull, push ahead with privatization with no idea on how the 
millions in lost revenue will be replaced. The stakes are too 
high for Saskatchewan people who rely on the benefits and 
services provided by profits from public liquor stores. There’s 
no justification for putting profits for private corporations ahead 
of the interests of Saskatchewan families and communities. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, on average, an SLGA employee makes 
about $18 an hour. Private stores pay their workers 
approximately $12 an hour. That is not a living wage, and that 
is not going to help with our tax base. It’s not good 
mortgage-paying jobs, and it’s not a good decision for the 
people of Saskatchewan. Also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, SLGA 
staff are trained, professional employees. They are trained so 
that they don’t serve underage people accessing alcohol . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Can we have a little 
quiet? Thank you. 
 
[21:30] 

Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So it’s 
really important that underage people aren’t accessing alcohol, 
and SLGA staff are trained and professional with regards to 
that. And so we also know that they’re trained to make sure that 
they’re not over serving. And because their sales aren’t 
dependent of their jobs, they adhere to those rules. If it’s a 
person who, the sales of the alcohol is going to be putting 
money in their pockets, they might be more flexible of breaking 
the rules. But we know that these staff are trained and won’t do 
that. 
 
And you know, I’ve seen first-hand, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
SLGA staff in my own home community help people who come 
there and they know that they’re having some issues or they 
need some support and they’ve provided them that support. 
They’ve called mobile crisis in our community and got them 
access to the detox centre or whatever they need. And so we’ve 
got professionally trained employees working there, and when 
you pay people good money, they stay professional, so that’s 
really important as well. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, according to the World Health 
Organization, alcohol is a major global contributing factor to 
death, disease, and injury. And you know, the Minister of Rural 
Health is like . . . He’s chirping here. And this is health-based 
information. This is important stuff. This is happening in rural 
Saskatchewan. Maybe he needs to listen up here. So I’ll repeat 
what I just wanted to say here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. According 
to the World Health Organization alcohol is a major global 
contributing factor to death, disease, and injury. Worldwide 
alcohol abuse is estimated to cause 2.5 million in premature 
deaths per year and is the world’s leading risk factor for death 
among adult males. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, studies also show that Saskatchewan 
already has the highest rates of alcohol-related diseases and 
alcohol-related injuries. So increasing accessibility will increase 
society issues. So privatizing liquor stores would only lead to 
greater costs to society, and we know that. So this is . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . We do know that. There’s studies. 
There’s evidence. Look at evidence-based documentation. 
Whether it’s drinking and driving, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
whether it’s fetal alcohol spectrum disorder, underage drinking, 
domestic violence, chronic diseases, liver cirrhosis, suicide and 
homicide, alcohol-related offences and violent crimes, that’s all 
because of the increase of alcohol in our communities. So 
alcohol consumption is a major contributing factor to death, 
disease, and injury, and social consequences related to alcohol 
abuse are wide-ranging and very serious. 
 
And I’m really disappointed to think that the members across 
don’t believe that this is a serious matter because it is. And I 
think if you would talk to front-line workers in communities, 
they would also tell you this is a serious matter. And I’d like to 
see how much the Ministry of Health expenses are related to 
alcohol because I bet a lot of the expenses that are going into 
health are alcohol related. Mr. Deputy Speaker, alcohol is a big 
issue in our communities and for you to not think that this is 
serious is wrong. A key determent of overall alcohol 
consumption is availability. If liquor is cheaper and easier to 
find, more will be consumed. So we’ll see what’s going to 
happen with our health expenses once all this happens. 
 



1194 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2016 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m very proud that my own community 
of Prince Albert said no to a private-owned liquor store. We 
have a lot of issues of alcoholism in our community and our 
community’s taking a stand and we’re working towards a way 
of dealing with addictions in our community and so I’m very 
proud about that. 
 
And you know, privatization has been a problem for the people 
of Prince Albert. We lost over 80 jobs from the privatization of 
our laundry services. We lost almost 30 people with the 
privatization of food services in our correctional centres. And 
just last week we lost five deputy sheriffs, and they’re going to 
be laid off. And you know what? We know that the 
privatization of correctional workers is coming soon. 
Everybody’s concerned about that. We’ve had health care cuts. 
We’ve had health care workers that have been cut.  
 
And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Prince Albert is a 
government town because unfortunately we still don’t have a 
pulp mill which was an election promise. So if this government 
can’t even keep private jobs, then how can they afford to get rid 
of the public jobs, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Again, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, these are real people and these are real families, and 
we need to consider this when we’re making these decisions. 
 
And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I really hope the members 
across, they look through these bills like we do. We examine 
each and every bill and we do our research and I hope they 
consider doing that and that they vote . . . When it comes time 
to vote on these bills, I hope they vote based on what the 
research shows them and also what their constituents want. Not 
like the Moose Jaw members that voted for the cuts for their 
own park that’s against what their constituents wanted. You 
need to vote based on the research not what your leader tells 
you. And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, sometimes the right 
thing to do is not the most popular thing to do, but the right 
thing to do is always the right thing. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know my fellow colleagues have a 
lot more that they want to add to this bill. This is a really 
important bill. I know there’ll be a lot of discussion with 
regards to this in committee. And so with this, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I move to adjourn debate. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from . . . Order. The 
member from Prince Albert Northcote has moved to adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 1, The Crown Corporation Public 
Ownership Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 
Bill No. 32 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 32 — The 
Automobile Accident Insurance (Benefits) Amendment Act, 
2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 

Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure and honour to rise this evening to speak to Bill No. 32, 
The Automobile Accident Insurance Act. Now this is quite a 
hefty piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. And it’s interesting that 
the members opposite seemed to speak so loudly. It’s almost 
like they woke up for a couple minutes there when my 
colleague was speaking to the last bill. I hope they’re just as 
engaged and interested in the important changes within The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Act as they were with the last 
bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And as 
long as they’re not heckling, then they’ll be able to hear what I 
have to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I feel no need to speak any 
louder than I speak, and as long as the members opposite stay 
awake and pay attention, then they’ll be able to hear all the 
important things that I have to say with respect to this piece of 
legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now the minister, the ex-minister, the former minister, I 
apologize, for this bill when they tabled it indicated that there 
are more than 30 changes to this piece of legislation, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and it’s a very, very hefty piece of legislation. 
So there’s a lot to go through, and there’s a lot of technicalities 
as there always is with respect to this area when we’re talking 
about benefits. It’s a really important thing that we get right 
when we’re dealing with . . . Those who are using The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Act provisions are typically by 
nature injured and at essentially the mercy of the insurer. And 
we need to make sure that there’s appropriate provisions in 
place to adequately compensate the people of Saskatchewan and 
ensure that they get just benefits in terms of what they’re 
entitled to and what they deserve frankly, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So this is an extremely lengthy piece of legislation, as I had 
said, something that’s going to be a bit more appropriate for 
probably for committee later on to be able to really work 
through it and really discuss the changes. I encourage anyone 
who’s watching who works in this field to peruse it and, if 
there’s any recommendations that they think should have been 
made or shouldn’t have been made within the legislative 
changes, to be sure to contact the current Minister for SGI as 
well as members opposite, and we’ll ensure that those 
legislative provisions are in place. 
 
Just to speak to a couple of the changes — because there are, 
like I said, the former minister has indicated that there are over 
30 — this bill increases the amount of weekly benefits for 
employed injured persons, which is about equivalent to 40 
hours at minimum wage for fully disabled persons and 20 hours 
a week at minimum wage for partially disabled persons or those 
confined to a hospital bed or a wheelchair.  
 
It also prohibits Saskatchewan Government Insurance from 
paying benefits to a person who is in prison, and prohibits 
Saskatchewan Government Insurance from paying benefits to a 
driver who is more than 50 per cent responsible for the collision 
and convicted of or charged with causing death or bodily harm 
by street racing, being negligent, or fleeing a peace officer, and 
have been found guilty in the last five years of causing death or 
bodily harm by street racing, being negligent, or fleeing a peace 
officer. And as I said, there are many, many other changes that 
are in this bill that’s almost a bit too lengthy to be able to 
discuss at this time. 
 



November 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1195 

One of the ones that I thought was a bit interesting, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, was the inclusion of a new provision which I believe is 
section 30.5. It will be 30.5 of the Act which requires that or 
indicates that: 
 

(1) the insurer is not required to pay benefits based on the 
insured suffering a catastrophic injury until the medical 
information establishes that the insured suffered a 
catastrophic injury; and  
(2) the insurer shall back pay benefits on the basis that the 
insured suffered a catastrophic injury with interest once the 
medical information establishes that the insured suffered a 
catastrophic injury. 

 
Now if my reading of this is correct, it places the onus on the 
insured to prove that they have suffered a catastrophic injury, 
and it also gives them the onus of not receiving any benefits 
until they’ve proven that. I understand that subsection (2) 
allows for the payment of back pay should it later be 
determined that they have in fact suffered a catastrophic injury. 
 
But a concern that I have with respect to this, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is the length of time that it can often take to 
accumulate the requisite medical information that’s required. 
I’ve actually represented a few people through the AIAC 
[Automobile Injury Appeal Commission] process, and I know 
that it’s a lengthy, it’s a lengthy process. Getting appropriate 
medical information and enough medical information that the 
tribunal is therefore satisfied that the individual has suffered 
what would be defined a catastrophic injury can be very lengthy 
and can be very onerous. 
 
So we could potentially be talking about people who are injured 
who are going years, and it’s not an exaggeration to say, are 
going years without pay and having to do whatever they can to 
essentially cover that time, be it through, I don’t know, be it 
through social assistance, be it through friends and family. 
Some people don’t have that luxury frankly, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And it’s not like those who have a catastrophic injury 
are able to continue working or to be able to fill the gap in 
through their own financial needs. That’s the whole point, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is that those who are suffering an injury and 
have to go to the AIAC for compensation and have to go 
through this process aren’t able to work and aren’t able to fill 
that gap in terms of how are they going to pay for their rent or 
their mortgage or utilities or food. It creates a very, very 
burdensome process and a very concerning gap that can frankly 
run for years, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
[21:45] 
 
So I hope, I hope that members opposite are paying attention to 
this and have thought about this. And I hope that this discussion 
comes out in committee because it is concerning. It’s something 
that happens not just with respect to the catastrophic injury 
piece but with all the benefits when it comes to government, is 
any sort of delay can be essentially a matter of life or death 
frankly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the recipient. 
 
Another thing I noticed that the former minister mentioned 
when he tabled this bill was that the government has decided to 
defer two of the more financially significant injury programs, 
and one of them being changes to the living expenses, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. The living expenses allowance hasn’t been 
changed for awhile, and it’s quite low. And it’s not really 
reflective of the reality of what actual living expenses are in 
today’s times, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s something that I urge 
the members opposite to look at very closely and very soon. 
 
They’ve mentioned that they want to make sure they’re 
implementing it later when it’s, and I quote, “. . . financially 
prudent to do so.” The problem with that is I don’t know what 
that means. Are they going to wait until oil hits $100 a barrel 
before they start looking at important things like this, or are 
they going to wait until oil hits something else? I have no idea. 
“Financially prudent to do so” could mean a million different 
things to a million different people. But what the reality is, is 
that people are struggling today to try and survive off of the 
living expenses allowance that they’re provided now. So that’s 
something that I’m hoping that this government and members 
opposite will take a look at sooner rather than later because it’s 
essentially, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a matter of life or death to a 
lot of people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Like I said, this is a really lengthy bill. There’s a lot of very 
technical changes. I know that the critic will have a lot of 
important things to ask at committee and a lot of things to say 
about this bill, and that I have other members who are going to 
want to join in on this debate. So with that, I’ll adjourn debate 
on Bill No. 32. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Douglas 
Park has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 32. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 33 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 33 — The Child 
and Family Services Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
privilege to wade into the discussion on Bill No. 33, The Child 
and Family Services Amendment Act, 2016. Just in summary 
here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s a few things this bill does. It 
replaces the term “department” with “ministry” throughout the 
Act. So we’ll just cast your mind back to 2007, and there was a 
time where the now ministries were referred to as departments. 
I’m not sure about the rationale at the time for changing from 
department to ministry, but this is something the current 
administration had chosen to do. So they appear in this 
legislative session to be changing much of the language in 
many of the bills that are before us from “department” to 
“ministry” that haven’t had that happen yet, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It replaces The Children’s Law Act with The Children’s Law 
Act, 1997. It modernizes the language and reflects current 
drafting standards by replacing people of “Indian” ancestry to 



1196 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2016 

“Aboriginal” people. So I think that that’s an interesting 
discussion actually. So this bill in 2016 is moving from people 
of Indian ancestry to Aboriginal people, but it might be 
something to consider when this bill gets to committee to 
consider using the word “indigenous” rather than “Aboriginal.” 
I know that that is a move that many, many people would like 
to see happen. 
 
The federal government moved to the term Indigenous and 
Northern Affairs Canada, from Aboriginal Affairs and Northern 
Development. I’m actually very proud to say our political party 
here in the opposition, the Saskatchewan New Democrats, at 
our last convention actually moved from . . . One of the wings 
of our party was previously ANDS, the Aboriginal New 
Democrats of Saskatchewan. And ANDS at the time brought a 
resolution forward. They debated and discussed their desire to 
move to being referred to as Indigenous New Democrats of 
Saskatchewan.  
 
So that was a change that just passed a couple of weeks ago, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. So that might be something that the 
minister just with these changes might want to think about at 
committee. And I know that will be a discussion that will 
happen, that perhaps instead of using “Aboriginal people” we 
use the word “indigenous people” here in this particular bill. 
 
This bill introduces provisions and explicit criteria to be 
included in agreements with First Nations Child and Family 
Services agencies, as well as others prescribed in regulations. 
The bill also enables the termination of existing agreements 
with First Nations Child and Family Service agencies and other 
prescribed agencies that do not include a fixed contractual term 
or termination provisions . . . the minister believes that it’s in 
the public’s interest to do so. 
 
Agreements must be terminated in accordance with the 
procedures and terms prescribed in the regulations. The bill 
requires a 90 days written notice of intent to terminate an 
existing agreement, and it identifies that the circumstances in 
which information may be disclosed without written consent 
will be specified in regulations. And it also ensures that the 
disclosing of information is done in accordance with the intent 
of the Act, with what is outlined in the Act or what is specified 
in the regulations. 
 
I think it’s important . . . I know the minister outlined in her 
remarks that this was about, the changes to this particular bill, 
this is part of the transformation strategy of this government 
around renewing child welfare legislation and that this is part of 
the province’s attempt at doing just that. 
 
We need to think about our relationships with First Nations. It 
should be about respect and trust, that nation-to-nation 
relationship, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I think this government 
also needs to think about how this bill fits in with respect to the 
Truth and Reconciliation, the work of The Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission and their recommendations, that 
putting in place of those recommendations and bringing them to 
life here in Saskatchewan is imperative, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We can look to the North where we see tragedies happening, i.e. 
youth suicides, young kids, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s very hard 
for me as a parent of an almost nine-year-old to think of a 

10-year-old girl choosing to end her life. We have much work 
to do around the reconciliation piece, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
looking at how these proposed changes to The Child and 
Family Services Amendment Act, I think, would be very 
worthwhile. 
 
So I do know I have very capable colleagues. The critic for 
Social Services will look very closely at this bill and will have 
an opportunity to speak to this bill. And then in committee she 
will do her diligent work in asking the minister many questions. 
And I look forward to hearing out some of that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. But for the time being, I would like to move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 33. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 34 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 34 — The 
Provincial Lands Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s a pleasure to enter into debate on Bill No. 34, an Act 
requesting provincial lands and so forth.  
 
And this is a pretty important piece of legislature before us. 
And I understand that it’s been under review since 2013. There 
have been consultations, according to the minister, which we 
are glad to hear. It is interesting that quite often we don’t hear 
about the consultation process, but he has gone out of the way 
to make note that they have in fact consulted with the First 
Nations and Métis and other groups that would be impacted by 
this, you know, because it has such a long, long history, an 
important history within our province, and as our province has 
matured. He references in 1930, Canada transferred the 
responsibility for Crown lands, mines, and minerals to the 
province. And he goes, lots has changed. 
 
But what’s interesting is that in fact when you talk to the First 
Nations, the Métis, the indigenous folks, this has always been a 
bit of an issue for them, particularly in light of the treaties. And 
that they weren’t consulted back in leading up to the transfer in 
1930. So we need to hear more about this, but I am glad that the 
minister has recognized that, and if he has, then that’s very, 
very important. He talks about how he has met with, engaged 
with key stakeholders including the public, people who are 
leasing the lands, First Nations and Métis groups, and in-depth 
consultations. 
 
So it’s very important, and many of the stakeholders told them 
about environmental issues like care and conservation, and they 
needed clarity on who to contact with the administration of 
Crown land. Because we know, and it appears now — the 



November 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1197 

minister references this — that in fact that you do have the 
Ministry of Environment, who really is in charge of 
administering the Crown lands in the North, past the forest belt 
and into the North, where in the South it is Agriculture’s 
responsibility. And that seems to continue on, and we hope that 
is. But it’s not quite clear in the minister’s remarks, so we hope 
that this is something that is the way that we move forward. 
 
I am glad to see that we see the ecological reserves are 
continued on, and in particular, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m 
particularly glad to see the Great Sand Hills Representative 
Area designated as it was in 2005 and continues to be. That was 
a source of major pride for many people who were involved in 
the local areas, the local RMs [rural municipality], and how we 
work together to make sure that we could protect those areas, 
and yet to see some economic development, particularly around 
natural gas. And so that’s key, and so the ecological reserves 
continue on. We need to make a line-by-line comparison to 
make sure that they are as they were, and that’s very, very 
important. 
 
You know I don’t plan on going too exhaustive into this 
because I think this is the kind of bill that will have a lot of 
questions in committee, but I do want to say that it is interesting 
to see some of the old language from the old bill from the ’30s, 
particularly when it comes to access to water, water beds, and 
shores. There’s a certain sense in Canada and in this province 
that our public waterways, our public lands should be 
accessible, and that’s so, so important, and that continues to be 
the case. 
 
And so while the minister talks about how they want to reduce 
red tape, they want to make sure people have access so that . . . 
to be able to ensure economic development on Crown land, 
because we know many of the people who are engaged in 
agriculture in rural Saskatchewan do so because they’re leasing 
Crown land. And that’s important, but it does hinder long-term 
investment. He talks about wind turbines as something that 
could be appealing to be placed on Crown land, but the issue 
then becomes mortgaging the land or having access to 
long-term investments. And so there needs to be a way of doing 
that as well. So this is an important piece of legislation. 
 
He talks about . . . and again, you know, I think that the 
Minister of Agriculture deserves some credit for having pretty 
thorough speaking notes here. He does talk about, we need to 
recognize the importance of Saskatchewan’s land base for our 
future and need to protect it, particularly when it comes to 
taking action when land is being misused. And an example of 
this would be illegal drainage, where the government could step 
in and issue a stop work order. But this needs to be worked 
with, and we hope that that will actually be accomplished. 
 
[22:00] 
 
And we also know that people have a lot . . . You know, 
Saskatchewan is blessed with an abundance of land and of 
water, and all of this comes under the responsibility of the 
provincial government. And we need to make sure that we do 
all that we can to protect it, and as the minister says, that the 
Crown land is protected and productive for generations to 
come. And that is so, so true. 
 

And as we move to make sure that we have an appropriate 
amount of land set aside as representative areas, I know at one 
point there was talk about up to about 12 per cent of the land 
protected. It doesn’t mean that it’s taken out of economic 
activity; it just means that it’s protected and that it’s status, and 
the way it is will be protected. But it doesn’t mean it can’t be 
used for some economic activity. All of those things are 
important. 
 
So we look forward to hearing more about this, particularly in 
committee in a dialogue with the minister and with the officials 
about the long-term plan. I know, though, others will have a 
few comments to speak. I may be getting ahead of myself here. 
I’m just . . . But I know that that’s what I’m looking forward to 
hearing, those kind of questions. 
 
So with that — to make sure, I want to clarify and be clear 
about what I speak — I want to adjourn Bill No. 34, The 
Provincial Lands Act, 2016 . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . You 
almost caught me up. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 34, The Provincial 
Lands Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 35 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 35 — The Small 
Claims Act, 2016/Loi de 2016 sur les petites créances be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise this evening and enter debate on Bill No. 35, the small 
claims amendment Act. This and its companion, Bill No. 36, 
were proposed by the minister back in June of this year, and 
what’s being proposed here is to repeal the existing legislation 
and replace it with this new Act, moving from just over 24 
pages up to over 45 pages with this new bill. But of course the 
new bill has the French translation as well, so that I think 
accounts for most of that increase in the length of the bill. 
 
But there are some substantive changes as well that are 
anticipated and proposed with this legislation. The first and 
maybe one of the more significant ones is the fact that the cap 
for small claims moves from 20,000 up to $30,000, so a 50 per 
cent increase, Mr. Speaker, which is significant. Another 
change is that it enables a judge to order that one party pay the 
legal costs of another party if that’s decided, and there’s some 
particular circumstances that I’ll get into in a little bit around 
that. It also proposes that all defendants in a suit would be 
required to fill their . . . file their claim, rather, with the courts 
so that all parties would have access to information. And again, 
I’ll get into that in a little more detail. 
 



1198 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2016 

I’m going to read a little bit from the minister’s remarks on 
June the 15th when . . . during second reading. The minister 
noted that this legislation is one of the pieces of legislation that 
came out of the justice innovation agenda, and I know my 
colleague earlier remarked how many pieces of legislation 
we’re seeing from that minister. So I would expect that some of 
that is, substantively, that it’s flowing out of that agenda. 
 
And it was noted in his comments that the ministry last year had 
conducted reviews of the small claims process in Saskatchewan, 
which certainly is something that I think is reasonable, to do 
that type of consultation and to meet with those stakeholders 
and those impacted in the community before you would 
introduce such legislation. 
 
I understand that there was a consultation paper that was 
released to the public in order to gain that feedback and identify 
some potential changes and enhancements to the small claims 
process, Mr. Speaker. So I would anticipate that the changes 
that are proposed here came out of that consultation. But I know 
that isn’t always the case so I’d be interested to see who was 
met with, and what their advice and their input was into that 
review. 
 
As noted, the first recommendation is bumping that small 
claims monetary limit up from 20 to $30,000 which is a fairly 
significant change, Mr. Speaker. And I’m not sure how often 
that’s reviewed and those claim amounts are looked at and 
made sure that it’s providing equal access to coverage when 
you take into account inflation. 
 
One of the other substantive changes that’s noted in this 
legislation, or proposed in this legislation is expanding the 
court’s authority to award costs from one party to another, as I 
noted in the brief summary. And in particular, in one instance 
when this might be the case would be when the court would 
award costs when the party fails to show for court or otherwise 
purposely delays. And certainly I would guess that that would 
be to perhaps cover some legal costs and also to be a way of 
ensuring that people do show up to their court dates and make 
the process more timely and have fewer adjournments. But I 
would only be speculating there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It also would allow the court to award general costs at the 
conclusion of a matter based on factors such as behaviour of the 
party again, Mr. Speaker. Disruptive or uncooperative 
behaviour could also be penalized in this way, Mr. Speaker, is 
my understanding. And I don’t think that, without reading the 
consultation or having further consultation with community 
members, I can speak to the extent that that is a problem within 
court. But certainly, if that is a problem, that would be one way 
to deal with it. 
 
It is also noted that this bill will require all defendants to file a 
reply to a claim. So if someone has a claim against them in 
court, that the defendant would be required, I believe at the first 
day of the trial, to submit a reply to that claim. I think that it 
would be reasonable to wonder about what kind of notice that 
that defendant would receive. I wonder in instances where 
perhaps that person doesn’t have access to legal counsel, how 
that would be dealt with to ensure that they had some legal 
advice about that. But those would be questions perhaps better 
proposed by the critic or perhaps in committee, Mr. Speaker. 

And again, looking back to what came out of those 
consultations, and if indeed that was a recommendation that 
came out of those consultations, that would be interesting. 
 
It also notes that requiring all defendants to file a copy of a 
reply to the claim will ensure that claimants have early notice of 
the defence that will be made. And again, when I was looking at 
this, just wondering how notice would be provided to the 
defendant. Of course, this is always a matter of balance, Mr. 
Speaker, to weigh rights. And it certainly is important to have 
scrutiny no matter how noble the intent here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another proposed change in this legislation would be allowing, 
where the defendant fails to file a reply or doesn’t attend 
proceedings, to award a default judgment, Mr. Speaker. And I 
think that could happen as early as the first trial date which 
certainly is very early on in the proceedings. So I’d be 
interested to hear what my colleagues and perhaps others in the 
legal community might have to say about that. 
 
Existing protections, it is noted by the minister, remain in place 
that will allow the defendant to apply to overturn that judgment 
where the defendant can reasonably demonstrate that they had a 
good excuse for not showing up or not filing that defence claim. 
So I guess that is a bit of a balance or a counterbalance there, 
Mr. Speaker. And again, I would anticipate that others would 
want to have a look at that, ensure that that balance is correct. 
 
In some of his closing remarks, Mr. Speaker, the minister noted 
that access to justice remains an important issue in the legal 
community as well as the public at large, and certainly I would 
concur with those comments. He notes that the intention of this 
bill is to “enhance access to justice for Saskatchewan residents 
. . . [and provide] timely, cost-effective, and citizen-centred 
dispute resolution through the small claims process,” Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And again that sounds reasonable but would like to see that 
weighed against the input that was provided during the 
consultation process and just to be sure that a broad swath of 
those impacted by this legislation would have been consulted 
and that their input would have been reasonably weighed in 
proposing these amendments while replacing the former Act 
with the small claims amendment Act, as is proposed in Bill 
No. 35. 
 
So as I’ve noted several times in my comments, I’m sure that 
the legal minds on this side, and in their comments and perhaps 
also in committee, will want to take some further scrutiny of 
this bill, and certainly I think that is well warranted given the 
scope of Bill 35. 
 
But with that, I think I’ll conclude my remarks and move to 
adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 35, The Small Claims 
Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 



November 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1199 

Bill No. 36 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 36 — The Small 
Claims Consequential Amendments Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I note that in his 
comments regarding Bill No. 36, the minister kept his remarks 
quite short, as have my colleagues at this point. So I think I will 
follow suit. But just to make note that Bill 36, as I had noted 
before, certainly is the companion to Bill No. 35, and it makes 
those consequential amendments to the non-bilingual legislation 
to accompany The Small Claims Act of 2016, and in particular 
references the current small claims Act and updates to refer to 
the new Act. So really a lot of housekeeping issues and not, I 
don’t think, anything else of real substance in this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So assuming that the legislation is passed, it would be 
reasonable to make those changes to that amendment. And I 
think from there, I’ve got nothing further to add of 
consequence, so I will also move to adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 36, The Small Claims 
Consequential Amendments Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 37 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 37 — The 
Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to rise this evening and speak to The Traffic Safety 
Amendment Act, Bill No. 37. Now this bill makes a few changes 
that I’ll speak to fairly briefly, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now the first change is the bill allows SGI to cancel the licence 
or registration renewal of someone who has large amounts of 
unpaid debt to SGI that they’ve not created a plan yet to pay 
off. So I am assuming that means that it’s up to the discretion of 
essentially whoever within SGI to decide whether the plan is an 
adequate plan or whether or not it’s being fulfilled in a way that 
SGI seems happy with. 
 
[22:15] 
 
Now I find that a little interesting, the first change, a little bit 
interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because I’m not too sure if 
there’s a way or there’s some sort of mechanism in place for an 

individual who disagrees with what the decision is of SGI to 
appeal that to the courts. I hope that there is. 
 
Unfortunately I hadn’t had time to quite look into it, but I’m 
sure that our critic will ask some questions around that in 
committee because it’s really important that . . . Well having a 
licence is extremely important. It’s a privilege, of course, it’s 
not a right. But when we’re talking about things like abilities 
for people to pay off a debt to SGI, for example, they’ll need to 
get to work and perhaps they also need their licence to be able 
to get to work. 
 
Again saying it’s not a . . . As I’ve said, it’s a privilege, it’s not 
a right. But these are factors that we need to consider, that it can 
become difficult for people to maintain employment when they 
lose their licences. 
 
So I’m just hoping that there’s a certain level of discretion 
there. First of all that there’s discretion there for those who are 
making this decision to remove someone’s licence if they’re not 
paying off this debt. And second, that there is an appeal 
provision in place or there’s an ability for an individual, if 
they’re not satisfied with the decision of the person within SGI, 
to appeal that decision. I suppose perhaps they could judicially 
review that but I’m not entirely sure, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Another change that was made, the bill makes it clear that SGI 
may now collect money for impoundment fees from the owner 
of an impounded vehicle or the driver if the owner cannot be 
determined. Now it’s a little bit of a change from what I 
understand, reading the comments from the former minister 
when he tabled this bill, that it’s going to instead of just 
requiring, for example, the fees to be recovered from an owner, 
they can also, they have the discretion to try and get those 
impoundment fees against the individual that was operating the 
vehicle at the time that it was impounded. So that’s an 
interesting change, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I’m hoping, I’m wondering if there was some issues with 
respect to collecting these fees from SGI, if this was an onerous 
process for them. I’m not too sure why it would be onerous if 
they already . . . it’s quite accessible to them, the registered 
owner of the vehicle. Or if they felt that this was unfair to 
registered owners and that in fact those people who, those 
individuals who caused the impoundment in the first place 
should have to pay the fee, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
From what I understand, this bill also makes some new rules for 
passengers on motorcycles, including that they must wear a 
helmet, but I think a helmet is already a requirement. In any 
event, eye protection is being added, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
they have to have their own footrests, and that they cannot sit in 
front of the driver. So I think it’s very important that we ensure 
the safety of our motorists and those who ride a motorcycle. 
 
I had a friend actually about 10 years ago — he was about 20 
years old — who got into an accident while he was driving a 
motorcycle, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And really the only thing that 
kept him from dying was the helmet on his head. And he had to 
go through quite a few surgeries, and thankfully he’s quite 
healthy now. And he has a little girl, and him and his wife are 
expecting another little girl, which is really nice. But like I said, 
really the only thing that kept him alive at the time of that 



1200 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2016 

accident was his helmet. 
 
So it’s important to make sure that we’re keeping in line with 
safety standards and especially safety standards as they are seen 
across jurisdictions. So I’m assuming that this is to keep up 
with other jurisdictions. I hope it is. And I hope that we 
continue to ensure that the safety of motorists, whether they are 
in a vehicle or in a car or in a motorcycle, is paramount 
concern. 
 
I also notice, similarly, that the bill also prohibits driving a 
three-wheeled vehicle with small passengers and children under 
seven. Now I was trying to rack my brain about what these 
three-wheeled vehicles would be, and all I can think of are those 
motorcycles that you sometimes see people in. They’re not 
really motorcycles because they have the two wheels in the 
back. I don’t even know what the heck those are called, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Spyders? 
Apparently the . . . Some member opposite says that they’re a 
Spyder, and I don’t know if that’s a true thing or not. That 
sounds a little goofy to me, but maybe that’s a real thing. I don’t 
know. I have no idea . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well no, 
the three-wheeled vehicles, we’re talking about . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, it seems like I’m getting 
. . . I’m not getting the quite correct information from the 
members opposite. Sounds like a Spyder has two wheels in the 
front and two wheels in the back, so still questions remain what 
the one wheel at the front, two wheels at the back are called, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But you know what? There’s lots of time for the critic to weigh 
in on this, and hopefully at committee he can ask important 
questions like what the heck is a vehicle called when there’s 
one wheel at the front and two wheels at the back. But I know 
he’ll also . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Aside from a tricycle, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, because I have a feeling that this is talking 
about a motorized vehicle and not a tricycle, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Again I’m not sure if I’m getting correct information 
from the other side. 
 
In any event, I know that there’s going to be that question plus 
significantly more important questions asked by our critic on 
this bill at committee, and I know that there’s going to be a lot 
of other members who are going to want to weigh in on this 
important piece of legislation as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So 
with that, I would adjourn debate on Bill No. 37. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Douglas 
Park has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 37, The Traffic 
Safety Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? Is it the pleasure. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of 
the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has moved that this 
House does now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This House stands adjourned until 
tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 22:22.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 8 — The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2016  
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1173 
 Bill No. 9 — The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 2016 
 Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’exécution des jugements canadiens  
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1174 
 Bill No. 12 — The Public Health (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2016  
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1175 
 Bill No. 13 — The Cancer Agency Amendment Act, 2016  
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1176 
 Bill No. 15 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2016  
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1177 
 Bill No. 16 — The Adoption Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’adoption  
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1178 
 Bill No. 17 — The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2016  
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1180 
 Bill No. 19 — The Film and Video Classification Act, 2016  
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1182 
 Bill No. 26 — The Patient Choice Medical Imaging Act  
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1183 
 Bill No. 28 — The Extension of Compassionate Care Act, 2016  
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1186 
 Bill No. 29 — The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur les juges de paix  
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1187 
 Bill No. 30 — The Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016  
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1188 
 Bill No. 31 — The Local Authority Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016  
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1190 
 Bill No. 1 — The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Amendment Act, 2016  
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1192 
 Bill No. 32 — The Automobile Accident Insurance (Benefits) Amendment Act, 2016  
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1194 
 Bill No. 33 — The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2016  
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1195 
 Bill No. 34 — The Provincial Lands Act, 2016  
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1196 
 Bill No. 35 — The Small Claims Act, 2016/Loi de 2016 sur les petites créances  
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1197 
 Bill No. 36 — The Small Claims Consequential Amendments Act, 2016  
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1199 
 Bill No. 37 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2016  
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1199 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


	Bill No. 30

