






















































Hansard: November 01, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 34A  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 1, 2016, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (Ind.) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10; Independent (Ind.) — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1021 
 November 1, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it gives me great pleasure to introduce to you and through you 
to the rest of the House, a group of 26 grade 7 and 8 students 
from MacNeill School here in Regina. These students are seated 
in your west gallery, and they’re accompanied by their teacher, 
Mr. Scott Bansley and their student intern, Ms. Jennifer Chyz. 
 
Now I had the opportunity to meet and talk to some of the 
student-teacher interns earlier this year, and it’s a treat to be 
able to have one here in our Legislative Assembly today. And I 
look forward to meeting with this group of students and their 
teacher and their intern teacher to discuss the proceedings 
today. So welcome and thank you very much for coming to 
your Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
introduce guests seated in your gallery today from Merit 
Contractors. Founded in 1988, today Merit represents about 
11,000 employers and 43,000 workers in Saskatchewan 
covering virtually every segment of the industry. They provide 
support and advocacy on behalf of contractors, working to 
ensure open bidding and a fair, level playing field for all 
contractors as a voice for open-shop contractors. 
 
With us today are Ian Knibbs, Coram Construction, who is 
chairperson of the board of directors; and board members 
Darren Swanson from Rococo Construction Services and Joe 
Yungwirth from Miller Contracting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank Merit Contractors for their work 
on behalf of contractors throughout our province. Their 
members are truly building our province, and we thank them for 
their outstanding contribution. Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask 
all members to welcome the guests today to their Assembly. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join with the Deputy Premier in welcoming these individuals 
from Merit here to their Legislative Assembly and wish them 
continued success in their endeavours, and again welcome these 
individuals to their Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you in the Speaker’s gallery, I would like to introduce 

two special guests, friends of mine, Sharon Hodgson from Big 
River and her sister Jan Healey of Rosetown. Both ladies are 
very accomplished in the arts, enjoyed the paintings. And some 
of you may know their brother’s paintings, Glen Scrimshaw. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, I’d like to introduce Joe Yungwirth, 
a neighbour and good friend of mine from Buckland. Welcome 
to your Assembly, all three of you. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you seated in your gallery, it’s my pleasure to welcome 
family of Norman MacAuley, former MLA [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] for Cumberland to their Assembly here 
today. They’re from La Ronge and from Prince Albert. I’ll read 
their presence into the record when we get into remarks later on 
with condolence motions, but it’s my pleasure to welcome these 
guests to their Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise in 
my place again to present a petition for a second bridge in 
Prince Albert, as we all know how important a second bridge 
for Prince Albert is to not only the Northeast, Mr. Speaker, but 
the entire northern part of our province. And: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan ask that the 
Saskatchewan Party government stop stalling, hiding 
behind rhetoric and refusing to listen to the people calling 
for action, and begin immediately to plan and then quickly 
commence the construction of a second bridge for Prince 
Albert using federal and provincial dollars. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 
from all throughout the land. And the particular pages that I’m 
presenting today, they’re from Saskatoon. They are from 
Regina. They are from Lumsden, and they are from Moose Jaw. 
And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from the citizens of 
Melville-Saltcoats who are opposed to the federal government’s 
decision to impose a carbon tax on the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of 
Churchbridge, Saltcoats, Yorkton, Langenburg, Calder, 



1022 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2016 

Melville, Stockholm, and Esterhazy. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition regarding wetlands in Saskatchewan. Wetlands serve a 
very vital function in our ecosystem. They take the form of 
marshes, bogs, fens, swamps, and open water. Wetlands are 
home to wildlife, including waterfowl. They clean the water 
running off of agricultural fields. They protect us from flooding 
and drought, and they are a playground where families can 
explore and play. In the worst cases, such as some areas in the 
prairies, as much as 90 per cent of our wetlands have 
disappeared. As they continue to disappear, so too do the many 
benefits they provide. I’d like to read the petition. The 
petitioners are respectfully requesting the Government of 
Saskatchewan to: 
 

Increase funding to do the proper inventory work, putting 
Saskatchewan in a better position to manage the water 
resource; 
 
Speed up the evaluation of high-risk watersheds where 
there is significant damage annually from flooding. This 
evaluation must include a recognition of drainage works 
that could be closed or restored that will alleviate some of 
the issues downstream with respect to flooding and nutrient 
loading; and 
 
Create a sound and transparent mitigation process that 
adequately addresses sustainable development. The 
sequence should first focus on avoiding the environmental 
harm whenever possible, before a secondary focus on 
minimizing the harm with compensation being sought only 
when the development is deemed essential and the first two 
stages cannot be met. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed today from citizens who live in 
Regina, Saskatoon, and Moose Jaw. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much. I rise today to present a 
petition in support of Wakamow Valley Authority in Moose 
Jaw. And we know that as a result of the passage of The 
Wakamow Valley Authority Amendment Act, 2016 on June 30th, 
the Wakamow Valley Authority lost statutory funding of 
$127,000 from the Saskatchewan government in addition to 
$30,000 of supplementary funding. And this loss of annual 
funding negatively affected the ability of Wakamow to maintain 
its lands and repair its facilities and provide services to the 
community. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, on June 21st, 2016 the provincial 
government, including the two MLAs from Moose Jaw, voted 
in favour of this bill, resulting in cuts to Wakamow and 
subsequent job losses. I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to immediately repeal The Wakamow Valley Authority 
Amendment Act, 2016 and reinstate statutory funding to the 
Wakamow Valley Authority. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
Moose Jaw. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present to you a petition condemning the Sask Party’s cuts to 
the SAID [Saskatchewan assured income for disability] 
program. After nearly a decade of wasting the economic boom 
and blowing through the savings, the government is now 
forcing the province’s most vulnerable to pay for the Sask 
Party’s mismanagement. 
 
The Sask Party’s latest cold-hearted cut will take money away 
from people who are unable to work due to a disability; that 
many people who are being hurt by the Sask Party cut live with 
serious illnesses such as multiple sclerosis, cancer, autism, 
among other illnesses; and that contrary to the Minister of 
Social Services’s claims, the government underfunds clients in 
regards to shelter allowance, and that shelter allowance should 
be reflective of the current rental costs. I will read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to stop their plan to cut 
the SAID funding and immediately restore funding for 
those living with a disability; that shelter allowance is 
reflective of the current rental costs; and that the 
Saskatchewan Party government implement the 
recommendations of the advisory group on poverty 
reduction. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing these petitions are from La 
Ronge and Air Ronge, and I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
regarding child care centres and taxation in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Those signing this petition wish to draw our 
attention to the following: that across Saskatchewan, licensed 
non-profit child care centres are taxed inconsistently. Many of 
our licensed non-profit child care centres pay commercial 
property tax, and this is not done in Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario, 
BC [British Columbia], or New Brunswick. 
 
Child care is essential to the economy, yet most centres struggle 
with their budgets. This issue threatens both the number of child 
care spaces as well as the quality of care. Quality child care has 
an enormous positive impact on a child’s future outcomes and 
yields high rates of economic return. Child care centres are 
institutions of early learning and childhood development, and it 
is appropriate that they have the same tax treatment as schools. 



November 1, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1023 

And I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan recognize 
that licensed non-profit child care centres provide 
programs that are foundational to a healthy society by 
including them in the Saskatchewan education Act and 
exempt all licensed non-profit child care centres in 
Saskatchewan from property tax through changes to the 
appropriate legislation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we have received hundreds of these petitions. 
These ones today have been signed specifically by people in 
Yorkton, Regina, Lanigan, and Jansen. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition calling for a stop to Sask Party plans to sell 
off SaskTel. The undersigned petitioners, Mr. Speaker, call 
attention to the fact that in the last five years alone, SaskTel has 
returned $497 million to support government programs and 
services like education and health care. They point out that once 
SaskTel is gone there is no getting it back, and of course, Mr. 
Speaker, that then there will be no telling what else the Sask 
Party will sell. Mr. Speaker, in the prayer that reads as follows: 
 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the Saskatchewan Party 
government to keep their promise, stop their plan to sell off 
SaskTel, and keep our valued Crown corporation in the 
hands of Saskatchewan people. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular group of petitions is signed by 
citizens from Swift Current, Mossbank, Saskatoon, and Cabri. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition calling on the government to reverse its 
short-sighted cuts to the Aboriginal court worker program. The 
Government of Saskatchewan cut the budget for the Aboriginal 
court worker program in the 2016-2017 provincial budget. And 
as we all know, the Aboriginal court workers play an important 
role helping Aboriginal people in criminal and child 
apprehension cases. 
 
Aboriginal peoples are disproportionately represented in 
Saskatchewan’s correctional centres, and Aboriginal court 
workers successfully help to make our communities safer 
through reduced recidivism rates. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan reverse its 
short-sighted and counterproductive cuts to the Aboriginal 
court worker program. 
 

And the people signing this petition today are from the Regina 
area. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
to stop the redirection of funding of the Northern Teacher 
Education Program Council, Inc. A recent report shows that 94 
per cent of NORTEP [northern teacher education program] 
grads found employment in the North. NORTEP has improved 
teacher retention in northern Saskatchewan. NORTEP has a 
positive economic impact in northern Saskatchewan. NORTEP 
provides a high-quality, face-to-face instruction and services to 
students. The province financial deficit cannot be fixed by 
cutting indigenous education in the North and a program that 
has served the North for over 40 years. And the prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to immediately restore the 
five-year agreement to fund the Northern Teacher 
Education Program Council, Inc. and to continue funding 
NORTEP-NORPAC programs in La Ronge. 

 
It is signed by hundreds and hundreds of people of our good 
province. It will continue to be served in this House. And I 
would just like to say again, on behalf of the people in northern 
Saskatchewan, I so present. 
 
[13:45] 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 
 

Support for People With Intellectual Disabilities 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Friday I had 
the pleasure of attending an event at the University of Regina 
announcing further supports for individuals with intellectual 
disabilities. This announcement, which coincides with the 
beginning of Canadian Down Syndrome Week and National 
Disability Employment Awareness Month, speaks to our 
government’s commitment to ensure that high-quality education 
is available to everyone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the programs benefiting from this announcement 
include Campus for All, an inclusive program that gives 
students with intellectual disabilities a chance to experience 
post-secondary education and campus life; 4 to 40, which 
brings employers and employees together to create meaningful 
employment opportunities for people experiencing disabilities; 
and Creative Options Regina, which offers personalized 
services to support and strengthen individuals experiencing 
disabilities. Through these programs, not-for-profit 
organizations, our government, and many passionate people are 
all working hard to remove barriers for people with disabilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Down Syndrome Week, National Disability 
Employment Awareness Month are great opportunities to 
acknowledge how valuable people are with intellectual 
disabilities. Anyone who has spent time with people who have 
intellectual disabilities will find they are very passionate and 
capable people. 
 
I invite all members to join me in celebrating the work that is 
taking place here in Saskatchewan to remove barriers for people 



1024 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2016 

with intellectual disabilities. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

New City Council in Prince Albert 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On the night of 
October 31st, the new Prince Albert City Council was sworn in 
and is now entrusted with the important job of serving our city 
for the next four years. 
 
Returned to council was Mayor Greg Dionne, Charlene Miller 
in ward 1, Don Cody in ward 4, and Ted Zurakowski who was 
acclaimed in ward 8. As well as returning members of council, 
Mr. Speaker, several new councillors were sworn in: Terra 
Lennox-Zepp in ward 2, Evert Botha in ward 3, Dennis 
Ogrodnick in ward 5, Blake Edwards in ward 6, and Dennis 
Nowoselsky in ward 7. 
 
Our new council is a great mix of experienced and new 
councillors. I’m confident that they will all contribute a great 
deal to our city and to the people they serve. 
 
I also wish to commend all the candidates in the 2016-17 civic 
election in Prince Albert for allowing their names to stand. 
Their decision to run for office indicates a strong commitment 
to one’s community, and one that is always supported by family 
and loved ones. Although not everyone can win, all candidates 
can be proud of their dedication to Prince Albert and their 
willingness to serve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in 
congratulating Mayor Dionne and the new Prince Albert 
council and extending our best wishes to all candidates who ran 
in the recent election. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 
 

Bethany Pioneer Village Celebrates 60th Anniversary 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On October 15th I 
was able to attend the 60th anniversary of Bethany Pioneer 
Village in Middle Lake. Bethany Pioneer Village was a vision 
of Pastor Karl Krahenbil. He saw a need to care for seniors who 
found living in their own homes difficult and sometimes 
dangerous. 
 
In 1956 a 124-acre lakefront property on Lucien Lake was 
purchased and Bethany began. Sixty years later, the 
construction hasn’t stopped. This retirement community ensures 
that most residents can transition through a variety of housing 
and care options and remain in the same community throughout 
their retirement years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Aspen Manor is a 36-bed special care home 
offering level 3 and 4 long-term care. Birch Manor is an 
assisted living home with a campus-like feel to provide social 
interaction, comfort, and support. Bethany also offers housing 
units for seniors who would like to live independently. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the mission of Bethany Pioneer Village is to 

glorify God by providing a welcoming Christian environment 
and a caring staff to nurture those in need of physical and 
personal support. I would like all members to join me in 
congratulating Bethany on their 60th anniversary celebration 
and thank them for the wonderful care they provide to seniors. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

Organization for Heritage Languages 
Banquet and Awards 

 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I, along with the Leader of the 
Official Opposition, had the honour of attending the annual 
Saskatchewan Organization for Heritage Languages provincial 
banquet and awards this past Saturday, October 29th here in 
Regina. This year’s theme was Keeping Languages Alive: 
Overcoming Adversity. 
 
Unfortunately, the adversity they worry about is the aftermath 
of the Minister of Education’s decision to cut their annual 
funding of $227,000. Regrettably, some schools are having to 
consider closing down as they cannot survive without this 
support. But SOHL [Saskatchewan Organization for Heritage 
Languages Inc.] is determined more than ever to preserve and 
enliven over 60 heritage languages here in Saskatchewan. 
SOHL’s strength are their volunteers, so they recognized two 
very special people. The first was new volunteer Kalhari 
Goonewardene, member of the Saskatoon Sinhala Language 
School, currently a Ph.D. [Doctor of Philosophy] student at the 
U of S [University of Saskatchewan]. Through all her university 
work, she still finds time each week to teach the youngest of 
students at the language school. 
 
The second was long-term volunteer, Olena Shyian, a member 
of the Ukrainian National Federation, Regina branch Ridna 
Shkola. Olena has been with the UNF [Ukrainian National 
Federation] for over eight years. Recently some new initiatives 
have put in place by Olena has helped increase student 
registration and retention. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I call on all members to wish the Saskatchewan 
Organization for Heritage Languages the very best as they 
prepare for another successful year. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Battlefords. 
 

New Beginnings Campaign Benefits 
Saskatchewan Hospital 

 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to stand 
today and share the great news that the Saskatchewan Hospital 
New Beginnings campaign recently received a $1 million gift 
from an anonymous donor. Mr. Speaker, this once again 
demonstrates the incredible generosity of Saskatchewan 
residents. 
 
Ensuring that quality care is being provided to those who need 
it most is a priority for our government. Construction of the 
new Saskatchewan Hospital North Battleford is a key step 
forward in our commitment to improve mental health services 
in this province and to act on the recommendations in the 



November 1, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1025 

mental health and addictions action plan. This 284-bed 
psychiatric facility will replace the existing 156-bed hospital 
and will include 188 psychiatric rehabilitation beds and a secure 
96-room unit for male and female offenders living with mental 
health issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, construction of the new facility began in 
September of 2015 and is proceeding on time and on budget 
with a targeted completion date of June 2018. I know that the 
people of this great province will continue to give generously to 
support the New Beginnings campaign in its work to raise funds 
to purchase equipment and furniture for the new Saskatchewan 
Hospital North Battleford. 
 
This important project will enhance mental health services in 
our province, and I look forward to seeing the progress as this 
new building takes shape over the next two years. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Westview. 
 

Prairie Prism Multicultural Event 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the 
beginning of October, I had the pleasure of attending Prairie 
Prism in Saskatoon. The Prairie Prism multicultural event was a 
chance to celebrate Saskatchewan’s rich mosaic of cultures 
through cultural entertainment, food, storytelling, and a variety 
of informative art, dance, music, children’s activities, and 
interactive displays. This event is unique in that it is composed 
of approximately 20 different agencies who have come together 
to put on a multicultural event. It is a true community initiative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is growing at a record pace. We 
have more people living here than at any point in our history. 
And central to that growth is immigration. In fact since 2007, 
more than 77,000 immigrants have settled in over 400 
communities across Saskatchewan. 
 
Prairie Prism’s goal is to have friends educate friends because 
intercultural sharing and interaction leads to understanding and 
appreciation. And that, that is vital to the health of our 
community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me thanking all the 
organizers and the partners of Prairie Prism for hosting such a 
wonderful and inclusive event. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 
 

Carbon Capture Facility Uses Green Technology 
 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 
inform the House that the carbon capture and sequestration 
facility at Boundary dam 3 has captured 800 000 tonnes of 
carbon in the last 12 months. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a good-news story about how our 
government has invested in green technology that works. In my 
constituency, where BD3 [Boundary dam 3] is located, 
constituents understand that this breakthrough technology has 
the capacity to transform the way that the world produces 

electricity. With 2,400 coal-fired power plants planned or under 
construction around the world, this technology can do more to 
help the global fight against climate change than a carbon tax 
would ever do. Mr. Speaker, imagine for a moment if those 
power plants used this technology. Global carbon emissions 
would see a drastic reduction. 
 
The evidence speaks for itself. Our government has made 
investment in green technology that works; all the while the 
opposition have said time and time again that they would have 
cancelled this project and imposed a tax instead. 
 
The CCS [carbon capture and storage] facility has captured the 
total equivalent amount of carbon as if we took 250,000 cars off 
the road. That is real change. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members of the House 
congratulate SaskPower, their employees, and all involved in 
the CCS at BD3 on capturing 800 000 tonnes of carbon this last 
year. Thank you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Auditor’s Report and Details of Land Transaction 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, more of the government’s 
secrets are slowly leaking out in the Sask Party’s GTH [Global 
Transportation Hub] land scandal. And really we’re right back 
at the beginning here now. 
 
We know now that the then GTH CEO [chief executive officer] 
received redacted legal advice from Ministry of Justice 
officials. The land was appraised, of course, at four times less 
than the Sask Party ultimately paid. They found that the bypass 
would take a big chunk of this land and they recommended that 
all landowners should be told that Highways would be buying 
the land and that expropriation was an option. Seems like good 
advice. 
 
To the Premier: why was the GTH CEO let go right after this, 
and why was the recommendation from Justice ignored? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, everything my friend has just 
said in the preamble to his question was available to and part of 
the report that the Provincial Auditor has done into the GTH 
land acquisition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s revisit the conclusions of the auditor wherein 
she advised the government and the people of Saskatchewan 
that there should have been better coordination, there should 
have been better communication between the Ministry of 
Highways and the Global Transportation Hub. She highlighted 
a number of specific recommendations to that end, 
recommendations we accept completely and have moved on 
already in terms of implementation, up to and including 
changing the governance of the GTH so that the minister is no 
longer on the board. We now have former deputy minister and 
long-term public servant Doug Moen as the Chair. 
 



1026 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2016 

She also, Mr. Speaker, it’s important to point out, she also 
issued a press release that accompanied the Provincial Auditor’s 
report. And in that press release she said unequivocally and 
clearly that, according to her work, there was no evidence of 
any wrongdoing or fraud or conflict of interest by the board of 
directors, which includes the minister. The next day, she went 
on province-wide radio, and the transcripts of the interview 
demonstrate she said there were no red flags, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know all of this doesn’t fit with the member’s conspiracy. 
None of the facts of the case fit with this conspiracy. But they 
remain the facts of the case, and we accept the auditor’s 
recommendations. We hope that finally the NDP [New 
Democratic Party] will also accept the auditor’s report. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — We see it again here. The Premier loves 
to hear the sound of his own voice. But Saskatchewan people 
would like to hear some answers in their Legislative Assembly. 
Question after question after question and not a single answer 
from the Premier. And of course the auditor’s report was 
nothing but scathing and it exonerated no one. My question to 
the Premier that I asked the first time, that wasn’t answered: 
why was the then GTH CEO let go right after this, and why 
were the recommendations from Justice ignored? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, 
that the auditor had full authority to canvass all elements of this 
transaction. She had access to all of the documents, all of the 
cabinet documents, all of the emails. She had access to all of the 
individuals involved. She had the ability to do her report on the 
basis of all of that information. Her conclusion at the end of that 
report, as stated in the press release which she attached to the 
report being released, was that there was no wrongdoing; there 
was no conflict of interest and that there was no fraud. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, so weak. Again the 
question was to the Premier. Not a single answer, not a single 
answer from the minister in his place to the question that was 
asked. I’ll move along to another. 
 
We now have a government spokesperson who’s apparently 
talking to the CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] and 
says that the scandal-plagued former minister received a call 
from an Edmonton lawyer representing a client named 
Blackstone. So instead of hiding behind redactions, can the 
Premier tell us who Blackstone is? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — The email being referenced by the 
Leader of the Opposition was made available to the Provincial 
Auditor as a part of her investigation, as a part of her audit. She 
concluded that the email and the phone call were not germane 

to being followed up upon. She in fact said that the day after 
she released her report, that there were no red flags. 
 
That being said, Mr. Speaker, she had full access to all of this 
information. Her conclusion was that there was no wrongdoing, 
that there was no fraud, that there was no conflict of interest. 
And with respect to the, with respect to the phone call being 
referenced, Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is there was no 
follow-up by the Ministry of the Economy. There was no 
follow-up by the Global Transportation Hub. And the auditor 
didn’t feel that the email and call were germane to further 
follow-up in her audit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Again, the report that the minister 
references — the question was to the Premier; no answers — 
the minister references, was scathing. It exonerated no one. 
Huge questions exist. And you know, Saskatchewan people 
should expect answers from their Premier and their government. 
We’ve asked day in, day out about questions like, who made 
that phone call? And the Premier hasn’t said a thing, and the 
minister won’t answer the question. Now we hear through this 
leak that it was some lawyer from Edmonton and a company 
named Blackstone. 
 
Don’t you think the people of Saskatchewan deserve better than 
this? Don’t you think, don’t you think they deserve the Premier 
to take to his feet and provide these kind of facts and not have a 
slow drip of information? So again, to the Premier: why does he 
think he can hide from answering these questions? Why won’t 
he come clean? And who is Blackstone? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well the fact of the matter with respect 
to the company being referenced, Mr. Speaker, is that the 
Ministry of Justice looked into who that company was, and we 
couldn’t find out who it was. That was a part of the reason why 
the sale didn’t go ahead. In fact we . . . And the auditor 
referenced that that was the right decision, I believe, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So we did look into that. That particular company’s name was 
canvassed. It wasn’t clear who that company was or if that 
company existed, and who this lawyer was in terms of 
representing this company. So because we couldn’t actually 
find out — the government couldn’t ascertain who the actual 
company was — there was no follow-up that went on because 
of that discussion, that there was no follow-up either by the 
GTH or by the Ministry of the Economy. And the government 
did the right thing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve asked these 
questions to the Premier day after day. No answers. Now a slow 
drip of new information. You know, of course this Premier 
could just turn around and talk 20 feet over to the 
scandal-plagued minister who’s finally out of his cabinet, but he 
hasn’t done that. 
 



November 1, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1027 

We get these tired talking points from the minister, but you’d 
think that maybe there’s a cabinet minister over there that 
would stand up and provide some of this information. Maybe 
the Justice minister, who we know was involved in some of this 
process, maybe the Justice minister would let us know. So I 
guess to Minister of Justice: who is Blackstone? And I guess 
from the Minister of Justice: what can he tell us about this 
operation? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think I 
answered, responded to the question with regard to that 
particular company. With regard to the challenges identified in 
the auditor’s report, she made 10 recommendations. The 
government accepted those recommendations, many of which 
have to do with improving governance at the GTH with respect 
to improving communication between the Global 
Transportation Hub Authority and the Ministry of Highways 
and Infrastructure. 
 
We’ve been focused on moving forward. How can we 
implement those recommendations most effectively? How can 
we improve governance at the Global Transportation Hub 
Authority? Yesterday, I made a pretty significant announcement 
in terms of the governance of the GTH, an important 
announcement appointing a very highly respected former public 
servant of this province, who served both this government and 
the former government very, very well, Mr. Doug Moen, who 
has agreed to serve as the Chair of the Global Transportation 
Hub Authority. We’re focused on moving forward, Mr. 
Speaker, on making the GTH a great success. We know that 
that’s going to happen and we very much appreciate Mr. Moen 
being willing to take on that leadership role with the GTH. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, another question, this one 
to the Justice minister, no answer. The minister with his tired 
talking points . . . But we know, we’ve learned now that Justice 
flagged the ownership of this parcel as a problem in May and 
cabinet was still concerned about this ownership, we’ve 
learned, in November of 2012. Of course that’s just before this 
government stroked the cheque and authorized paying four 
times more for this land than they ever should have. So to the 
Minister of Justice: what changed? Why was the advice not 
taken? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well in fact, Mr. Speaker, the 
Provincial Auditor said that the government did exactly the 
right thing in that we were not able to ascertain . . . We were not 
able to ascertain the owner of the property in question. The 
government decided, because we were unable to ascertain the 
ownership of the property, that we weren’t going to go ahead 
with . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize Minister of the Economy and the 

GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In fact the 
government . . . as I just said, the Provincial Auditor said the 
government did precisely the right thing in not going ahead 
with the sale of the property at that point because we couldn’t 
ascertain the ownership of the property. 
 
She did identify challenges, and that’s a big part of what she 
had in her report, 10 recommendations which we take very 
seriously. We accept the recommendations of the auditor, and 
as importantly, Mr. Speaker, we accept the conclusions of the 
auditor as stated in her press release when she released the 
report. The conclusion that she came to was that there was no 
wrongdoing, that there was no fraud, and that there was no 
conflict of interest. 
 
I’m interested in knowing whether the Leader of the Opposition 
accepts those conclusions as well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Questions, questions here today of 
course, day in, day out, to the Premier. Not a single answer, no 
accountability, no answers, and a deal that’s wasted millions of 
dollars. Questions now today trying to get to the bottom of this 
from the Justice minister as we’ve learned of his involvement. 
Not a single answer from the Justice minister. A bunch of tired 
and weak talking points from that minister. 
 
But the CBC has also uncovered that the CEO of the GTH got 
legal advice from the executive director of the civil law division 
of the Ministry of Justice. It’s all in a redacted email with the 
subject being the name of the Sask Party-supporting Alberta 
land baron’s law firm. 
 
My question to the Minister of Justice: what was in that email, 
and will he release it here today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — The fact of the matter is that the 
Provincial Auditor had access to all of these documents — all 
of them, including this email along with thousands of others. 
Her and her team of experts went through all of this material in 
a very, very detailed fashion, which I think the members 
opposite know to be the case. 
 
She had full access to those documents. She had full access to 
cabinet documents. She had full access to any of the individuals 
who played a part in the transaction. And at the end of the day, 
at the end of all of that work, at the end of reviewing all of 
those documents, those emails, including the one being 
referenced, her conclusion was that there was no wrongdoing, 
that there was no fraud, and there was no conflict of interest. 
 
And once again I’m interested in knowing from the Leader of 
the Opposition . . . He claims to support the Provincial 
Auditor’s report, her mandate — in fact I think they called for 
that mandate — which this government gave the auditor to look 
into these matters. Will he accept the conclusion that the auditor 
came to, which was that there was no wrongdoing, no fraud, 



1028 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2016 

and no conflict of interest? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

State of Provincial Finances 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the mismanagement and the 
scandal runs deep, so let’s try another topic. On October 12th, 
they passed an order in council and authorized themselves to 
borrow $6 billion. Now OCs [order in council] are used from 
time to time to authorize borrowing when it’s needed. But this, 
this is an unprecedented amount. It’s double any debt 
previously authorized. 
 
But they have gone back for seconds before. In September 
2013, $2 billion borrowing was authorized. And then a year 
later, in December 2014, $3 billion borrowing was authorized. 
Now it’s up to $6 billion. That’s billion with a “b”. The budget 
estimates for public debt are adding another $1.3 billion for the 
next year. So my question for the Minister of Finance is simple: 
why is the Sask Party so desperate to authorize $6 billion for 
themselves? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
find it interesting that we’re on, I think day eight of this session, 
the midpoint of the third week of this session and the NDP 
opposition finally decides it’s time to ask a question about 
something even remotely related to the economy here in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. And I think that that’s important. 
 
In answer to the member’s question with respect to the credit 
facility that the order in council passed, it is to provide the 
government the opportunity to borrow monies if it indeed 
deems it to be necessary to borrow those dollars. This credit 
facility, Mr. Speaker, is revolving credit, so we have debt that 
comes new on an occasional basis we need to renew. We need 
the order in council — we need the government authorization 
— to be able to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And because of the fact that we’re investing money to borrow 
in infrastructure in this province, should the opportunity arise 
and we find the markets are acceptable to our paper, Mr. 
Speaker — which they are because of a AAA credit rating in 
this province, one of two in Canada — we will take full 
advantage of that borrowing authority to take advantage of the 
markets to invest in infrastructure in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, what’s interesting about that 
minister’s response is that Saskatchewan people haven’t even 
seen the first quarter financial update. I know we’ve heard all 
their excuses on this but, in the last few months, we have seen 
first quarter financial reports from SaskPower, SaskEnergy, 
SaskTel, SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance], CIC 
[Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] but still 
nothing from the Sask Party Minister of Finance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if all of the Crowns were able to get their act 

together and provide transparent disclosure of their finances, is 
there really any legitimate excuse for the Finance minister to 
not provide one? Or does it have something to do with the $6 
billion borrowing that they just authorized for themselves? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — As I said earlier in this House and I said 
to the media, the first quarter ended on June 30th, the exact 
same day that this Assembly passed The Appropriation Act, Mr. 
Speaker, with respect to the budget that was brought down on 
June 1st. 
 
We will be bringing out a full mid-year update before the end of 
November to present to the people of this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I can tell this Assembly and I can tell the 
people of this province, I think the federal Finance minister was 
on his feet today talking about slow growth is the new norm 
here in the country of Canada. It also applies to the province of 
Saskatchewan. We know, Mr. Speaker, we know that there are 
pressures on our budget in this province as we speak. We know 
that 20 per cent of the crop is still lying in the field, Mr. 
Speaker, which translates into crop insurance claims against the 
province’s summary financial statements. 
 
We know that there are . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well do 
you want an answer or are you going to sit there and chirp? I’m 
asking the critic. So I’m saying to the critic, Mr. Speaker, we 
know that there are increased utilization pressures. 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We will bring 
out a full mid-year report before the end of November to 
present to the people of this province as to the update with 
respect to the finances of this province. 
 
But I can say there are challenges. There are challenges with 
respect to our income tax. There are challenges with respect to 
corporate income tax in this province. We know that 20 per cent 
of the crop is still lying out in the field. We know that there are 
increased utilization pressures in health care, education, and 
social services, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to meet those 
demands. That puts pressure on our budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Provisions of The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the Crowns had a 15-month 
year-end to deal with, so forget the excuses. We all know now 
the Sask Party wants to redefine what privatization means in 
Saskatchewan. They want it to be 49 per cent. After all, that’s 
what the World Bank uses. But, Mr. Speaker, here in Canada 
the federal government uses 10 per cent. You see, if a Crown 
corporation is more than 10 per cent privately owned, well the 
federal government no longer considers it tax exempt. In other 
words, once the Sask Party desperately sells off more than 10 
per cent of any one of our Crowns, it will have to start paying 



November 1, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1029 

corporate income tax to Ottawa. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen the rants on Twitter and in the 
headlines where the premiers and others pretend they want to 
defend Saskatchewan. Why are they now selling out 
Saskatchewan? And why do they so badly want to send our 
money to Ottawa? 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
changes to The Interpretation Act are very simple. We seek to 
define a word that’s in legislation that the New Democrats, 
when they proposed the legislation on the floor of this House, 
refused to define, Mr. Speaker. So we’re bringing in to the 
definition of the Act simply the World Bank definition, Mr. 
Speaker, the most authoritative definition that we could find 
with regard to the word, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s simple legislation, Mr. Speaker, and I’m not sure at the end 
of the day . . . The New Democrats had the opportunity to 
define that word when they brought the legislation forward, Mr. 
Speaker. They never did. They never did. They could’ve had 
whatever definition they wanted, Mr. Speaker. So we seek the 
most authoritative definition that we can find, Mr. Speaker, and 
that’s what we’re introducing through the legislation. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — They have the right to their own opinions, Mr. 
Speaker, but not their own facts. Look at the battles that they’ve 
pretended to wage over equalization and federal taxes — the 
tantrums, the grandstanding, the fearmongering. In the end, the 
Sask Party are the ones planning to send Saskatchewan dollars 
to Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our Crowns were built by generations of 
Saskatchewan people and for generations they have paved our 
roads, brought power to farmhouses, heated our homes, and 
connected our communities. But once again instead of truly 
standing up for the people of Saskatchewan, the Sask Party is 
running ahead and leading with their chin. With their wordplay 
and semantic games, why are they putting our Crowns at risk 
and forcing them to pay 15 per cent — millions and millions — 
to Ottawa? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
change to the legislation is not about privatizing any of our 
Crowns. It’s simply about bringing a definition to it. And, Mr. 
Speaker, at the end of it, once the definition has been changed, 
it will allow for all sorts of investments — our Auto Fund, for 
instance, Mr. Speaker; our Workers’ Compensation fund, funds 
that can’t invest in these Crown corporations the way they are, 
Mr. Speaker. We’ll have Saskatchewan people investing in our 
Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker, to give them the equity they 
need to continue to grow and continue to provide the vital 

services to the people of Saskatchewan that the people of 
Saskatchewan need, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Hospital Laundry Services 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, privatization is hurting us right 
down to hospital laundry facilities — not just the loss of 300 
good, mortgage-paying jobs but the loss of the quality of the 
linens that hospital patients and staff depend on every single 
day. A recent RQHR [Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region] 
newsletter noted that their staff have found hazardous, sharp 
objects in supposedly clean hospital linens: needles, syringes, 
and even surgical scissors and scalpels, Mr. Speaker. 
 
According to a report in the media today, in September alone, 
439 items were returned, and 48 per cent of those were due to 
staining. The privatization of our hospital laundry system is 
putting hundreds of patients and staff at risk. That’s 
unacceptable. Mr. Speaker, even the private laundry company 
now admits they don’t check for hazardous materials or sharp 
objects. 
 
Mr. Speaker, believe it or not, the then Health minister 
promised this move would improve patient safety. So, Mr. 
Speaker, will the minister admit his predecessor was clearly 
wrong and take responsibility for his government’s decision to 
privatize and put hospital staff and patients at risk? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, obviously we’re very 
concerned when anything like this happens that could put 
front-line employees at any sort of risk. Mr. Speaker, I’m told 
that, by ministry officials, that these situations unfortunately 
occurred prior to the privatization of linen services and they 
also occur from time to time across the country, Mr. Speaker, 
whether it’s services provided by private enterprise or provided 
by staff. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again I’m very concerned about this. I’ve asked 
ministry officials to contact the private provider, have 
discussions with them, see what can be done to ensure safety. 
But again, Mr. Speaker, this is not unique to Saskatchewan. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, we are talking about sharp 
objects being found in linens that were promised to be clean. I 
would think the minister would agree that this is a great risk to 
staff and patient safety. More concerning, Mr. Speaker, there is 
no tracking of the number of times a hazardous object is found 
in these linens. It’s true. 
 
We asked in a written question last year, and the Health 
minister’s office could provide no answer. Mr. Speaker, the 
Health ministry’s own guidelines require health care providers 
to report annually on the number of persons exposed to blood 
and bodily fluids. Given the facts, how is the minister okay with 



1030 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2016 

privatizing hospital laundry services? And will he commit to 
creating a proper system to track the amount of times hazardous 
objects are found in hospital linens, or at the very least, commit 
to following the existing guidelines of his own ministry? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 
I indicated in the first question, we’re very concerned about 
this. That’s why I’ve asked ministry officials to contact the 
private provider to have discussions whether something could 
be done more appropriately. But I would reiterate that this is not 
new to Saskatchewan. It’s happened in the past and 
unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, it happens on occasion across the 
entire country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I realize that the members opposite have some sort 
of ideological bent against any services ever being provided by 
private enterprise, Mr. Speaker, but in laundry, it makes 
significant sense. There has been millions of dollars saved. 
There will continue to be millions of dollars saved that can be 
used for front-line health care services, core health care services 
that really do need to be provided by staff. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would just add that there was a recent editorial in 
a Calgary paper, a scathing indictment of the government in 
Alberta for not moving in this very same direction to save 
millions of dollars that can be saved to be used for front-line 
services, for core health services, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answer to question 113. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled the answer 
to question no. 113. I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answers to questions 114 through 126. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered the 
responses to questions 114 to 126. 
 
I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to be asking for 
leave to move a motion of condolence. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 
 

CONDOLENCE MOTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s an 

honour today to be able to rise in my place and say just a few 
words about those former members of this Assembly whom we 
have lost. Mr. Speaker, I will be moving a specific motion with 
respect to Cyril MacDonald, and I know other members will 
want to join in on the debate, as it were, although there won’t be 
much disagreement, I’m sure. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that we take a moment, I 
think, every fall, as we are today in the session of the 
legislature, to pay tribute, to say a few words of gratitude and of 
condolence to the families and the friends and in memory of 
women and men that have served this place well, that have 
stepped forward in public service, that have stepped forward to 
serve their constituents, to do their very best to represent them 
both on the floor of this legislature and in their everyday work 
in their constituency offices or around their constituencies. 
 
And so today we will be honouring the former member from 
Milestone and Indian Head-Wolseley, Cy MacDonald. And we 
will honour also Bob Larter from the constituency of Estevan, 
Norman MacAuley from Cumberland, and Larry Birkbeck who 
was a member for Moosomin. Mr. Speaker, each of these 
individuals deserves our tribute, and their families and friends 
deserve our thanks and our condolence. 
 
We know that is especially true because to those who are left 
behind, we owe a great gratitude in terms of their willingness to 
share their loved one with the rest of the province. When 
someone enters into public service, when they run for office and 
they are successful and they are allowed to sign that wonderful 
roll of members, it is the individual that signs it, but it is a 
family that shares in the cost of public service. And so we say 
through the record today and through this debate, we say thank 
you to the families and the loved ones of all of these members 
who have served this province and this legislature well. 
 

Cyril Pius MacDonald 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — So, Mr. Speaker, I will begin today’s 
condolences by moving the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of the Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 
Cy Pius MacDonald, who passed away on November 
14th, 2015, was a Member of the Legislative Assembly 
from 1964 until 1978. He represented the constituencies of 
Milestone and Indian Head-Wolseley for the Liberal Party. 
He served as the minister of Industry and Commerce and 
the minister of Welfare. 
 
Mr. MacDonald was born 29 February, 1928, in Humboldt. 
He completed his Bachelor of Arts at Notre Dame College 
in Wilcox and a Bachelor of Education at St. Francis 
Xavier University in Nova Scotia. Mr. MacDonald 
returned to Wilcox in 1953 where he taught English and 
coached football and hockey for 15 years. He served on the 
Notre Dame senate and was recognized as an honorary life 
member of the Notre Dame Alumni Association and a 
member of the Notre Dame wall of honour. 



November 1, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1031 

After his political career, Mr. MacDonald joined his 
brother in Calgary and ran an oil service company. In the 
mid-1980s, he returned to Regina and founded Strategy 
West, a public relations and event management company, 
until his retirement in 1992. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, and colleagues, if I may just interrupt the 
actual motion wording now to offer some of my own personal 
perspective on Cy. It is at this point where I had the chance to 
meet Cy MacDonald and to work with him directly because he 
was engaged along with the Government of Saskatchewan of 
the day, with whom I was employed, and specifically worked 
with the minister that I worked for through his company called 
Strategy West. 
 
And I just found him to be the quintessential gentleman and 
more than happy as a veteran, not only of this place but of 
public life in terms of his business experience, to be very 
patient with any number of perhaps dumb questions I had at the 
time. Very patient with what I was trying to glean from an 
association with someone who had had such a career, who had 
served in the cabinet of the Thatcher government, who then had 
gone on to be involved in business and to risk and to create jobs 
for himself and others. 
 
And I found him to be, as I said, just a great gentleman, and we 
became friends. And it wasn’t until I guess years later, even 
after I was then elected — I had the honour of being elected to 
this place in ’99 — that we rekindled that relationship and met 
again and talked a little bit about those days. 
 
But I only have warm memories of Cy, how he carried himself, 
his comport and his willingness to continue to serve the 
province of Saskatchewan not long after he had left this 
Assembly and as he became involved in business and other 
matters. And so to continue with the wording, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Mr. MacDonald is survived and sadly missed by his wife 
of 64 years, Anne; his seven children, Katherine, Murray, 
Marilyn, Margaret, Maureen, Mariann, and Theresa; and 
their families including 12 grandchildren and seven 
great-grandchildren. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy to 
members of the bereaved family. 

 
The Speaker: — The Premier has moved a condolence motion. 
We’ll take it as read. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 
recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
humble honour to rise and to join with the Premier to remember 
Cy MacDonald and to offer respect to him and to his family for 
his service and contributions to our province. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Certainly as described by the Premier and through his service 
within our province, his contributions were multi-faceted. They 
were through the business community. They were through his 
formal service as an MLA for a number of years and as a 
cabinet minister, but also through education and through sport. 

I understand that Mr. MacDonald is survived by his wife, Anne; 
his seven children, Katherine, Murray, Marilyn, Margaret, 
Maureen, Mariann, and Theresa; as well as 12 grandchildren 
and seven great-grandchildren, and sister Kay MacDonald. So 
that, as was referenced, the service of a member here includes 
an entire family. And to all those members of that family, we 
say thank you. 
 
I recognize that Mr. MacDonald had a Bachelor of Arts from 
Notre Dame College in Wilcox, a Bachelor of Education from 
Francis Xavier University in Nova Scotia, and that Mr. 
MacDonald was an English teacher. And after his political 
career he ran an oil service company, I understand, Superior 
Mud in Calgary with his brother, and then came back to Regina 
to establish the public relations company that was referenced in 
the Premier’s remarks, Strategy West public relations. 
 
Mr. MacDonald represented the constituencies of Milestone 
from 1964 to 1975, and Indian Head-Wolseley from 1975 to 
1978. He served as minister of Industry and Commerce, and 
minister of Welfare and Youth. I understand that Mr. 
MacDonald led an initiative for youth regarding physical, 
social, and cultural programming. I understand that he was a 
hockey and football coach for 15 years, helping serve our 
communities through the development of sport as well. And I 
understand that Mr. MacDonald served on the Notre Dame 
senate, was recognized as an Honorary Life Member of their 
Alumni Association and as a member of their Wall of Honour. 
 
Pulling from Mr. MacDonald’s maiden speech read into this, or 
shared or spoken in this Assembly on February 15th, 1965, and 
his taking pride of representing rural Saskatchewan, I quote: 
 

As the member for the constituency of Milestone, I take 
pride in representing a constituency that is symbolic of 
rural Saskatchewan. Its boundaries stretch from no. 13 
Highway to the south, to no. 1 and no. 33 highways to the 
north. It stretches on the west to the doorsteps of Moose 
Jaw and on the east to the doorsteps of Weyburn. Its farms 
include those that are the real breadbasket of Western 
Canada. 

 
The pride shared by Mr. MacDonald in his maiden speech for 
that rural riding in that beautiful part of our province is certainly 
evident. And on behalf of a grateful opposition and a grateful 
province, we extend our condolences to the MacDonald family 
and our thanks to Cy MacDonald for his service to the people of 
Saskatchewan on so many fronts. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s an 
honour and a privilege to join in this condolence motion for — 
I’m interested when I see the paper — Cyril MacDonald. I’ve 
never ever heard of him called that before. In our area, he’s well 
known, was very well known as Cy MacDonald. 
 
It was already mentioned of course his connection to Wilcox 
and Notre Dame. There was a movie made, or a show made a 
number of years ago called The Hounds of Notre Dame, and Cy 
would have been one of those hounds. 
 



1032 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2016 

Mr. Speaker, he was quite well known in the area of course in 
his early days for attending there when the conditions were far 
from premium; you know, the stories of when somebody wasn’t 
using a granary, Père Athol Murray would haul that into Wilcox 
and that became a dormitory for people to stay in through the 
winter months. That was certainly, no doubt, experienced, and I 
never got to hear the stories from Cy, but I’m sure he probably 
had many of those early days in Notre Dame. 
 
I do know that Notre Dame has got quite a tradition of hockey, 
which is hard to believe because in those days it didn’t even 
have a hockey rink. They went to Milestone to play their 
hockey games. 
 
And I was talking to a fellow in Milestone just a couple days 
ago as I was kind of wanting to get a few stories regarding Cy. 
And he was telling about always remembering when Notre 
Dame would come, and they’d be playing against Weyburn or 
Estevan. And Cy, for some reason, seemed to be kind of, maybe 
not the policeman, but seemed to get mixed up with some of the 
toughest members, whether it was “Punch” McLean from 
Estevan or many different names. Cy was known as the guy that 
certainly tried to keep things straight for the Hounds of Notre 
Dame. So he had quite a reputation in the area as a player, and 
then of course on as a coach into the future. 
 
My experience with Cy, even though I was just a very, very 
young kid, I would say it was probably the reason . . . maybe 
not the reason, but my first experience in politics. I grew up in a 
very small town of Lewvan which Cy represented through the 
mid- to late-’60s and early ’70s. And the very first event that I 
ever went to, a friend of mine — because there was only one 
other friend in Lewvan when there’s only 22 people in the 
whole town; there was only one friend in Lewvan — and he 
was going. They were going to Avonlea to Dunnet Park to a 
barbecue. And I remember Mark O’Byrne asked me if I would 
like to go, and of course I wanted to. Anything to get out of 
Lewvan for a young kid was exciting. 
 
So I went to this what I thought was a barbecue, just a barbecue 
at Dunnet Park in Avonlea. And it was great. It was hot. I 
remember bits and pieces of it. And I remember there being 
speeches, which was kind of different for a barbecue, not 
knowing what I was going to. Well I ended up getting home, 
and I was telling my dad what I had just experienced. My dad 
was a very strong conservative, so it broke his heart to think the 
first political event I went to was for Cy MacDonald as a 
Liberal in Dunnet Park in Avonlea. I think my dad was a very 
strong conservative, but I sure . . . He also was a supporter of 
Cy because Cy had a lot of supporters. He brought kind of the 
centre right together, and that was probably a large part of his 
success in those elections. 
 
I also talked to a lady from Milestone who is kind of known as 
the Liberal around the community. She’s really from Gray 
originally and was a young Liberal. Cy actually started the 
young Liberal organization, I think, before he was elected in the 
Milestone area. But this Nita Monson now, but Lafoy before 
she was married, talked about how Cy really kind of united and 
brought together not only the youth, the elderly, but the youth 
especially. They would have bonspiels and really kind of taught 
the whole importance of democracy, the whole importance of 
knowing the different issues so that when you do vote, you are 

an informed voter, as opposed to just a party-line voter.  
 
And she talked a lot about Cy. She ended up actually working 
in this building when Cy was in his last term elected in this 
building. She spent some time working for the Liberal 
government in this building. But again, Cy really had such a 
presence, you know. I have had the fortune of the past . . . well 
since 1999 representing the constituency of Indian 
Head-Milestone. Indian Head will talk a little bit about Cy, but 
when you get down to that Milestone-Wilcox area, that’s where 
he spent so much of his time and is so well known. 
 
Just my last story, I just want to say that really kind of impacted 
my political life was one of my earliest memories of politics, 
again was of course a barbecue in Dunnet Park, which I’m not 
supposed to repeat anymore from the McMorris family name, 
but anyway . . . was at Christmastime we would get a Christmas 
card from the MacDonald family every year. And it was really 
quite a fascinating card because it had all the family. It had all 
seven kids plus Cy and Anne. And my mom, I always 
remember when she would open that card, I mean, because 
every year you’d watch this family grow. Even though we 
weren’t directly connected to it, you know, starting in ’64 for 14 
years, each year — and I think Mom collected every one of 
those — and you’d see this family of seven grow year after year 
after year. 
 
And I really want to commend Anne for putting that, and 
probably Cy had something to do with it, putting that together. 
Because when I was elected in ’99 we decided, I decided, that 
was really kind of neat because it stuck in my mind. And so we 
have done one every year until last year, couldn’t get the boys 
home. But what I want to say is how I am so impressed with 
Anne, because I found it, we found it impossible to try and 
corral two. They were able to corral seven plus Mom and Dad 
every year for 14 years to put this family card out, which really 
connected them I think with the constituency. 
 
So I’ve met a few of the kids. Don’t know all of them of course, 
but met a few. And you know, Cy needs to be proud of the 
family that they raised, in light of also carrying on a political 
career which can be quite demanding. 
 
So from the people of Indian Head-Milestone, and especially 
from the people around Milestone-Wilcox, our deepest 
condolences. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask again for leave to 
present another motion of condolence. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 
 



November 1, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1033 

Norman MacAuley 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, each 
one of these that we honour deserve our thanks for their public 
service. One could ask oneself a question though, as you read 
the bios or even the obituaries of some of the members, the 
reasonable question might be, if once one had served in World 
War II in places like France and Belgium and Holland and 
Germany, and then upon their return once they had worked in 
the Saskatchewan government trading store, and once they had 
served as a special constable for the RCMP [Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police], one could rightly ask, what would make them 
want to continue to serve? Because they could credibly say, I 
have done my public service. 
 
You know, we often note well, and I think reasonably so, that 
those who fought in World War II were the greatest generation. 
And it’s hard for any, even the most cursory read of the history 
of that war, it’s hard to disagree with that notion, that they were 
the greatest generation. And any member of that generation that 
so fought in that war, that went overseas far from home, in this 
case to four different countries, could come back and say, I 
have done my share. And we would rightly respond, no actually 
you have done more than your share. Public service has been 
done, not just on behalf of your own legacy but on behalf of 
your family’s legacy and the rest of ours. 
 
And yet Norman MacAuley came back and wanted to continue 
to be involved in public service through that trading store that 
was a government-related entity or through his work with the 
RCMP. He also found time, as you will note when we read the 
motion, found time to be an entrepreneur, owning and operating 
a fishing camp. So this was the quality of the individual then 
that served in this place throughout the late 1970s as a strong 
voice for the northern constituency of Cumberland on behalf of 
the New Democratic Party and then quite rightly appointed as 
the Legislative Secretary for the minister of the Department of 
Northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re honoured to have the loved ones of Mr. 
MacAuley who have joined us today. And so it gives us a 
unique opportunity to not just say for the record and transmittal 
that maybe the family and friends might read, but rather in 
person, for us — all of us, even those who did not know Mr. 
MacAuley — to say thank you through them to his memory and 
for his legacy but also directly to them for sharing him with us 
and supporting him in his public service. 
 
And so I know there will be members that wish to make a 
number of remarks in the public record, and let me make way 
for that, Mr. Speaker, by reading the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to his 
province.  
 
Norman MacAuley, who passed away on July 6th, 2016, 
was a member of this Assembly from 1975 until 1982. He 
represented the constituency of Cumberland for the New 
Democratic Party and served as the legislative secretary for 
the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. 

Mr. MacAuley was born on August 10, 1917 in La Ronge. 
He attended the All Saints Indian Residential School but 
left school early to work as a fisher and a freighter with his 
father. In 1941, Mr. MacAuley enlisted in the Canadian 
Armed Forces and served in France and Belgium and 
Holland and Germany. After settling back in northern 
Saskatchewan, Mr. MacAuley managed the Saskatchewan 
government trading stores in Pinehouse and at 
Deschambault Lake. He also served as a special constable 
for the RCMP and was an owner/operator of a fishing 
camp. After his political career, Mr. MacAuley and his 
wife retired to Kelowna, British Columbia. 

 
Mr. MacAuley is survived and sadly missed by his 
daughter-in-law Pat, granddaughter Erin, grandson Neil, 
and great-granddaughter Allison. In recording its own 
deep sense of loss and bereavement, this Assembly 
expresses its most sincere sympathy to members of the 
bereaved family. 

 
[14:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has moved a motion of 
condolence for Norman MacAuley. I will take the motion as 
read. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
honour to recognize somebody who has given so much to our 
province and to so many. In many ways, when you understand 
the service and the contributions and the life of Norman 
MacAuley, you have somebody who is sort of that sort of giant 
within our province that has truly been a builder in so many 
ways and that has served in so many ways. 
 
Before getting into some of my remarks, I want to welcome 
family of Norman MacAuley that are here today with us. I want 
to start with his granddaughter, Mrs. Erin Reid, from 
Edmonton. I know that Mrs. Pat MacAuley’s not in the 
Assembly here right now, but she’s in the Legislative Assembly 
here today watching these remarks as well, and that’s his 
daughter-in-law who married his son, Angus. We have Mr. Neil 
MacAuley here, a grandson from La Ronge, along with Allison 
MacAuley, great-granddaughter from La Ronge as well. We 
have his nephew Charlie MacAuley, as well as his wife, 
Lorraine MacAuley, with us here. They’re from Prince Albert. 
 
I know in chatting with Charlie before, he said that Mr. 
MacAuley was his ref. He was his uncle, but he was his ref as 
well, and he was the first ref that tossed him out of a hockey 
game for a bit of a tussle on the ice. 
 
We also have Soleh MacAuley, a great-grandniece who comes 
from Prince Albert. 
 
The life of Norman MacAuley is a remarkable story of service 
from his youngest years, and an individual who contributed, as 
I’ve said, to all aspects of the North: the economic 
opportunities, so many ventures that were there to support 
youth throughout the North. 
 
And of course somebody that also had very practical 
experiences from cutting roads, and I believe was involved in 



1034 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2016 

literally paving the main street of La Ronge — not as minister 
sending the cheques, but being on the ground paving the main 
street — and actually cut the first road into English Bay. Along 
with his son, cut that road and set up a fishing camp there at 
English Bay. 
 
Someone who served his country as well in the Second World 
War, and even that story is a remarkable story where Norman 
MacAuley, I’m told, decided at that point that he needed to 
serve. And he walked 200 kilometres to Montreal Lake where 
he then got a ride to Prince Albert to enlist with the Canadian 
Armed Forces, and in this case the 8th Canadian Light 
Anti-Aircraft Regiment in the Royal Canadian Army 70th 
Battery. Someone who served through France and Belgium and 
Holland and Germany throughout the Second World War. 
 
It’s been mentioned that Norman MacAuley went to the All 
Saints Indian Residential School. He left early to work with his 
dad as a fisher and a freighter. He spent a life, in many ways, 
connected to nature and the lakes pulling nets as a commercial 
fisher but also as a sport fisher and hunter. 
 
And something that’s been noted to me by family of Mr. 
MacAuley is his focus throughout his life on strengthening 
supports and circumstances for youth, and certainly we know 
the value of those contributions. 
 
Mr. MacAuley also served as the legislative secretary for the 
minister of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. He 
along with his wife, Hetty, I understand they started the first 
Legion, or the Legion in La Ronge. I know I’ve been in that 
building for a debate or two and community gatherings or two. 
It’s a wonderful place. 
 
And of course, upon returning from service in the Second 
World War, he worked within the North operating the 
government stores, the trading posts in both Pinehouse and 
Deschambault Lake. Somebody that I understand built a special 
bond and relationship with all people in the North, all 
communities, and certainly that’s epitomized in his service as 
an MLA earning that trust. He also served as a special constable 
for the RCMP alongside of operating that fishing camp. And he 
was just so active in his community. 
 
Education was something very important to Mr. MacAuley. He 
served as the first chairperson in fact of the La Ronge School 
Board from 1964 to 1975. I’m told by family — I wouldn’t 
typically bring current discussion into condolence motions — 
but it was passed along that he would take great interest in a 
program like NORTEP [northern teacher education program]. 
And they’ve asked me to speak to that here today and what that 
means for the North, being the kind of program that we need to 
build upon. 
 
And I guess one other interesting piece, at one point, on behalf 
of the government that he was a part of, he coordinated the 
relocation of a community, Molanosa at the time, to a new and 
improved site which would now be known as Weyakwin. 
 
And I’m going to just share from Mr. MacAuley’s maiden 
speech which was brought into this House on November 25th, 
1975. I will quote: 
 

Now I want to say how happy I am to be representing the 
constituency of Cumberland in this House. Today I want to 
thank the people of Cumberland constituency who elected 
me to this office. I hope I can do a good job for them. 
 
I want to say a few words in Cree for the first two 
paragraphs so that the people at home can see what has 
been said here. 

 
And the Legislative Library believes that Mr. MacAuley would 
likely be the very first person to speak Cree in this Assembly, 
something that members like our Deputy Leader, the member 
for Athabasca, have continued on in very fine tradition. 
 
When we describe the life of Norman MacAuley, he’s a giant in 
so many ways who has served his country, who has served and 
built the North, who has served as an MLA with legislative 
responsibility, but somebody that’s always been focused on 
building a community. 
 
And it’s with condolence that I enter into this discussion to send 
care to that entire family. And it’s with hope that that sort of 
legacy and that sort of service and that sort of person can 
continue on to build the province that we love. So thank you to 
Norman MacAuley on behalf of a grateful opposition and 
importantly a grateful province. Thank you for your service. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in with the 
Premier and the Leader of the Opposition. Being that I am the 
current MLA for the Cumberland constituency, I wanted to pay 
my condolences but also respect. There’s been some great 
words that have been shared to the family, and I’m so pleased 
that the family could come here today to join an opportunity 
that we . . . And it is an honour to look back on the great work 
that their grandfather, father . . . And the great work that was 
done in the Cumberland constituency but throughout the North. 
 
And I think of Erin, who I know personally, and Neil as well, as 
the grandchildren of Norman. I would just like to say to them, it 
is an honour to represent the Cumberland constituency. And I 
know from the stories that I’ve heard and people have shared 
that your grandfather was a very proud man, and he did a fine 
job representing the people in . . . I was thinking, talking with 
Cheryl in our caucus office who works there now. It’s kind of 
funny because I asked her, well did you know them? You know, 
Norm when he was here in ’75. And she says . . . And I have to 
say this to Cheryl who works in our caucus office, I said, well 
you must have been just a kid when you knew him, because I 
had to take brownie points with her. I didn’t want to upset her 
that she was her age. 
 
But having said that, she said that when Norm was here serving 
the Cumberland constituency, the good people of the North, his 
wife would join him. And she would come and make sure that 
he was comfortable. She said it was amazing to watch. Get him 
ready, and she was right there working, she said, never getting 
in the way, always making sure he was . . . Whatever he 
needed, she said, he was there. Like true partners of someone 
who had compassion and care and love for her husband and 
companion, and the role he had. And she was here to support 
him. 



November 1, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1035 

It was kind of funny, she said, you know, Doyle, but after, she 
would get him ready to come into the House and he would have 
to do the great work that he had to do and how important it was. 
She would make sure she’d come around and never get in the 
way. Always asking and wanting to help out. She said, it’s 
amazing. It didn’t matter what you would ask her to do, she 
would do it. And I was amazed. She wasn’t staff but just 
wanted to be involved. And I kind of thank Cheryl for sharing 
that little bit of a story of your grandmother and your 
grandfather, and just showing the support that she gave to him 
to do the good work. 
 
And many of us in this Chamber have loved ones, spouses, that 
support us greatly. So I would like to take that time to 
acknowledge not only your grandfather but the great work and 
support your grandmother did together. But also on behalf of 
the Cumberland constituency and to those members in this 
Chamber, it is an honour to serve. And I’ve had that honour to 
serve since 2008, to raise the issues and bring the concerns of 
the North, as he would have brought the concerns and the issues 
facing northern people, our Aboriginal brothers and sisters. 
 
So with that, I just want to again say it is an honour to have you 
in here, and I welcome you to the Legislative Assembly. And 
you know, it’s with condolences that we share with you the love 
that you had for your grandfather, and to know the good people 
of the Cumberland constituency and this province are grateful. 
 
You know, the Premier as well as the Leader of the Opposition 
said some great things —and truly, I know it’s from the heart — 
about your grandfather. So I hope that, you know, brings you 
some, I guess, sense how important your grandfather was to our 
province, to this Assembly, and to northern Saskatchewan, the 
Cumberland constituency. With that I would just say thank you 
for allowing me an opportunity to share a little bit and pay my 
condolences to the family. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m also 
proud to stand in my place on behalf of the constituents of 
Athabasca to pay tribute to Mr. MacAuley and to thank his 
family who are present today. I look at the bio, and I can almost 
point out that some of his accomplishments were much the 
same as my father because my father was also a World War II 
veteran and he was also a special constable. He also was very 
good at speaking Cree. 
 
And I can certainly share the sentiments of the Premier when he 
says that that generation that returned from the war made such a 
significant difference to our country and more so to our families 
and really to the communities that they came back to. And 
we’re so grateful for those that paid the ultimate sacrifice and 
not returned, but we’re also very thankful for those that did 
return. And I think Norman is one of the contributors to the 
northern part of our province, and that’s why it’s important that 
I too get up and pay tribute to Norman for his incredible 
sacrifice, not only to our country but to our communities and to 
our people. 
 
I would point out that one of the things that I often speak of 
when we talk to groups and young kids about being from 

northern Saskatchewan, the challenges of being a northern 
MLA. And certainly if you look at the history of the 
Cumberland and the Athabasca constituencies, I often complain 
at times that it’s almost undemocratic, just the way that things 
are set up, primarily because of the distance that we have to 
travel, the communities that we have to stay in contact with. 
And the bigger challenge is travelling a great number of hours 
to come to Regina to represent our people. So those are some of 
the challenges that me and the current member face. And I can 
tell you, however, our predecessors, Norman as well as my 
predecessor, Mr. Thompson, had tougher roads to travel on and 
greater distances and greater challenges in those early years. So 
we certainly want to recognize that in the early ’70s, there was 
much work that needed to be done in northern Saskatchewan, 
and these champions of ours, Mr. Thompson and Mr. 
MacAuley, certainly paid a tougher price than we do today in 
making sure that the North does have that voice. 
 
I can tell you that while we at times feel it’s undemocratic just 
to cover the distances we have in terms of staying connected 
and to travel all the way to Regina, it does wear down a person 
at times but I can tell the family today, the MacAuley family, 
that it is his memory that drives many of us younger MLAs to 
continue that journey because, as I said, he had a tougher road 
to travel then we did. So we needn’t complain, because certain 
sections of the province now are paved a little bit more than 
they were in those times. So it’s certainly something that we 
benefit from today that of course many of our predecessors 
could not. 
 
[15:00] 
 
I can also point out that, despite many misgivings and bad 
stories that people may have of the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan, DNS, and this was their heyday when Mr. 
MacAuley and Mr. Thompson introduced a great era in 
northern Saskatchewan. And we can pay tribute to them 
because we saw investments into highways, investments into 
housing, investments into airports. And those investments to 
this day, 2016, still serve and benefit the people of 
Saskatchewan. It was an exciting generation to see those that 
served in the war to come home and to offer solutions to our 
many communities, but it was also a great time for northern 
Saskatchewan people. And amongst the names that history will 
reflect, MacAuley is one of those names that we will echo our 
thanks to, as Thompson is one of those names that we also want 
to thank. 
 
So these are some of the things I think are really important for 
the families to take with them and place in their hearts. I 
understand his brother is here, and some of his family members 
. . . or his nephew is here, rather. Sorry. And I think the 
important thing is that, as we take our place in this Assembly, 
the key thing, as I also point out to the schoolchildren, that it’s 
nice, it’s a great honour to represent people in this province. 
 
And what’s really great, an honourable tribute to democracy, is 
the fact that our seats aren’t our names on these desks. The 
desks represent the constituency. So often in the Assembly 
you’ll hear the words “the member from Cumberland,” “the 
member from Athabasca.” And that’s a tribute to people like 
Mr. MacAuley, who worked very hard to give us the basic 
democracy that we enjoy today. And that is one of the most 



1036 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2016 

important, significant positives that I share with people because 
I think it’s a great, great tribute to those that served their 
country overseas. 
 
Now the final point I would say is that we also want to thank 
his family. Because as the member from Cumberland indicated, 
there is a great challenge of being an MLA from a great 
distance and having to cover a great area of our province. 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 
 
So the Cree translation is, I want to say in my own language, 
the language that Norman honoured in this Assembly and first 
spoke in this Assembly, that I want to thank him for his service 
and to point out that the work, the commitment, and the 
dedication will continue to preserve his memory and the 
memories of all those that served in the Assembly and those 
people that we’re honouring overall today. So again, thank you 
very much. God bless, and may he rest in peace. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is a 
motion by the Premier, a motion of condolence with regards to 
former member Norman MacAuley who passed away on July 
6th of this year. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I again 
ask leave to make a motion of condolence. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Premier has asked leave to make 
a motion of condolence. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 

Robert “Bob” Larter 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and colleagues. It’s an honour to say a few words about Bob 
Larter, who was known to those of us who followed politics 
carefully in the late ’70s, known to us well. He was a 
Progressive Conservative member of this Legislative Assembly 
for the Estevan constituency. 
 
And he went on . . . Well prior to politics he did many, many 
commendable things of great contribution to the Estevan area as 
an entrepreneur involved in the farm implement business. And 
then after politics, he continued to contribute to the province as 
a whole, albeit at the office that Saskatchewan had at the time in 
London, England. 
 
But during his time in politics, though it was only five years, he 
played a pivotal role in the history of the political life and the 
political history, now as we can attest here, in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, it was a time of significant 
political debate here in Saskatchewan around the role of 
government, around government-owned enterprises, around any 
number of issues. 

This was a very important time in the political life of 
Saskatchewan that Bob Larter participated in from this floor 
and from those chairs as a member of the Progressive 
Conservative opposition, Mr. Speaker. Some of the issues that 
were being still debated from 1975 through 1980 was, well the 
government’s role in the potash business, the government’s role 
in salt mines and peat bogs and all manner of activities, as well 
as the family of Crown corporations which remains a part of the 
debate in the political life of Saskatchewan. And certainly there 
were also important health care debates that Mr. Larter 
participated in. 
 
He also had to do the work of the MLA and advocate for his 
constituents in the Estevan area. And I think we’ll hear in a 
moment from the current member for Estevan that there were, 
you know, that the constituency was his priority. I think we all 
recognize in this place that there’s a certain amount of sacrifice 
to public life regardless of where we sit and regardless of our 
party affiliation. And then you have the example of some 
members who, during their time here, sacrifice even a little bit 
more. Because I think there was every bit of evidence that Mr. 
Larter enjoyed his job here in this Legislative Assembly. 
 
I think it’s also true that he was hopeful that in just a few years 
— and remember he retired in 1980, stepped aside in 1980 — 
that he was probably hopeful, as some were in his party, that 
there might be change coming, that the election that would be 
happening in 1981 or 1982 might see change and he might have 
the chance to sit on the government side for awhile. 
 
And members in this House will know there are members on 
both sides who have had a shared experience of serving in 
opposition and serving in government, and there are advantages 
to both. There are things that commend both positions in this 
House on either side of the aisle and to your left and to your 
right, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But I think it’s fair to say that there 
is the greater opportunity to contribute to public life, to help 
make changes that you believe in your heart that should be 
made or decisions that should be made if you’re sitting to the 
right of the dais, if you’re sitting on the government benches. 
 
And so it was in this context that Mr. Larter decided to make 
way — I believe the member for Thunder Creek would 
remember this well — to make way for a new leader of the 
political party at the time, Mr. Devine. And I think the thought 
is typically that when that happens, the calculation is that I’m 
going to step aside, notwithstanding the fact that it might not be 
my first choice, because I think it’s the right thing to do and I 
represent a constituency where there’s a pretty good shot that 
the new leader will win in that riding. And so that’s what he 
decided to do in 1980. I’m sure he consulted with his executive 
and with his family and he made this difficult choice. And he 
sacrificed some of, obviously, I’m sure what were his own 
objectives and ambitions so that someone else, so the leader of 
his party could run in his constituency. 
 
And Mr. Devine did run in that constituency and was 
unsuccessful as I recall, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So that would 
have probably been even a little bit more difficult for Mr. Larter 
to have realized that he stepped away from this job, and the 
person that replaced him was not only not the leader of his party 
but it was a member of the government side of the opposition 
party. 



November 1, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1037 

And yet I know that I’ve heard certainly that he continued to 
work for and toward a change that then did happen in 1982 
when Mr. Devine did win in that constituency and became the 
Premier of Saskatchewan as a result. So notwithstanding all that 
he did as the local MLA and with his pre-political life and 
post-political life, I think it’s important to recognize someone 
that would make that sacrifice. Obviously it was for a partisan 
view he believed in, but I think it’s fair to say that that kind of 
sacrifice can be recognized by all members of the House when 
someone’s prepared to step aside and allow for someone else to 
run in their stead. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, making way again for those who 
would want to put some more direct comments on the record, I 
move the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 

 
Robert “Bob” Larter, who passed away on December 26, 
2015, was a Member of the Legislative Assembly from 
1975 to 1980. He represented the constituency of Estevan 
for the Progressive Conservative Party. 
 
Mr. Larter was born on January 16, 1925 in Belle Plaine. 
Mr. Larter was raised in Regina where he received his 
primary and secondary education. He later studied at the 
Banff School of Fine Arts and the Chicago Vocational 
College. In 1960 his family moved to Estevan and he 
became an owner of a farm implement business. 
 
After his political career, Mr. Larter was named as the 
agent general for Saskatchewan in London, England. He 
was responsible for promoting international trade and 
bringing foreign investment into Saskatchewan from the 
United Kingdom and Europe. 
 
Mr. Larter is survived and sadly missed by his four 
children, Kea, Bob Jr., Susan, Jim, and their families. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy to 
members of the bereaved family. 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Premier has moved a motion of 
condolence for Robert “Bob” Larter. Will the Assembly take 
the motion as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour 
to enter into the condolence motion to address the passing of 
Mr. Bob Larter here today. As has been mentioned, Mr. Larter 
is survived by his four children, Kea, Bob Jr., Susan, Jim, and 
their families, as well as two sisters, Dode and Darlyne. 
 
As has been referenced, and as many would know, Mr. Larter 

represented the constituency of Estevan for the PC [Progressive 
Conservative] Party from 1975 through to 1980. As was shared 
by the Premier here today — with, I’m sure, some 
understandings of that process at that time — he made the 
decision to allow his leader to advance in that seat. And he was 
raised in Regina as well. I understand he received his primary 
and secondary education in Regina, later attending the Banff 
School of Fine Arts and the Chicago Vocational College. 
 
I understand that Mr. Larter served with the navy from 1942 
and served until 1945. I’d like to offer special thanks for that 
service. And I understand Mr. Larter moved to Estevan in 1960 
with his family and became an owner of a farm implement 
business, Double “R” down in Estevan, and was very active in 
the business life of Estevan as someone owning that business 
and growing that business. 
 
Now following the service of Mr. Larter, I understand that he 
was appointed and served as agent general for Saskatchewan in 
London, England, and that through that work certainly had 
responsibility and focus on promoting international trade and 
bringing United Kingdom and European investments here to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
As I mentioned before, Mr. Larter was definitely involved in 
the business community of Estevan. He was the president of the 
chamber of commerce in Estevan, and president of the 
Saskatchewan-Manitoba Implement Dealers Association in 
1970. He served as president of the Estevan Shrine Club, and he 
served as well as an alderman within Estevan in 1966. So we 
have somebody that’s served their province through their 
constituency on the floor of this Legislative Assembly and has 
served in many economic and business ways as well. 
 
I’d like to quote just a little portion of his maiden speech, sort 
of characterizing on what’s in the best interest of the public or 
doing what’s in the best interests of the public, from March 
16th, 1976: 
 

I feel I should make it abundantly clear to all Members in 
this House that should our caucus make decisions at any 
time and feel at another time that our decision in caucus 
has been wrong and not in the public interest, then 
certainly under our democratic process we will always 
reserve the right to make a change on that decision. 

 
And just pulling a quote as well from a story from 1979 when 
he sold his implement dealership that he, I understand, very 
proudly grew in Estevan, he was quoted as saying, “I’d like to 
think we’ve played a part in the growth of the agriculture 
industry in this province.” Well I can say to the Larter family 
that I think most certainly that would be the case, that both 
through his ownership of that implement dealership and the 
growth of it that he played a very important role within the 
growth of the agribusiness here in Saskatchewan, as well as 
through his role as agent general for Saskatchewan. 
 
[15:15] 
 
And to the family of Bob Larter, we share our condolences and 
our care. We offer our thanks for supporting his service, and 
extend the same to Mr. Larter who has passed. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 



1038 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2016 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well the stories 
that you’ve heard today about Bob Larter are all so true. Now 
when he was sworn into this Assembly, I was six years old, so I 
must admit I didn’t know Bob Larter in my younger years. But 
my dad in fact knew him very well and worked on his campaign 
back in those days, which I think is something I spoke about in 
my maiden speech, how some of my political passion has come 
from, you know, the way you’re brought up and your family’s 
beliefs. 
 
So I watched my dad in those years spend time in the campaign 
offices and in the constituency offices of Bob Larter, and then 
of course further on when we moved on to Grant Devine. So as 
the Premier has already mentioned, you know, thank you so 
much for the service he’s given and the way he stepped aside so 
humbly so that someone else could serve and go on to be the 
Premier of Saskatchewan. 
 
So I actually had the pleasure of getting to know Mr. Larter the 
past few years through the Legion at different ceremonies and 
stuff that he would attend, and at times when he was receiving 
awards himself. I got the chance to sit and talk with him, and 
one of the things I told him was that this is something that I’m 
interested in doing. And in fact Doreen Eagles was with me that 
day, and she was standing right next to me. And he looked at 
her and he looked at me and he said, well you’ve got big shoes 
to fill. So it was . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And fancy ones, 
as another member would say. But he had a great respect for her 
and a great respect for politics as a whole.  
 
So the city of Estevan was very lucky to have him as a member, 
as both a business member, and that’s where he chose to raise 
his family. You’ve heard everything he’s done as far as, you 
know, serving in the war, being on city council, being over in 
London — several roles that he’s played throughout his history. 
 
So I’d just like to say he will be dearly missed in the city of 
Estevan by both his family and the citizens. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 
Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to take just a few minutes and talk about 
the late Bob Larter myself. I was a constituent of his when he 
got elected in that first . . . And at the risk of showing my age 
compared to the member from Estevan, I remember that 
election. And in my thoughts, Mr. Larter really wasn’t ready to 
serve at that point because of the political landscape of the day. 
 
But you didn’t have to talk to him very long and you realized 
that here is a man of leadership, a man of very much 
appreciated sincerity that really could turn the people’s minds. 
And you could understand why he would have been chosen as 
the MLA for Estevan — a very likeable gentleman, very fair, 
and very fair in his business practices, and very helpful. He was 
very involved in the community and had a lot of influence in 
the community with the Chamber of Commerce and different 
business associations, and with that sincerity showed a 
leadership that is very hard to find in a lot of aspects. 

So we got to know him through that initial campaign and really 
became very strong supporters of him because of his beliefs, 
because of his ingenuity, because of his ethics. And I’d like to 
just go down on record saying that he brought out the best in 
people. He certainly brought out the encouragement and the 
influence of his personality when he talked to us on that first 
election. And I’d like to just extend my condolences to his 
family and thank him for his services. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask leave for a final 
motion of condolence. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Premier has asked leave for a 
final motion of condolence. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 

Larry Wayne Birkbeck 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s an honour again to be putting a few words on the record in 
regard to the memory and the service of Larry Birkbeck. 
 
Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I had a great interest in politics 
through the years that Mr. Birkbeck served in this Legislative 
Assembly. I think I would have been even a summer student 
working in the Legislative Building when he was serving, not 
only as the MLA for Moosomin, but also as the Legislative 
Secretary for the Minister of Health, and perhaps at the time, it 
was the Minister of Social Services. 
 
And again as I pointed out with respect to Mr. Larter, this was a 
time of great political interest, heightened political debate in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And unlike Mr. Larter, Mr. 
Birkbeck had the advantage and had the opportunity to see 
government, to see his own personal service from both sides of 
the Assembly, first as an opposition member elected in ’75, and 
then sitting on the government benches from 1982 to 1986 and 
having the chance to perhaps more directly contribute to 
decisions that we all have the opportunity to make, to influence 
decisions that are made on behalf of our constituents and the 
people of the province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the case of Mr. Birkbeck, his political 
interest most assuredly continued after his time in this 
legislature was complete. I can remember reading a number of 
letters to the editor that Mr. Birkbeck would write very, very 
regular. And I note the member for Cannington is nodding in 
agreement, and I note that you are too, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 



November 1, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1039 

And I can quite honestly tell members of the House that there 
was some parts of those letters and maybe even in some cases 
the entirety of those letters that I’d find myself in agreement 
with, and then there were some that perhaps I didn’t agree with. 
And there were parts and whole letters that I would have taken 
issue with and had the chance to engage in some spirited 
discussion and debate with Mr. Birkbeck. 
 
But his again was an example of public service, both before, 
during, and after his time in this Legislative Assembly. And we 
are, I think, we are all obligated on an occasion such as this, as 
we have done with those that we have honoured prior to Mr. 
Birkbeck, to thank him and to thank his family and his friends 
for sharing him into public life. And so, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
do that quite solemnly today. 
 
Eleven years is a long time to serve in the Legislative 
Assembly, to interrupt one’s life and offer up themselves in 
public service and to the scrutiny of this place. Mr. Birkbeck 
was prepared and I think even happy to do that, not just during 
his time here but after. Even if some disagreed with his views, 
he was courageous in presenting them in a public way. 
 
And so I just want to say, on behalf of this side of the 
legislature, but on behalf of the province of Saskatchewan, 
thank you to Mr. Birkbeck’s family and friends for sharing with 
the province and allowing him to serve and give a legacy here 
to this place. And so, Mr. Speaker, to make way for others who 
also may want to comment, I move: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to his 
province. 

 
Larry Wayne Birkbeck, who passed away on August 29, 
2016, was a member of this Legislative Assembly from 
1975 through to 1986. He represented the constituency of 
Moosomin for the Progressive Conservative Party. He 
served as the Legislative Secretary to the ministers of 
Health and Social Services. 
 
Mr. Birkbeck was born on October the 9th, 1943 in 
Winnipeg, Manitoba, and he was raised near Welwyn, 
Saskatchewan. After completing his secondary education, 
he operated a dairy farm. 
 
After his political career, Mr. Birkbeck established a 
consulting business. He compiled many documents on the 
ambulance industry, seniors’ care, housing, and the hotel 
industry. He served as the federal-provincial liaison officer 
for the Saskatchewan Emergency Measures Organization 
and Emergency Preparedness Canada, and he sat on the 
municipal boundary committee for the Saskatchewan 
Municipal Board and was a member of the Board of 
Revenue Commissioners. 
 
Mr. Birkbeck is survived and sadly missed by his wife, 
Debra, his seven children, and their families. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy to 

members of the bereaved family. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Premier has moved the motion of 
condolence for Larry Wayne Birkbeck. Will the members take 
the motion as read?  
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour 
to enter into this condolence motion and to pay tribute and 
thanks and condolence with respect to Larry Birkbeck. 
Certainly he’s survived by his wife, Debra, seven children: 
Daniel, Pamela, Christopher, Shawn, Jay, Brendan, Tyler; two 
stepchildren, Danielle and Kevin; and 11 grandchildren. 
 
As has been referenced, Mr. Birkbeck grew up near Welwyn, 
Saskatchewan. He represented the constituency of Moose Jaw 
for the PC Party from 1975 to 1986. He served as the 
Legislative Secretary to the Minister of Health and Social 
Services. Before his service he operated a dairy farm until his 
political career, and following his service he established a 
consulting business, Venus Consulting, and served as the 
federal-provincial liaison officer for the Saskatchewan 
Emergency Measures Organization and Emergency 
Preparedness Canada. So certainly service on many fronts that 
also extended through to the Municipal Boundary Committee 
for the Saskatchewan Municipal Board and was a member of 
the Board of Revenue Commissioners. 
 
I understand that Mr. Birkbeck also had hobbies of skiing and 
horseback riding. Certainly we continued to read Mr. 
Birkbeck’s letters to the editor across Saskatchewan for many 
years following his service. In fact I just pulled up, I believe, his 
last post on Birkbeck’s Blog. This was posted on Wednesday, 
March 30th, 2011, and it’s titled “Last Letter:” 
 

I’ve been writing in many papers for nearly two decades. 
The time has come to move on with my writing. The 
following is a transcript of my last letter: 
 
March 30th, 2011 
 
Dear Editor, 
 
For nearly two decades I have submitted “Letters to the 
Editor” on various issues. Over the last few years, papers 
across the country received these letters with the majority 
going to Saskatchewan weekly papers. It has been 
interesting writing on issues of importance. It is important 
for people to have a range of views on the issues. 
 
There is respect for papers that allow their readers to 
submit letters. It is a service vital to the principles of free 
speech. Appreciation goes to all these papers. You have 
earned the respect of your readers. 
 
Writing will always be important, but it will take a 
different form in the future. Thank you to the papers and to 
their readers for respectfully accommodating these letters. 
 



1040 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2016 

Someone once said it is better to write for your self and 
have no public than to write for the public and have no 
self. For this and other reasons, it’s time to move on to . . . 
[others]. 
 
Yours truly, 
 
Larry Birkbeck 

 
And I know in pulling from the Leader-Post when he was 
relaying his reasons to choose to not seek re-election, I quote: 
 

I determine my future. No one else ever has and ever will. 
Politics is a competitive business. Ten years ago, no one 
else was interested in running, today there is. This makes 
me feel good. 

 
And a final quote: “It was my goal to be like that great 
Canadian from Prince Albert, John Diefenbaker, who was a true 
constituency man.” It sort of defines how he viewed his service. 
 
To the Birkbeck family, we send our care and, too, our 
condolences. We thank them for their involvement in his 
service, and we thank Mr. Larry Birkbeck for his service also. 
Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion of condolence as moved by the Premier for 
Larry Wayne Birkbeck? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
request leave to move a motion of transmittal. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
requested leave to move a motion of transmittal. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 

TRANSMITTAL MOTION 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d 
like to move the following motion: 
 

That, notwithstanding rule 8(2) of the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 
the Speaker, on behalf of the Legislative Assembly, 
transmit an audio-video record of the tributes together with 
the verbatim record and the Votes and Proceedings to the 
bereaved families in memory of the deceased members. 

 
I so move. 
 
[15:30] 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved a motion: 
 

That, notwithstanding rule 8(2) of the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 
the Speaker, on behalf of the Legislative Assembly, 
transmit an audio-video record of the tributes, together 
with the verbatim record and Votes and Proceedings to the 
bereaved families in memory of the deceased members. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 40 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 40 — The 
Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 
sur l’interprétation be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And as always it is my great honour to be able to enter into the 
debate on the bills and the legislative agenda of the government 
of Saskatchewan. This bill is remarkably short and yet has long 
arms and legs, Mr. Speaker. And it’s a very important bill that I 
think will actually alter how we view our Crown corporations 
here in Saskatchewan. And I think it’s one that’s worthy of 
great debate and at great length, and certainly we need to take a 
very close look at what the government is attempting to do here, 
what they say they’re attempting to do, and what the real impact 
of this bill will be. 
 
We had a very brief explanation by the minister when he 
introduced this bill yesterday, or when he spoke to it in the 
second reading. And what he’s basically telling us is that we 
need clarity, Mr. Speaker. I couldn’t agree with him more. I 
mean clarity is something that is in short order from this 
government on the best of days. And so as far as that goes, yes, 
we would certainly appreciate to have more clarity from the 
government. Unfortunately, I think what this bill is doing is 
actually muddying the water way more than it needs to be and I 
think with some reasons that we can only suspect why the 
government is attempting to do this. 
 
He says that there’s this great need in the province of 
Saskatchewan to define or clarify what the definition of 
“privatization” is. Mr. Speaker, in the course of my comments 
today, I’m going to provide the Assembly with a number of 
definitions of “privatization”. And certainly it is a word that has 
a very complex history, a complex meaning, particularly in the 
last 40 years or 30 years globally. So yes, the word 



November 1, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1041 

“privatization” is very complex and can mean many different 
things. The definition that this government has chosen speaks 
volumes to its political agenda. 
 
I think that the first thing I find really offensive about this bill is 
the misuse of an interpretation Act to accomplish a government 
political agenda. Most lawyers would know that The 
Interpretation Act is a very sacrosanct piece of legislation that 
has a very specific purpose, and that is to identify common 
terms throughout legislation and give a meaning of something 
like “year” or “person” or “minister” — very germane words in 
relation to the mechanics of government, the bureaucratic side 
of government. 
 
But it’s very clear to me that the attempt being undertaken by 
this government with our Saskatchewan interpretation Act is 
anything but following the intent of The Interpretation Act. And 
certainly I would expect that the Law Society of Saskatchewan 
is going to express concern on this, first and foremost because it 
really does change what the purpose of an interpretation Act is. 
Public policy doesn’t belong in The Interpretation Act. And I’ll 
probably come back to that over and over. That’s not a place for 
a government to introduce a privatization agenda, in The 
Interpretation Act. 
 
It’s weird. It’s curious. And when he says he’s trying to clarify 
by using a definition that is used by the World Bank, he 
certainly hasn’t given us where that citation is. And it doesn’t 
exist on the Internet. So I don’t know where this World Bank 
definition comes from, and I do want the minister to provide us 
with his source for that particular quote that he gave in the 
House yesterday. He said, “Mr. Deputy Speaker, the definition 
is based on the World Bank definition of privatization.” 
 
I did a search and there was no definition that I could find. Now 
maybe my Google skills aren’t all that good, and mea culpa for 
that. But I think it’s important for him to share with this House 
and with the people of Saskatchewan where that definition 
came from and exactly what that definition is. 
 
I did do a search, myself. I was able to search every other 
interpretation Act in the Dominion of Canada and in other 
Commonwealth countries, Mr. Speaker. And this is what I 
found as I was going through it. Is there a definition of 
privatization in the British Columbia interpretation Act? No. Is 
there a definition of privatization in the Alberta interpretation 
Act? No there isn’t. Is there a definition of privatization in the 
interpretation Act for Manitoba? No there isn’t, Mr. Speaker. 
How about Ontario? Is there a definition of privatization in the 
Ontario interpretation Act? Well as a matter of fact, Mr. 
Speaker, there isn’t. 
 
Let’s try New Brunswick. Is there a definition of privatization 
in the New Brunswick Act? No there isn’t, Mr. Speaker. Prince 
Edward Island? No, no definition of privatization in that bill. 
Newfoundland? Definition of privatization not there, not to be 
found. Prince Edward Island maybe? No, it’s not there either. I 
tried Nova Scotia. It was my last try in Canada, actually I didn’t 
. . . I did look at Nova Scotia. There’s no definition there. And I 
even tried Quebec, which has laws in French, but they actually 
have convenient translations. And guess what, Mr. Speaker? In 
Quebec there is no definition of privatization to be found in the 
interpretation Act. 

So I thought, well what about England and Wales? I’ll check 
that out. And I looked in the interpretation Act for England and 
Wales and I just couldn’t find the definition of privatization in 
that bill. So I thought, well maybe New Zealand? We could try 
there. And guess what, Mr. Speaker? There was no definition of 
privatization in the interpretation Act from New Zealand. 
 
An Hon. Member: — World leading. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — World leading. Yes, once again the Sask Party 
is out front, setting the pace for the world in terms of how to 
change definitions to say something that they’re not. And if 
clarity is to change the definition to make it something that it 
isn’t, or something that only one particular aspect of the world 
. . . The World Bank has its own views on things, and we all 
know that, Mr. Speaker. That is not providing clarity. I think 
it’s hiding behind The Interpretation Act to achieve government 
political goals, policy goals, that have nothing to do with clarity 
in the least, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so this is something that I find really disturbing, that this 
government is choosing at this point in its mandate . . . And you 
know, we hear them say, oh well, it’s not going to happen 
today. It’s not going to happen tomorrow. What are you getting 
so excited about? Mr. Speaker, this is going to change 
fundamentally the way our government in Saskatchewan 
operates, and it has the potential to fundamentally change our 
relationship with our Crown corporations. That is, last time I 
checked, pretty important to the people of Saskatchewan. It’s 
something we’re proud of and is something that I think we have 
a proud heritage of. 
 
So for a government to lack the courage and to be cowardly 
enough to enact this kind of change, without facing it full on in 
the Crown protection Act that they agreed to unanimously in 
2004, is nothing short of cowardice, Mr. Speaker. And this is 
something that I think we need to speak out loudly against, and 
we need to point out to this government that its misleading 
ways, its deceptive ways, and its cowardly ways are not 
acceptable to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I have a whole lot of pieces that I want to share with the House 
this afternoon and into this evening, if I have time. And so I’m 
just first of all going to start with something that was said by a 
former Premier. It’s a good story, and I want to start with a 
story. So this is a story from Allan Blakeney, and it’s from a 
book called Public Enterprise in an Era of Change, edited by 
Dr. John Allan. And there was a chapter in the book, and it’s 
called “The History of the Saskatchewan Crown Corporations” 
by Allan Blakeney. And as you will recall, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Blakeney was Premier of Saskatchewan in most of the ’70s and 
into the early ’80s. So this is what Mr. Blakeney had to say: 
 

In talking about Saskatchewan Crown corporations, I do 
not propose to talk about the ideology of Crown 
corporations, either the ideology that says that Crown 
corporations are good and therefore we should keep the 
existing Crowns and have more, or alternatively, the 
ideology that says Crown corporations are bad, therefore 
we should sell SaskEnergy or SGI or whatever. 
 
I believe that human affairs are complex. I believe that 
they are best dealt with by applying one’s mind to the 



1042 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2016 

circumstances at hand, and arriving at what is the best 
course of action for the people whose interests we seek to 
represent. Thus, I think that, when deciding whether 
Saskatchewan needs more Crown corporations or fewer, 
one should ask for whose benefit the Crown corporations 
were organized; who they benefit now and in the future; 
and who would benefit if they were dismantled; and assess 
the situation case by case. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s something that we need to do 
here today as well. He goes on to say: 
 

I do not favour the thinking which starts from an 
ideological straightjacket, one which says that government 
enterprise is bad, therefore Crown corporations should be 
disposed of or, conversely, government enterprise is 
inherently good, therefore the existing Crown corporations 
should be retained and others should be established. I do 
not believe that Crown corporations are inherently good or 
inherently bad. They are a tool. They are a tool whereby 
people acting through their government seek to achieve 
social objectives or economic objectives or both. 

 
I believe that this is how the great bulk of Saskatchewan 
Crown corporations came into being. Many Crown 
corporations were brought into being by Conservative 
governments, Liberal governments, and NDP governments. 
Many of them have been disposed of by Conservative 
governments, Liberal governments, and NDP governments. 
In most cases, this was done because it was thought to 
make sense if one was acting for the benefit of the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
In the past, governments of all political hues have, to use a 
facetious phrase, “laid aside their principles and done what 
was right,” and I hope we can continue to do this. 
Accordingly, I reject out of hand the ideological, 
broad-brush approach to Crown corporations, past, present, 
or future. 
 
I want to say that I also reject the false argument that some 
people use when they are talking about Crown 
corporations. They say that the Crown corporations have 
served the people of Saskatchewan well in the past; but 
things have now changed; and, therefore, Crown 
corporations should be disposed of. They say this without 
in any way attempting to establish just why the changes, 
which undoubtedly have come about, in this decade as they 
have in every other decade, dictate the sale of Crown 
corporations now, when changes in past times did not. The 
mere fact of change is an argument for nothing. If I may 
use a paradoxical statement, change is a constant. It is only 
if a particular change dictates a particular course of action 
that we should take note of change. 
 
I am in some ways one of the many Saskatchewan citizens 
who have received services from many public enterprises 
throughout our lifetimes. 
 
I have worked in this city as a public servant and as a 
lawyer engaged in the private practice of law. The first 
house I ever owned was one that I built, along with others, 
on the 31 block Montague Street. When I woke up in the 

morning, I noted that the house was nice and warm. I liked 
the natural gas provided by the then Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation. I got out of bed and struggled to the bathroom 
and used the plumbing facilities provided by the City of 
Regina and the water facilities provided by the City of 
Regina and the hot water provided by SaskPower’s natural 
gas. 
 
I was conscious of the fact that my house had been paid for 
largely by a mortgage provided through the Central 
Mortgage and Housing Corporation, and the property and 
fire insurance on the house was provided by Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance and I drove a car that was insured 
by Saskatchewan Government Insurance. I drove out of my 
driveway onto a street which was provided by the City of 
Regina and maintained and snowplowed by the City of 
Regina. I was a member of Sherwood Co-op and usually 
bought my gasoline at the Sherwood Co-op Association, 
obtained from the Consumers Co-op Refinery Limited. My 
children went off to the nearby school provided by the 
Regina Public School Board, and I went for some time to a 
job with the Government of Saskatchewan and for some 
time with a private law firm in downtown Regina. My 
children were born, or three of them were, in hospitals 
owned by the City of Regina and the Government of 
Saskatchewan. One of the children was born at our home 
because of circumstances created when people, following 
ideology almost blindly, opposed a particular government 
enterprise — the introduction of medical-care insurance, 
what they called state medicine and what we now call 
medicare. They were wrong. On the basis of what was best 
for the people, this was a proper extension of state activity, 
a proper use of a new Crown corporation. 

 
I am unlikely to be convinced that only the public sector, 
or only the private sector, can provide goods and services. I 
believe there is a role for the private sector. After all, I was 
engaged in the private practice of law. I believe that there 
is a role for the public sector. I believe that there is a role 
for the cooperative sector. What we are talking about is the 
appropriate role for each of these sectors, as well as a 
private non-profit sector. The appropriate role will change 
with time and circumstances. The appropriate role will not 
be ascertained by large dollops of ideology. It will be 
ascertained by finding out what goods and services we 
need as individuals and as a community and how we can 
best provide them for ourselves. 

 
[15:45] 
 
And I’ll stop quoting this particular chapter, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Blakeney goes on to talk about a lot of the main Crown 
corporations but I will speak to some of them later. And I 
certainly recommend this read for anyone who is interested in 
having a look at that. 
 
So maybe we could talk now a little bit about different 
definitions of privatization. There are many, many, many, many 
in the world, and so we could look at some of those if I can get 
to those definitions. Just take me a moment here. 
 
Maybe I’ll start with an article about . . . Well I’ll get to those 
later because I’m having trouble putting my finger on . . . oh 



November 1, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1043 

here we are, “The Meaning of Privatization.” This is an article 
from . . . by a gentleman named Paul Starr from the Yale Law 
& Policy Review, and he has a pretty good description of 
privatization. Now it isn’t one paragraph that you could stick in 
The Interpretation Act because it’s a little more complicated 
than that, but I will share with the Assembly this particular 
gentleman’s thoughts about the meaning of privatization. And it 
is an extensive quote, so I’d certainly be happy to provide 
Hansard with hard copies if they so desire. 
 
So I’m going to read this section called “Privatization as an 
Idea.” And this is what Paul Starr has to say: 
 

In the ideological world we inhabit, contesting interests 
and parties use “public” and “private” not only to describe 
but also to celebrate and condemn. Any serious inquiry 
into the meaning of privatization must begin, therefore, by 
unloading the complex freight that the public-private 
distinction carries. In this section I analyze, first, the 
general uses of the public-private distinction and, second, 
the recent political application of the concept of 
privatization. 

 
And just an interjection there, Mr. Speaker. You will remember 
that in the ’80s, that’s when global privatization really took off 
and got wheels, the concept of privatization of 
government-owned entities. So I’ll go back to the article now: 
 

A. The Public-Private Distinction and the Concept of 
Privatization 
 
The terms public and private are fundamental to the 
language of our law, politics, and social life, but they are 
the source of continual frustration. Many things seem to be 
public and private at the same time in varying degrees or in 
different ways. As a result, we quarrel endlessly about 
whether some act or institution is really one or the other. 
We qualify the categories: This group is quasi-public, that 
one is semi-private. In desperation some theorists 
announce that the distinction is outdated or so ideologically 
loaded that it ought to be discarded [not the Sask Party], or 
that it is a distinction without a difference. Yet the terms 
can hardly be banished nor ought they. To speak 
intelligently about modern societies and politics without 
using the words public and private would be as great an 
achievement as writing a novel without the word “the.” 
However, neither is necessarily the sort of achievement 
that other theorists or novelists would care to imitate. 
 
The frustration with these ubiquitous categories partly 
arises because public and private are paired to describe a 
number of related oppositions in our thought. At the core 
of many uses are the two ideas that public is to private as 
open is to closed and that public is to private as the whole 
is to the part. In the first sense, we speak of a public place, 
a public conference, public behavior, making something 
public, or publishing an article. The private counterparts, 
from homes to diaries, are private in that access is 
restricted and visibility reduced. The concepts of publicity 
and privacy stand in opposition to each other along this 
dimension of accessibility. Public is to private as the 
transparent is to the opaque, as the announced is to the 
concealed. Similarly, a person's public life is to his or her 

private life as the outer is to the inner realm. 
 
On the other hand, when we speak of public opinion, 
public health, or the public interest, we mean the opinion, 
health, or interest of the whole of the people as opposed to 
that of a part, whether a class or an individual. Public in 
this sense often means “common,” not necessarily 
governmental. The public-spirited or public-minded citizen 
is one concerned about the community as a whole. But in 
the modern world the concepts of governmental and public 
have become so closely linked that in some contexts they 
are interchangeable. The state acts for the whole of the 
society in international relations and makes rules binding 
on the whole internally. Public thus often means official. In 
this sense “a public act” is one that carries official status, 
even if it is secret and therefore not public in the sense of 
being openly visible. Indeed, according to the Oxford 
English Dictionary, private originally signified “not 
holding public office or official position.” As Albert 
Hirschman points out, this is a meaning that survives in the 
army “private,” that is, the “ordinary soldier without any 
rank or position.” Now, of course, private is contrasted 
with public to characterize that which lies beyond the 
state’s boundaries, such as the market or the family. 
 
These different contrasts between public and private lead 
to some apparent conflicts in defining what lies on each 
side of the boundary. One such conflict concerns the 
location of the market. 

 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, this is relevant to this conversation: 
 

To an economist, the marketplace is quintessentially 
private. But to a sociologist or anthropologist concerned 
with culture, the marketplace is quintessentially public — a 
sphere open to utter strangers who nonetheless are able to 
understand the same rules and gestures in what may be a 
highly ritualized process of exchange. While economists 
use the public-private distinction to signify the contrast 
between state and market, analysts of culture — 
particularly those concerned with the roles and relations of 
men and women — take the public sphere to include the 
market as well as politics and contrast them both with the 
private domain of the family. In this sense, the 
public-private distinction is sometimes taken to mark out 
the contested boundaries of the male and female worlds — 
a usage that takes us back to the notion of the private as 
being more closed, more shielded from contact and view, 
than the open encounters of public life . . . 
 
The general meanings of privatization, then, correspond to 
withdrawals from any of these variously conceived public 
spheres. Historians and sociologists write about the 
withdrawal of affective interest and involvement from the 
sphere of public sociability. For example, in their work on 
the development of the modern family, Peter Willmott and 
Michael Young argue that as the modern household 
became equipped with larger homes, private cars, 
televisions, and other resources, more time and capital 
came to be invested in the private interior of the family and 
less in public taverns, squares, and streets. Similarly, 
Richard Sennett suggests that since the eighteenth century 
modern society has seen a decline of public culture and 



1044 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2016 

sociability, a . . . [broadening] of public life and public 
space, a privatization of emotion. Such arguments shade 
into a second meaning of privatization: a shift of individual 
involvements from the whole to the part — that is, from 
public action to private concerns — the kind of 
privatization that Hirschman describes as one swing in a 
public-private cycle of individual action. In this sort of 
public-to-private transition, the swing is not from 
sociability to intimacy but from civic concern to the pursuit 
of self-interest. 
 
Privatization can also signify another kind of withdrawal 
from the whole to the part: an appropriation by an 
individual or a particular group of some good formerly 
available to the entire public or community. Like the 
withdrawal of involvement, privatization in the sense of 
private appropriation has obvious implications for the 
distribution of welfare. 
 
From these meanings it is but a short step to the sense of 
privatization as a withdrawal from the state, not of 
individual involvements, but of assets, functions, indeed 
entire institutions. Public policy is concerned with 
privatization at this level. But the two forms, the 
privatization of individual involvements and the 
privatization of social functions and assets, are certainly 
related, at least by ideological kinship. A confidence that 
pursuit of private gain serves the larger social order leads 
to approval for both self-interested behaviour and private 
enterprise.  
 
Thus far I have been . . . [speaking] about privatization as 
if both spheres, public and private, were already 
constituted. But in a longer perspective, their constitution 
and separation represent complementary processes. 

 
I’m going to move on a little bit to the second part of this 
discussion, where he talks about the political meaning of 
privatization. So I’ll pick it up there: 

 
B. The Political Meaning of Privatization 
 
The term privatization did not gain wide circulation in 
politics until the late 1970s and early 1980s. With the rise 
of conservative governments in Great Britain, the United 
States, and France, privatization has come primarily to 
mean two things: . . . any shift of activities or functions 
from the state to the private sector; and, more specifically, 
. . . any shift of the production of goods and services from 
public to private. 

 
So there’s a definition right there, Mr. Speaker, of privatization 
that has not been used by this government for its bill. I’ll go on 
to quote: 
 

Besides directly producing services, governments establish 
the legal framework of societies and regulate social and 
economic life, and they finance services that are privately 
produced and consumed. The first, broader definition of 
privatization includes all reductions in the regulatory and 
spending activity of the state. The second, more specific 
definition of privatization . . . [includes] deregulation and 
spending cuts except when they result in a shift from 

public to private in the production of goods and services. 
This more focused definition is the one that I shall use 
here. It leaves open the possibility that privatization may 
not actually result in less government spending and 
regulation — indeed, may even unexpectedly increase 
them. 
 
Several further points about my definition need 
clarification. First, the public sector here includes agencies 
administered as part of the state and organizations owned 
by it, such as state enterprises and independent public 
authorities like the British Broadcasting Corporation or the 
Port Authority of New York and New Jersey. In the private 
sector I include not only commercial firms but also 
informal and domestic activities, voluntary associations, 
cooperatives, and private nonprofit corporations. 
 
Secondly, in the definition I am using, privatization refers 
to shifts from the public to the private sector, not shifts 
within sectors. 

 
And I think that’s part of the confusion, that this clarity that the 
minister’s advocating is actually creating more confusion. So I 
am going to say that again: 
 

Secondly, in the definition I am using, [and this is the 
author, Paul Starr] privatization refers to shifts from the 
public to the private sector, not shifts within sectors. 

 
So in the sense of saying that privatization means anything in a 
controlling share in a corporation, that doesn’t fit at all within 
this particular definition of privatization at all because what we 
see here is a shift within the sector itself. There will be a shift 
within a Crown corporations of ownership from a 100 per cent 
share to a 51 per cent share, and that has all kinds of legal 
implications that I’ll get into later. So I’ll continue on with the 
quote: 
 

Thus the conversion of the state agency into an 
autonomous public authority or state-owned enterprise is 
not privatization, though it may well put the enterprise on a 
commercial footing.  

 
And I think we see that with a lot of our Crowns here, Mr. 
Speaker. Carrying on with the quote:  
 

This was the objective, for example, of the conversion of 
the United States Post Office into a public corporation, the 
United States Postal Service, in 1971. Similarly, the 
conversion of a private nonprofit organization into a 
profit-making firm also is not privatization, though it, too, 
may orient the firm toward the market. Both of these 
intrasectoral changes might be described as 
commercialization; in the case of public agencies, 
commercialization is sometimes a preliminary stage to 
privatization. 

 
And we certainly saw that, Mr. Speaker, with the 
commercialization of our land titles registry not too long ago. 
Carrying on with the quote: 
 

Third, shifts from publicly to privately produced services 
may result not only from a deliberate government action, 



November 1, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1045 

such as a sale of assets, but also from the choices of 
individuals or firms that a government is unwilling or 
unable to satisfy or control. In many countries . . . 

 
And this is something that we need to watch out for, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

In many countries, private demand for education, health 
care or . . . income has outstripped public provision. As a 
result, private schooling, medical care, and pensions have 
grown to relatively larger proportions. This is 
demand-driven privatization. When privatization is a 
demand-driven process, it does not require an absolute 
reduction in publicly produced services. Stagnation or slow 
growth in the public sector may be the cause. In some 
socialist societies, the growth of an “underground” 
economy represents a form of privatization that is not a 
planned development (though it may well result from 
development planning). In other words, as a process, 
privatization encompasses more institutional changes than 
those brought about by self-conscious privatization 
policies. It seems useful, then, to distinguish instances of 
privatization according to whether they are prominently 
policy- or demand-driven. 
 

[16:00] 
 
And in this case, Mr. Speaker, it may be a little bit of both. We 
know that this is definitely a policy-driven move by this 
government, that they are looking to access some sources of 
funds. And the Premier himself has said, you know, the Auto 
Fund might want to invest in the Crown corporations, a very 
interesting concept when you think that a Crown is investing in 
a Crown. And how that will affect the other minority 
shareholders is kind of mind-boggling. 
 
But also there’s a demand-driven aspect to this because we 
know that there’s slow growth in the public sector. We know 
there’s stagnation in the revenues that this government has been 
ripping through for the last 10 years. And so they’re kind of in a 
pickle, Mr. Speaker. They’ve put themself in that position and 
now they’re stuck. So this is, as I said before, is a bit of a 
backdoor entry into dealing with a problem that they’ve created 
for themselves, but it will have significant long-term effects on 
the entire province and in future generations here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So moving on to the fourth item when we’re talking about the 
political meaning of privatization, I’ll quote again: 
 

Fourth, if one shifts attention from the sphere of production 
to the sphere of consumption, one may alternatively define 
privatization as the substitution of private goods for public 
goods. A public good, in the economist’s sense, has two 
distinguishing properties: One person’s consumption does 
not preclude another’s; and excluding anyone from 
consumption is costly, if not impossible. The prototypical 
example is fresh air. A public good need not be produced 
by government. A broadcast television program is a public 
good even if it is provided by a commercially owned 
station; but videotape is not, nor is programming on 
subscription cable services. Any shift toward these forms 
of nonbroadcast television represents a privatization of 

consumption, even if the local cable service is municipally 
owned. 

 
Depending on whether one is talking about the locus of 
production or the forms of consumption, privatization can 
mean rather different things. In regard to production, 
“privatization of health care” might mean a transfer of 
medical facilities from public to private ownership; 
regarding consumption, it might refer to a shift in 
expenditures from public health (environmental protection, 
vaccinations, etc.) to individual medical care. Similarly, 
“privatization of transportation” might refer to the 
conversion of an urban bus system from public to 
commercial ownership; or it might mean a shift in 
ridership from buses to private automobiles, regardless of 
whether the bus company is municipal or commercial. 
Strictly speaking, public transportation is not a public 
good, since exclusion is possible and only one person at a 
time can sit in a seat; however, because buses and trains 
are open to the public at large, common carriers are a 
distinctly public form of consumption compared to private 
cars. More generally, the historical process described by 
Willmott and Young — the concentration of consumption 
activities in the home — represented a shift toward more 
privatized forms of consumption. This shift has been the 
source of much criticism of contemporary society, as in 
John Kenneth Galbraith’s famous contrast of private 
opulence and public squalor in The Affluent Society. In this 
discussion, whenever referring specifically to a shift from 
public goods to private goods, or from common carriers to 
private carriers, I use the phrase “privatization of 
consumption.” Otherwise, I take privatization to mean a 
shift in the locus of the production of services from public 
to private. 
 
Four types of government policies can bring about such a 
shift. First, the cessation of public programs and 
disengagement of government from specific kinds of 
responsibilities represent an implicit form of privatization. 
At a less drastic level, the restriction of publicly produced 
services in volume, availability, or quality may lead to a 
shift by consumers toward privately produced and 
purchased substitutes (called “privatization by attrition” 
when a government lets public services run down). 
 

And that’s certainly something I think we’ve seen with 
something like STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company], 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

Second, privatization may take the explicit form of 
transfers of public assets to private ownership, through sale 
or lease of public land, infrastructure, and enterprises. 
Third, instead of directly producing some service, the 
government may finance private services, for example, 
through contracting-out or vouchers. 

 
And that’s certainly a method that we’ve seen this government 
attempt with its efforts to privatize imaging services for our 
health care system, our public health care system. So that’s a 
type of privatization right there. 
 

Finally, privatization may result from the deregulation of 
entry into activities previously treated as public 



1046 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2016 

monopolies. 
 
And I think in the case of SaskTel, you know, for many, many, 
many years it did have a monopoly here in Saskatchewan, but 
deregulation has caused it to enter into the commercial sphere 
and to act in competition with other companies. And I think it 
has performed admirably well. And I’ll get into some of the 
benefits of having these Crowns on an economic level and from 
a taxpayers’ level in a few minutes. 
 
So I think that’s as far as I want to go in terms of this particular 
article and the meaning of privatization. This discussion of the 
definition of privatization is actually, you know, 20 pages long. 
So it certainly wouldn’t work for insertion into an interpretation 
Act which, as I pointed out earlier, is an extraordinary, 
extraordinary deviation from what every other interpretation 
Act has in its definitions clause. So I think that’s something that 
we really need to pay attention to and ask, what exactly is the 
government getting at here when they’re going to do something 
so drastically different from what every other jurisdiction does? 
 
Now I was thinking about the process. Once the government 
inserts its pseudo-clarified definition of privatization, which I 
take exception to, and they start selling off shares in individual 
Crown corporations — let’s say SGI for example — how is that 
going to work? How is that going to look? And how are the 
shareholders going to be treated? 
 
One of the things I think that comes up right away from a legal 
perspective is, what happens to the rights of minority 
shareholders? The first question is, does The Business 
Corporations Act even apply now to this corporation, the 
Crown corporation? Because we have individual private 
shareholders which are normally governed under the provisions 
of The Business Corporations Act. So that’s my first question 
is, does The Business Corporations Act extend now to this new 
privatization, or will the government have to introduce new 
bills each time they privatize any one of these Crowns or don’t 
privatize it when they sell off 49 per cent of the shares? What’s 
the legal treatment of these shareholders? Because as you know, 
Mr. Speaker, there is a large body of law and legal 
interpretation in jurisprudence that deals with securities, that 
deals with shareholders’ rights, majority shareholders’ rights, 
interpreting unanimous shareholder agreements, and the like. 
And this is a very complex area of legal practice and not one 
that I have a lot of experience with. But what I do know is that 
it’s complicated. And when you now are having this . . . Is it 
quasi-private or semi-public? I don’t know which one it is, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I’m just going to talk a little bit about what minority 
shareholder rights might be. And I’m taking this from an article 
that came off the Internet from a law company called Nelligan 
O’Brien Payne, and this was published on August 16th, 2011. 
And in this case, corporations . . . It talks a little bit about 
minority shareholder rights. So what is the rights of minority 
shareholders? 
 

Corporations operate on a system of majority rule [and I’m 
quoting here] and this necessitates the codification of 
minority shareholder rights to ensure that the interests of 
the minority are protected and not overlooked by the 
majority. A shareholder . . . [owning] a substantial amount 

of shares within a corporation has tremendous power to 
orchestrate corporate activity, potentially at the expense of 
minority shareholders. 
 

So right away we know we’re going to have a majority 
shareholder here. This is the Government of Saskatchewan or 
the Crown in right of Saskatchewan is going to be the majority 
shareholder. So already it will have a tremendous power to 
orchestrate the activity of that corporation, potentially at the 
expense of the minority shareholders. 
 
So first of all, who wants to invest in that kind of company if 
you don’t have protections? You need to know if those 
protections are going to be afforded to these minority 
shareholders. Now there are laws in place. And this particular 
article comes from Ontario, and so they talk about what kind of 
rights the minority shareholders have. In particular, the main 
right that minority shareholders have is about when a special 
resolution is required for the company. 
 
So what is a special resolution? Well normally in almost all 
legislation across Canada, it requires a two-thirds vote. So in 
this case the minorities will have the right to cast a vote or at 
least some of them will have a say because it needs two-thirds 
of the vote. So if the Crown owns 51 per cent, then the minority 
shareholders can control these special resolutions because 66 
per cent is required. Two-thirds is required. So that makes me 
wonder, are we willing as Crowns to give away that power to 
change fundamental aspects of the corporation to the minority 
shareholders? 
 
And as ratepayers in SaskPower, I’m not sure that’s something I 
would be prepared to do. Or as, you know, a person who’s a 
SaskTel subscriber or get my automobile insurance plates from 
SGI or maybe SOCO [Saskatchewan Opportunities 
Corporation] and crop insurance, all of these Crowns, I’m not 
sure as citizens whether we’re prepared to give up some of our 
rights as the Crown in right of Saskatchewan to minority 
shareholders whose purpose for investing is completely 
unrelated to the establishment of why that Crown was 
established in the first place. 
 
So this article goes on to say, and I’ll quote: 
 

A special resolution is defined under the CBCA [which is 
the Canada Business Corporations Act] as a resolution 
passed by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the 
votes cast by the shareholders who voted in respect of that 
resolution or signed by all the shareholders entitled to vote. 
It is an effective way for minority shareholders to have a 
profound impact on corporate decision-making. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, are we suggesting now that we are going to 
hand over to minority shareholders in our Crowns “. . . a 
profound impact on corporate decision-making?” This is 
something I think we need to think through very carefully 
before this bill gets passed, before this government proceeds 
with muddying the waters on the definition of privatization. 
They’re opening the door to this, and I’m not sure that they’ve 
thought through the consequences. And I’m concerned about 
that. 
 
Now here’s examples, and I’ll read again from the article: 



November 1, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1047 

A common example of when a special resolution is 
required is when a corporation wishes to make certain 
amendments to its articles of incorporation, which are the 
primary rules governing the management of the 
corporation. 

 
And in our case, there would obviously be the founding 
legislation for each one of these particular Crowns. So again 
we’re not sure whether the law applies or not and that again is 
part of the uncertainty that the minister is creating by this 
unprecedented move. 
 
So examples — I’ll continue — of the quote: 
 

Such amendments which require special resolution include, 
but are not limited to: 

Changing the name of the corporation; 
Changing the province in which the registered office is 
located; 
Changing the maximum and minimum numbers of 
shares the corporation may issue; 
Changing the designation of all or any of its shares; and 
Increasing or decreasing the number of directors. 

 
So we have a situation here where the government may decide 
to privatize 49 per cent of the shares of SaskPower, and then 
they decide we’re going to change the designation of those 
shares from a dividend-paying share to a non-voting share, for 
example. I don’t know if that would ever happen but that’s an 
example. 
 
In this case the minority shareholders are now going to have a 
say in how the articles of the SaskPower Corporation, the 
founding principles of SaskPower Corporation, are going to be 
followed. So we need some clarity from the minister on that and 
whether or not the laws of corporations are going to even apply 
because if they do, we’re handing a lot of control over to the 
minority shareholders. 
 
And he talks about control as being the defining element of his 
definition. He’s not talking about control in all its senses. And I 
think that is also shortchanging the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
So I’ll go on, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The rights of minority shareholders are also protected 
under the CBCA and OBCA [and that would be the Ontario 
Business Corporations Act] . . . where a corporation 
intends to sell, lease or exchange all or substantially all of 
its property outside the ordinary course of business. In this 
type of situation a special resolution must be obtained in 
order to carry out such a sale, lease or exchange. 

 
[16:15] 
 
So in this case we may see — I’m trying to think — the Sask 
Gaming Corporation decide to sell or lease or exchange all of 
its property. Now again we have a 51 per cent share or majority 
share, but these minority shareholders, under the special 
resolution votes, have actually a say in whether or not the 
Gaming Corporation would be able to carry out those activities. 
 
So fundamental decisions relating to the activities of our 

Crowns will be controlled by the minority shareholders in the 
event that they form part of the two-thirds majority that are 
required for these special resolution votes. Very, very 
concerning, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One other remedy, and I’m going to speak about this at length 
later on, is the oppression remedy. This is another valuable right 
that minority shareholders have whenever they are dealing with 
a majority shareholder. 
 
And there’s a very good paper written by one of the 
Saskatchewan’s lawyers that I’ll get to in a bit where he goes 
into this in quite a bit of detail. But here’s what this article has 
to say: 
 

The oppression remedy is available under the CBCA and 
the OBCA and it is one of the most powerful tools that 
minority shareholders have to protect their rights. The 
remedy allows a shareholder to commence a claim against 
the corporation in cases where the actions or omissions of 
the corporation or its management are oppressive, unfairly 
prejudicial or unfairly disregard the interests of the 
shareholder. 
 
The oppression remedy, which is broad in scope, has 
gained traction in the past decade. Corporations therefore 
need to consider carefully the impact of its decisions and 
activities with respect to the rights of minority 
shareholders. 
 
When faced with an oppression remedy claim the court has 
wide discretion in choosing appropriate remedies, some of 
which include: 

An order restraining the conduct complained of; 
An order directing the corporation to purchase the shares 
of a shareholder; 
An order compensating an aggrieved person; [and] 
An order liquidating and dissolving the corporation. 

 
These orders can have a significant impact on a 
corporation and are an incentive for corporate owners and 
directors to act appropriately when making decisions 
which materially affect the corporation and its 
shareholders. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that is a powerful, powerful remedy for 
minority shareholders and could actually end up in an order 
liquidating or dissolving the corporation itself if it’s not used 
properly. So this is what we’re handing over. When we have 
Crown corporations that are currently controlled by the 
government and they hand over 49 per cent or even less, to the 
tune of 39 per cent even, that we will be giving these minority 
shareholders certain rights that quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, I 
think should be alarming to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
So I’m going to get into the changes or the impacts for 
corporate shareholders in a little bit. But right now I just want to 
talk a little bit about SGI as one of our Crown corporations and 
sort of its role and some of the impacts that this bill will have 
on some Crown corporations like SGI. 
 
This is an article by Malcolm Bird, Malcolm G. Bird. It’s called 
“The Insuring Crowns: Canada’s Public Auto Insurers,” and 



1048 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2016 

this was written in the spring of 2013 from the University of 
British Columbia, BC Studies. 
 
So he talks about three Western provinces and the public auto 
insurers. So in this case, he’s talking about ICBC [Insurance 
Corporation of British Columbia] from British Columbia, SGI 
from Saskatchewan, and Manitoba Public Insurance or MPI in 
Manitoba. These are three Crown corporations that continue to 
provide automobile insurance to the public. 
 
So I’ll share some of the thoughts from Mr. Bird as I go 
forward here. 
 

In this article I examine three Crown corporations — 
ICBC, SGI, and MPI. I outline both their historical origins 
and their current condition(s). My central premise is that 
these three Crowns help to meet a number of specific 
policy needs of their political masters and that these policy 
functions have significant political value. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when you’re talking about privatizing 
Crowns in the hybrid way, the new creature that this minister is 
creating, you have some fundamental conflict in terms of the 
rights of the minority shareholders and the rights of the public 
in terms of the majority share. So the clash between minority 
shareholder rights and our rights as the public is going to be 
monumental. And I’m not sure how, when you look at 
something like SGI, how on earth is this going to be reconciled 
as the minister moves forward with this crazy and I think 
uncourageous plan, as I mentioned earlier. 
 
So he goes on to say in regards to these three Crowns for auto 
insurance, he says: 
 

This, in conjunction with the dynamics of decision making 
in Canadian provincial governments, has insulated them 
from elimination. Their central value is their capacity to 
provide consistent prices for automobile insurance over 
divergent components of the population as well as over a 
long period of time. I argue that such consistency is more 
valuable to a government than are any possible gains to be 
derived from their replacement by private insurance 
providers operating in a competitive market. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker that raises another question. When you have 
a monopoly on, for example licence plates for cars, there is no 
competitive market. So if we’re going to privatize up to 49 per 
cent of SGI, what we are doing is allowing people to be 
shareholders in monopolies, and we have a monopoly law that 
doesn’t allow that. 
 
So these kinds of things are very, sort of troubling, and I think 
we need to see how the government has thought this through 
and how they will deal with some of these monumental 
problems that will be created by this hybrid, which as far as I 
can tell doesn’t exist anywhere else that I can find. I’ve looked; 
I haven’t found it. It doesn’t mean it doesn’t exist, but certainly 
you would think if the minister’s taking inspiration here, that he 
found inspiration somewhere. Or again is this just a backdoor 
way of trying to get around the Crown protection Act?  
 
It’s hard to say what’s going on, but I know there isn’t a lot of 
evidence out there that suggests that this kind of hybrid 

corporation can easily deal with all the minority shareholder 
rights issues that are raised, and certainly with private 
ownership of monopolies which, as you know, there is a 
considerable body of law protecting consumers against. 
 
So again, you know, how are these private owners wanting the 
government to perform? Obviously they’re going to want to 
make money, so does that mean our rates are going to go up? 
Or how will the rate review panels work for SaskPower and 
SaskEnergy and for SGI when they could actually be sued by 
the minority shareholders for not protecting their interests by 
keeping rates low? 
 
So these are the kinds of concerns that I think, as we go through 
this process and as the government begins to engage in this 
behaviour, their ability to deal with them may have to be 
through amendments to the Crown protection Act — not sure 
— or through very special pieces of legislation that take them 
out of the realm of The Business Corporations Act, take them 
out of the realm of The Income Tax Act, and take them out of 
the realm of the monopolies Act. So, I’m struggling with this, 
Mr. Speaker and I’m not sure that I’ve heard anything that 
would give us any kind of answers for that. 
 
So I’ll go on and talk a little bit more in terms of this article 
regarding the public auto insuring Crowns in Western Canada. 
He talks a little bit about the description and origins of the 
insuring Crowns, and this is what he says about SGI: 
 

The oldest of the insuring Crowns is Saskatchewan’s SGI, 
created in 1945 by Tommy Douglas’s Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation government. Public auto 
insurance started in the first CCF term as a 
sixty-dollar-per-driver yearly premium to cover uninsured 
motorists. This social welfare measure was intended to 
reduce accident-related poverty since, at the time of its 
inception, fewer than 10 percent of drivers carried auto 
insurance, and the province had to cope with the growing 
number of citizens injured from auto-related accidents who 
did not have access to insurance payouts. 

 
That’s hard for us to imagine, Mr. Speaker, is a world where if 
you couldn’t afford auto insurance, you just didn’t have it. And 
if somebody was hurt, you couldn’t pay. So we’ve come a long 
ways from that. He goes on to describe the corporation: 
 

From its modest beginning, SGI evolved quickly into a 
full-fledged public insurance firm. Among the other 
reasons for state intervention in this sector were the 
relatively high cost for policies for Saskatchewan’s 
residents [So the private sector was too expensive], unfair 
and unjust selection criteria for potential customers [People 
were being favoured over other people for insurance], and 
the fact that 90 percent of insurance policies were then 
written by eastern-based insurance firms, which meant that 
significant sums of money were leaving the province. SGI 
was a product of the Government of Saskatchewan’s 
efforts to diversify the provincial economy through the use 
of public Crowns and through non-private enterprises such 
as cooperatives. Its creation met with remarkably little 
resistance from either the industry or individual citizens 
within Saskatchewan. On the ideological front, SGI’s 
creation was congruent with the social democratic 



November 1, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1049 

philosophy that dominated the CCF . . . 
 
So that’s a little bit of the history on SGI. Now he goes into the 
next . . . A further part of his paper is entitled “Why do the 
insuring Crowns continue to exist?” And this is what he has to 
say: 
 

While the creation of these Crowns was a reasonable 
response to the problems that three governments faced in 
the insurance sector, and was roughly congruent with the 
general policy ethos of the time, these factors do not 
explain their continued existence. To understand their 
longevity, I now examine governmental decision making 
within the provincial sphere, the Crowns’ contextual and 
operational functions, and their value to their political 
masters. I argue that the central reason for their continued 
public ownership is the interaction between the mechanics 
of Canadian provincial governments’ decision-making 
processes and the institutional characteristics of this 
particular sector. 

 
He goes on to say: 
 

It’s noteworthy that in two provinces, Manitoba and British 
Columbia, right-of-centre governments have privatized 
other public enterprises, most notably Manitoba Telecom 
Services in 1996 and BC Rail in 2004; and, while British 
Columbia’s Gordon Campbell government discussed 
introducing “full competition” to the auto insurance 
market, this promise was never fulfilled. 

 
The next heading is: 
 

Low consistent costs for drivers 
 
The insuring Crowns operate on a non-profit basis. The 
Crowns’ revenues equal the payments made to motorists in 
order to resolve accident claims, minus administrative 
costs. This structure allows them to provide low-cost 
insurance to their clients when compared to the rates 
charged by private-sector firms in competitive markets. 
 

And again, Mr. Speaker, we run into this beast that’s being 
created here, where 49 per cent of SGI shares, if sold, would 
have a direct conflict with this desire to keep prices low 
because, as you know, shareholders’ sole purpose is to make 
money. And that’s the actual legal creation that we have when 
we create shareholders. And the obligation of the corporation to 
the shareholders is to look out for their best interests, which is 
to make money. 
 
So in terms of selling off 49 per cent of SGI, what is the 
minority rights when it comes to profitability, if in fact the 
policy reason for the existence of SGI is to allow them to 
provide low-cost insurance to their clients? So who’s the client 
here now, Mr. Speaker? I think this raises a lot of questions that 
we don’t have any answers for. 
 
He goes on to say: 
 

The ability to provide price consistency, based on 
demographic and geographic factors over a long period of 
time, translates into real and concrete political value for 

their governing masters. The primary concern for any of 
these governments is for the Crowns to keep insurance 
prices as low and as consistent as possible for the entire 
population. 

 
And certainly, Mr. Speaker, I think this bears out when in 2006 
there was an analysis done of the cost of our public utilities 
across Canada, and perhaps I’ll just refer to that right now. This 
was a study done by Meyers Norris and Penny in 2006, ordered 
by the Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan, and 
it’s entitled the 2006 Basic Utility Bundle Review. And if you 
look on page 16 of that report, appendix 1, this is the CIC 2006 
bundle rankings. And what they did is they bundled together the 
costs of all these public utilities — telephone, electricity, home 
heating, auto insurance — and consistently on all the categories, 
Saskatchewan ranked as the lowest in all of these areas. We 
were number one in terms of major centres. We were number 
one in terms of rural communities, and we were number one in 
terms of northern communities.  
 
And I know the previous minister at the time, the Hon. Pat 
Atkinson, worked very hard on ensuring that Saskatchewan 
people continued to be afforded the lowest bundle rates in 
Canada. And that was a promise that was made and kept by that 
government of the day. 
 
You look at some of the major centres that we were compared 
to. Regina, we were compared . . . Winnipeg, interestingly, and 
Manitoba was actually second in every one of these rankings as 
well. Third, we have Vancouver or British Colombia. Fourth 
was Alberta. Fifth was Montreal, Quebec. Sixth was St. John, 
New Brunswick. Seventh, Prince Edward Island, 
Charlottetown. Eighth we have Halifax. Ninth was St. John’s, 
Newfoundland. And tenth, Mr. Speaker, was Toronto, Ontario. 
So that was just in the major centres category.  
 
In terms of the total provincial rankings, again Saskatchewan 
was first, and our total bundle was $3,418 for a year for 
residential services. And then next was Manitoba, followed by 
B.C., Quebec, Alberta, New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island, 
Nova Scotia, Newfoundland, and again Ontario being dead last 
in terms of the cost of public utilities. 
 
[16:30] 
 
So I think that’s clearly the point that’s being made by the 
author, Mr. Bird, in this article about public auto insurers. So 
some of the other advantages he points out for what he calls 
natural monopolies . . . In this case, our auto insurer is a natural 
monopoly. And he goes on to say this: 
 

The insuring Crowns derive much of their political, policy, 
and economic value from the fact that they are the solitary 
providers of a particular good in a specific market. Since 
providing basic insurance coverage is their exclusive right, 
they enjoy a monopoly position in the compulsory 
component of the auto insurance sector and have a near 
monopoly in the optional coverage segment as well. This 
type of unitary arrangement brings significant efficiencies 
associated with uniform insurance claim policies and 
procedures as well as standardized repair payment and 
administration processes . . . The benefits of these lower 
transactional costs associated with a uniform provider, 



1050 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2016 

then, are distributed among different segments of the 
insurance sector: drivers, stakeholders, the Crowns’ 
unionized employees, and the government. But given the 
public nature of this bureau, such an arrangement holds the 
possibility for undue rent seeking by these entrenched 
interest groups as well as for undue political interference in 
these Crowns’ . . . [corporations]. 

 
So that is certainly something we see as a criticism, Mr. 
Speaker, of the Crowns, is the fact that there are some 
entrenched interest groups that often try to skew things to their 
advantage within the Crown sector. And that’s of course to say 
that nothing’s perfect, and there are always things that we need 
to work on. 
 
He goes on to say: 
 

A monopoly’s value limits potential changes to the 
market’s structure. In political terms, a Crown insurer’s 
value is tied to its unitary or monopoly position, and 
allowing private firms to sell the compulsory auto 
insurance, for instance, could threaten a Crown’s financial 
position since private firms would be inclined to only 
insure the lowest-risk drivers. Such actions could 
jeopardize a Crown’s financial well-being as well as its 
capacity to meet the government’s other policy and 
political objectives. The considerable sunk cost of a 
Crown’s physical assets, likewise, further constrains 
governments from changing the sector’s structure. Once a 
Crown has been established, it assumes an “all or nothing” 
condition because a hybrid market, in which private 
insurance firms play a prominent role, would be difficult to 
establish and to maintain. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think given the hybrid that’s being created 
here by this bill, those problems would continue to apply 
because again we have minority shareholders who are able to 
purchase shares in a monopoly. And there are laws against that, 
so that’s something the government would have to sort out. 
 
And then secondly, the notion of keeping the rates as low as 
possible, the public policy reasons for having auto insurance 
providers would be defeated if the minority shareholders were 
able to exercise their rights for profitability. So these are serious 
concerns that I think we need to look at very carefully as we go 
through this initiative by this government. 
 
Now this article goes on to talk about some other benefits. And 
the heading is: 
 

Ancillary Value: Government Services, Jobs, and Cash 
 
The insuring Crowns have other politically valuable policy 
functions. 
 

And I’ll just stop there. Again for a minority shareholder, they 
don’t care about policy functions. That’s not the role of a 
minority shareholder. So I’ll carry on: 
 

Any changes to their position in the market could 
potentially threaten their ability to provide their services to 
the citizens and their political masters. [Here’s an 
example.] For instance [he says], all the Crowns handle 

driver’s licence and vehicle registration for their respective 
governments and collect driving and parking infraction 
fines. 

 
And we’ve been talking about that in the House here, Mr. 
Speaker, where, you know, the radar tickets that are being given 
through photo radar, all the different things that SGI provides. 
In fact SGI is even paying for policing services. Now if I’m a 
minority shareholder, I’m not sure that’s an expense that I 
would want my investment to look into. 
 
So again, where is the connect between policy reasons for these 
Crowns and the profitability of these Crowns? And I think to 
muddy the waters, as this bill does, really creates some very 
significant issues for these Crowns. I’m afraid we’re going to 
end up in court more often than not. And these are expensive 
procedures that unless we get some very clear answers from this 
government, we’re going to have to see how those issues are 
going to be dealt with. 
 
He goes on to say . . . I’ll just pick up where I left off here. In a 
recent year in British Columbia, for example, ICBC — this was 
in 2010 — spent $82 million providing these two non-insurance 
functions to the provincial government, which is the drivers’ 
licence and registration, and the collection of the fines. 
Eighty-two million dollars is what ICBC spent in 2010 on that. 
I’ll go on: 
 

The provision of these ancillary services was not initially 
part of their mandates . . . originated later in their life 
cycles in an effort to help their respective governments in 
their efforts to reform the provision of public services and 
to reduce overall costs. MPI and SGI also recently worked 
with Canadian and American border services to offer 
enhanced provincial drivers’ licences that meet increased 
American security restrictions. This change allows citizens 
with special enhanced licences to cross the border using 
their provincial drivers’ licences instead of a passport. All 
three provincial Crowns sponsor various road safety and 
driver education campaigns to reduce accidents and the 
associated societal and private costs. 

 
And again, Mr. Speaker, if we are selling off 49 per cent of this 
Crown to private shareholders, I don’t know if the Auto Fund 
would buy into SGI or not. That would be a bit weird. But in 
the event that private investors come ahead, they’re not going to 
want to see their profits being diverted to road safety and driver 
education campaigns, for example. 
 
And when you think of all the public policy and the role that 
SGI has taken in a greater-public-good context, the idea of 
privatizing 49 per cent of it really throws into question, I think, 
what that corporation will look like and whether it can carry on 
with its mandate. 
 
And again, if the mandate gets changed, then we’re again back 
in the situation where the minority shareholders through the 
special provisions clauses can challenge the changing of a 
mandate even. So the questions just keep piling up, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The next quote I’ll start off here . . . I’ll continue I guess from 
where I left off: 



November 1, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1051 

In some cases, the insuring Crowns have funded specific 
road improvements in an effort to improve safety at 
particular locations, but this can attract some sharp 
criticism. 

 
This was from the Winnipeg Free Press in 2012. The author 
says: 
 

These functions all have a significant amount of political 
value since, in the absence of these Crowns, a government 
would still be obligated to provide such services in 
addition to having to regulate a privatized marketplace. 

 
These Crowns provide well-paying jobs to their citizens. In 
Manitoba and Saskatchewan, MPI and SGI employ two 
thousand and nineteen hundred people, respectively, and 
these jobs are valued, especially given these provinces’ 
peripheral positions in Canada’s political economy and the 
limited number of large private-sector firms that are 
headquartered in each province. ICBC’s fifty-two hundred 
employees, many of whom work at its head office in North 
Vancouver, are also politically significant given that the 
Lower Mainland has lost many head offices over the last 
ten years along with the economic activity and 
employment they spur. Since many private insurance firms 
are based outside of these three provinces, often in central 
Canada, any changes to their respective insurance regimes 
could result in a net loss of jobs from each province. 

 
And we’ve seen that here, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan with 
respect to insurers like Great-West Life. And we know the 
impact that can have on a community when a head office moves 
locations. 
 
He goes on to talk about capital, Mr. Speaker: 
 

These Crowns control large pools of capital. MPI, for 
instance, has approximately $1.7 billion in assets that are 
entirely invested within Manitoba in the form of 
provincial, municipal, hospital, and school bonds. These 
assets are important to the Manitoba government and the 
province as a whole. The focus on indigenous capital 
differentiates MPI from its two cousins . . . [since] both 
have significant corporate equities and bond holdings. In 
2010, the British Columbia government announced it 
would take $778 million from ICBC over three years, and 
BC’s 2012 budget called for the government to withdraw 
$497 million over two years from ICBC’s capital reserves 
and to place it in the general revenue fund. (Ostensibly, 
these revenues come from ICBC’s reserves comprised 
from the optional portion of its insurance products, but 
making such distinctions is difficult given the unitary 
nature of ICBC and its operations.) What could be more 
valuable to a government than a pool of money that can be 
used to meet the ever-increasing demands for public 
services? 

 
And that’s already inherently within the Auto Fund here in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That can be invested in all kinds 
of public services, Mr. Speaker, and we certainly don’t need 
to change the definition of privatization in the curious, hybrid 
way that this minister is now doing in order to have the Auto 
Fund benefit the people of Saskatchewan. It just doesn’t 

make sense. The government can do that through legislation. 
They certainly don’t have to do it through the back door 
through this weird change to The Interpretation Act. 
 
He goes on to say: 
 

SGI, too, has significant capital reserves, but there is no 
political interference in how or where it is invested, over 
and above concerns regarding risk and return . . .” 

 
So we already have the best of both worlds here, Mr. Speaker, 
with respect to SGI. And now this Premier’s desire to somehow 
give the Auto Fund more flexibility? I mean it lacks common 
sense, Mr. Speaker, and I think it really speaks to the misguided 
and somewhat desperate nature of this government’s fiscal 
management. 
 
The last piece I want to share with the House regarding this 
particular article is in relation to insurance rates and socializing 
the risk. And I’ll start here: 
 

Automobile insurance rates are a politically significant 
household cost. All provincial governments are acutely 
aware of the potential for significant political problems 
stemming from increases to auto insurance rates. 
 

And I’ll interject there. Again, if we have minority shareholders 
whose expectation is to derive maximum benefit from their 
investment, is that something that can jive? Or is it an actual 
conflict, Mr. Speaker? I’ll carry on. 
 

Since all three insuring Crowns are public agencies, there 
is a heightened political sensitivity to this issue in these 
provinces, but such sensitivity is not limited to the 
governments of the insuring Crowns. Bernard Lord, New 
Brunswick’s premier in 2003, almost lost an election over 
the significant rise in auto insurance prices that occurred in 
his province. Despite the fact that New Brunswick’s 
insurance market was regulated and competitive, voters 
still held the provincial government responsible for 
significant premium increases. Similarly, Howard Pawley, 
Manitoba’s premier for much of the 1980s, noted in his 
autobiography how a steep rise in auto insurance rates 
sparked a considerable political issue. Canada is a large 
country with a small population; automobiles are by far the 
most important means of transportation, and any increase 
in the cost of operating a car is met with strong resistance. 
 

He goes on to say: 
 

The insuring Crowns use their own risk assessment 
methods to evaluate clients. Private-sector firms, for the 
most part, use a number of demographic and geographic 
factors to assess the risks associated with insuring a 
specific individual and to set premiums to reflect those 
potential risks. Risk assessments are based upon 
aggregated statistical data and are applied to individuals 
according to a set number of characteristics. Not 
surprisingly, such a methodology often invokes stern 
criticism, given the potential for discriminatory and/or 
arbitrary premium assessments resulting, for example, 
from using home postal codes to set rates. The 
private-sector insurance industry, however, views this type 



1052 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2016 

of assessment as a legitimate business practice. An 
executive with IBC echoes this view when responding to 
these specific concerns: “The use of territory is a good 
predictor of risk, which is what insurance is based on.” In 
practice, this means that individuals who live in specific 
geographic areas and who are young and male pay 
substantially higher premiums than do other cohorts. 
 
The insuring Crowns assess individuals based on their 
driving history. SGI states this explicitly: “Our philosophy 
is that all drivers should be treated equally unless their 
driving records show that they are at a greater risk for 
causing a collision.” 
 

And as you can see, Mr. Speaker, that alone is a remarkable 
difference in terms of how our Crown auto insurer treats 
individuals much differently than the private world. And again, 
if I was a minority shareholder investing in SGI, which is a very 
profitable business, I would wonder why I couldn’t get more 
profit, and why we’re using that sort of assessment of drivers’ 
records as opposed to using what every other private insurance 
company uses. 
 
So these are questions that again we’re going to be looking to 
this government and to this minister to provide us some 
answers. 
 
The final thing I’ll share, and this is near the end of this article, 
is this: 
 

One must also keep in mind the ancillary services that 
these Crowns provide. [I’ve talked about that a little 
already, Mr. Speaker.] Such programs as driver licence and 
vehicle registration, road safety programs, and fine 
collection all have value to their political masters [it 
wouldn’t to the minority shareholders, though] and any 
changes to the insurance regime could threaten their 
capacity to provide these services. Also in the equation are 
those vested interests, such as unionized workers, 
insurance brokers, and auto body shops, that would fight 
long and hard against any governmental actions that might 
threaten their privileged positions. The loss of the large 
pools of financial capital that these Crowns control, and a 
reduction of the well-paying jobs that they provide, are two 
additional problems that any government contemplating 
altering the insurance regime in each province would have 
to manage. 
 

And that’s the end of the quote, and that’s the limit of what I’m 
going to take out of that particular article, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[16:45] 
 
Now I just want to talk a little bit about some of the benefits we 
have derived from the Crowns in the past. And of course I’m 
going to focus on the economic benefits. And I’m just going to 
find the dividends page here. 
 
I don’t know if people would have a sense of how much we’ve 
received from dividends over the past few years. From 2006 
until 2015-16, we’ve received significant dividends from many 
of these Crowns. And I would like to ask members to take a 
guess in terms of how much we’ve actually earned but I won’t 

make anybody guess . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Actually 
billions. My colleague says millions and millions. It’s actually 
billions. Since 2006, this government has put $3.117 billion into 
the General Revenue Fund from these Crowns, so SaskPower, 
SaskTel, SaskEnergy, SaskWater. 
 
ISC [Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan] was 
contributing around 15 to $20 million a year until it was 
privatized in 2014, so that’s money forgone already. 
 
SGI has consistently provided . . . last year it was $47 million 
into our General Revenue Fund to help with the costs for the 
programs that we want in Saskatchewan and that we want to 
continue. 
 
Also SOCO has provided some dividends as well. 
 
One thing I don’t see on here I guess — well it’s not a CIC 
dividend — but is whether or not . . . We don’t know if the 
GTH is actually turning a profit yet or not. 
 
But these revenues, Mr. Speaker, when you look at them, will 
. . . They are sustaining this particular government in terms of 
its ability to manage, or inability to manage, I think. 
 
And the other thing I wanted to mention at this point in time 
was the record of this government in relation to the Growth and 
Financial Security Fund because we know that in 2008 the 
balance in the Growth and Financial Security Fund was 
supposed to be 1.3 billion. But they actually drew out more than 
they anticipated so it was 1.2 billion. That’s in 2008. And guess 
what, Mr. Speaker? At the end of last fiscal year, it was zero. 
 
So we’ve seen a withdrawal, a depletion of the rainy day fund 
from $1.3 billion in 2008 to actually zero. And these are during 
times when the government was drawing down large dividends 
from its Crown corporations through the CIC and obviously in 
receipt of considerable, considerable record-breaking revenues 
from our natural resources sector. So that’s something I think 
that we have to be very cognizant of and concerned about. 
 
I’m going to talk a little bit now just about some of the things 
that happened when Mike Harris was Premier of Ontario, and 
this is in relation to the LCBO [Liquor Control Board of 
Ontario] — or LCBO as they call it in Ontario — the Liquor 
Control Board of Ontario. And this is an article again by 
Malcolm Bird. In this case it was in The Canadian Political 
Science Review, and the date of this article is September 2010. 
The title of the article is “Radical Institutional Change at a 
Crown Corporation: the Liquor Control Board of Ontario, 
1985-2010.” And he starts off by saying this: 
 

Of Canada’s 400 largest corporations, forty are 
state-owned Crown corporations. Terence Corcoran, editor 
of the Financial Post Magazine’s annual report on 
Corporate Canada, laments their continued existence. He, 
and many like him, continue to view state-owned Crowns 
as inefficient providers of goods and services, as well as 
. . . both poorly managed and governed corporate entities. 
But his views on them appear to go deeper than this. It is as 
if their public ownership somehow disqualifies them as 
legitimate firms when compared to their private sector 
counterparts. Such strong normative views are unfortunate, 



November 1, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1053 

not merely because they fail to take into account the 
significant role Crowns have played in the development of 
Canada throughout its history, but because they prevent 
such critics from understanding or appreciating the 
incredible organizational reforms that the many Crowns 
have undergone. These are not the same stodgy Crowns of 
yesteryear. One example of a Crown corporation that has 
experienced this type of significant institutional change is 
the Liquor Control Board of Ontario (LCBO), which has 
gone through major changes to both its internal 
organization and its external governance procedures and 
structures over the last twenty-five years. The LCBO has 
gone from a poorly run, patronage-ridden, inefficient 
retailer to an award winning, dynamic retailer that is 
widely regarded as the leader in liquor retailing and 
marketing. 

 
So this is a very thorough examination of how LCBO managed 
to change from its stodgy former self to an actually modernized 
Crown that’s actually the envy of many in the private sector. 
 
So in the conclusion of this paper — I won’t go through a lot of 
the paper, but I do want to share with the Assembly some of the 
words from the conclusion — this is what Mr. Bird has to say: 
 

The above case study of the LCBO study illustrates some 
important points regarding institutional change within a 
publicly owned and operated Crown corporation. The key 
event in the evolution of the LCBO was the . . . [internally] 
imposed shock, coming from the Peterson Liberal 
government, which gave the directive to modernize the 
archaic LCBO. This directive from the executive, in 
conjunction with the real powers given to the early 
reformers, were the key “critical junctures” that redirected 
the LCBO, sending it down a new path, on its way to 
becoming an effective and efficient retailer, better able to 
meet the needs of its political superiors regardless of their 
partisan stripes. Such an event was important, since it 
meant that by the time the Harris Conservatives came to 
power in the mid 1990s, the LCBO was already well 
positioned, in its existing form, to help meet some of the 
Harris government’s needs. Effective operational and 
political leadership at the LCBO also helped solidify its 
new positive organizational trajectory. 
 
But, the decisions of all Ontario governments, including 
the Harris Tories, were very much influenced by the 
political and historical context within which this institution 
exists. The decision to retain ownership of the LCBO in 
public hands and the manner in which the LCBO 
developed its marketing strategies reflect the political and 
historical factors at play. In particular, they reflect an 
understanding on the part of the Harris Tories, that any 
attempt to privatize would be met with strong resistance 
from suppliers and other retailers in the alcohol market, 
and that Ontario has traditionally had, and to a certain 
extent, continues to have a conservative social and political 
culture, one that remains apprehensive about making 
alcohol more freely available to the public. These factors, 
when combined with the organizational reforms to the 
LCBO already underway, helped to scupper any radical 
plans to privatize this institution. The proactive, 
policy-making potential of any government is severely 

limited by historical imposed institutional factors. No 
policy field is a “blank slate” but rather, is inhabited by 
significant actors that are used to certain consistencies; 
these factors limit government actions and decisions. The 
liquor distribution system in Ontario and the changes made 
to both the LCBO’s internal operations and its governance 
structure were made within a context whereby history and 
institutional configurations played a paramount role. 

 
Now one can only imagine, Mr. Speaker, what would have 
happened in Saskatchewan had this government positioned 
SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority] in the 
same frame. I’m just going to go on with a couple more quotes 
from this article, Mr. Speaker. He’s talking about changes, 
government organizational changes, and he said: 
 

To this list, we can add three other critical factors 
necessary for the successful reorganization of public 
Crowns: a formal ending of political interference into 
day-to-day business decisions [I don’t think that’s 
happening here]; increased allotments of capital, which are 
needed to improve the physical and human infrastructure 
[again, I’m not sure that’s happening]; thirdly, and the 
slow and careful, incremental manner that changes are 
brought about, which reflect governmental sensitivity 
toward negative, public responses to such changes. These 
external governance and internal reforms are necessary to 
make any changes possible within a public organization. 
 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, that demonstrates, in terms of the 
LCBO in Ontario, what is possible if a government turns its 
mind to making these radical changes from within rather than 
simply selling off 49 per cent and hoping that the market forces 
will provide the coffers with that much-needed cash that seems 
to have gone missing through radical spending sprees and other 
political factors, Mr. Speaker. So that’s another article by Mr. 
Bird. 
 
There’s another paper that I’d like to refer to now and it just 
talks a little bit about . . . The title is this: “Crown Corporations 
and Co-Operatives as Coping Mechanisms in Regional 
Economic Development.” This is written by Murray Rice and 
Darren Lavoie and it’s found in The Canadian Geographer, 
winter 2005. And this is from the introduction of that paper, Mr. 
Speaker. He says: 
 

This paper focuses attention on two specific types of 
businesses that have long-term associations with regional 
economic development efforts in Canada. 

 
And we know that’s something this government has been very 
interested in. 
 

Crown, or state-owned, corporations have been used by 
various levels of governments as instruments to implement 
a variety of government policies, as well as specific tools 
meant to assist directly in regional development, whether 
as sources of employment or as means of providing 
services and infrastructure seen by government as 
important in encouraging further development. 

 
Now again I’ll pause, Mr. Speaker. Think about this for a 
minute: if we have minority shareholders in these corporations, 



1054 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2016 

the public policy reasons for their existence are going to be 
continually challenged. And I think that is the main concern that 
keeps coming to me as we think through the implications of this 
hybrid form of privatization that this government is proposing 
in The Interpretation Act. 
 
It says here that . . . He goes on to say: “Co-operatives . . .” 
Well he speaks about co-operatives as well. I won’t mention 
that right now, but I’ll go on in the next part of the paragraph: 
 

While co-operatives and Crown corporations differ as to 
their ownership, organisation and legal basis, the two 
business forms share a common purpose in acting as an 
alternative to Canada’s dominant, market-based economy, 
enabling a cross-section of the community to participate in 
and influence local, regional and even national economic 
development. Crown corporations and co-operatives have 
been used by local communities and broader regions to 
effect economic change and promote economic stability. 
While recognising the unique characteristics and roles of 
both the business forms, this study focuses on the shared 
use of Crown corporations and co-operatives to influence 
and promote . . . economic development. 

 
He goes on to say: 
 

The operation of Crown corporations in particular has been 
an especially visible means . . . 

 
I’m going to keep going. Oh. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — Excuse the interruption. I do have an 
introduction to do quickly, if you would. Aaron Yohnke is in 
our west gallery. Give a wave there, Aaron. He’s a good friend 
of mine and he’s with PCL, and he’s literally building the 
country and the province with the important work that they do 
at work, and I just would like everyone to please welcome him 
to his Assembly. 
 
It being close to 5 p.m., this Assembly stands recessed until 
7 p.m. tonight. 
 
[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 
 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1021 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1021 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1021 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1021 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1021 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1054 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1021 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1021 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1022 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1022 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1022 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1022 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1023 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1023 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1023 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Support for People With Intellectual Disabilities 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1023 
 New City Council in Prince Albert 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1024 
 Bethany Pioneer Village Celebrates 60th Anniversary 
  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1024 
 Organization for Heritage Languages Banquet and Awards 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1024 
 New Beginnings Campaign Benefits Saskatchewan Hospital 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1024 
 Prairie Prism Multicultural Event 
  Buckingham ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1025 
 Carbon Capture Facility Uses Green Technology 
  Carr .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1025 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Auditor’s Report and Details of Land Transaction 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1025 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1025 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1026 
 State of Provincial Finances 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1028 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1028 
 Provisions of The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1028 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1029 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1029 
 Hospital Laundry Services 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1029 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1029 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1030 
CONDOLENCE MOTIONS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1030 
 Cyril Pius MacDonald 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1030 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1031 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1031 
 Norman MacAuley 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1033 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1033 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1034 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1035 
 



 

 Robert “Bob” Larter 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1036 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1037 
  Carr .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1038 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1038 
 Larry Wayne Birkbeck 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1038 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1039 
TRANSMITTAL MOTION 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1040 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 40 — The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’interprétation 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1040 
 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


