






















































Hansard: June 02, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 10A  THURSDAY, JUNE 2, 2016, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Hon. Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Hon. Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Merriman, Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 51; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Maurice Riou http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 259 
 June 2, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
privilege to introduce to you and through you to all the 
members in the Assembly this morning a great group of 
students from Fairview School in Swift Current, Saskatchewan. 
Maybe they could give us a wave. They’re grade 5 students, 
Mr. Speaker, and they’re joined today by their teachers: 
Rochelle Finell, Anthony Rolheiser, and Jolene Hornung. And I 
think the chaperones include Brandy Westbury, Jenn Berg, 
Darryk Noble, and Jody Knutson, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I am a proud alumni of Fairview School. I went there for grades 
1 through 7, and it only took me the seven years to get that 
done. And it is a great school; it’s a very important part of the 
community in which Tami and I and the family live as well. 
And we’re grateful, not just to the teachers that work there, but 
to all of the staff at the school and their community involvement 
on the south side of Swift Current. I’d ask all members to join 
me in welcoming these students to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from North 
Battleford. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of this Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce three gentlemen seated in your gallery this morning. 
I’d like to introduce Gil Le Dressay, the vice-president of 
refinery operations. These gentlemen are all from our Co-op 
Refinery here in Regina: Brad DeLorey, the director of public 
affairs — give us a wave gentlemen, please — and Andrew 
Swenson, communications manager. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Rochdale will be reading 
a member’s statement later this morning highlighting some of 
the great work that is being done at the refinery right here in 
Regina. So I would ask all members to please join with me in 
welcoming these gentlemen to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Requesting an 
extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to join with the minister opposite and welcome some economic 
leaders that are here with us today from the Co-op Refinery 
Complex. 

I had the pleasure of joining these leaders at the unveiling of an 
incredibly innovative waste water recycling system that they’ve 
built out at the Co-op Refinery, a system that makes this 
operation incredibly sustainable, actually eliminating the draw 
on Regina water. And of course this is a very important project 
to our province as a whole and to Regina. At a cost of over 
$200 million, this is impressive, forward-thinking leadership, 
the kind of leadership that I think will be exemplary for industry 
not just across our province but in North America, a biological 
process in fact that they’ve put forward. 
 
And of course this refinery is incredibly important to the 
economy not only of our province but certainly of Regina, and 
that expansion that they’ve put forward is something very 
important to all of us. So to Gil Le Dressay, vice-president; 
Brad DeLorey; Andrew Swenson; and certainly Scott Banda 
and the entire team at Federated and your entire team over at the 
refinery complex, thank you so very much for your leadership 
and your investment here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And while still on my feet, I’d like to welcome other economic 
leaders within their Assembly, leaders within the credit union 
movement in our province, representatives of SaskCentral. I see 
Keith Nixon there. I see Leslie. Of course we have an incredibly 
strong credit union system across our province. I believe they’re 
here for some announcements around legislation. We look 
forward to that and making sure that that puts our credit unions 
on the proper foundation for success well into the future. Of 
course we know their contributions historically have been 
immense, and they have a big role to play well into the future. I 
ask all members to welcome these leaders in our credit union 
movement to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the Leader of the Opposition to take a few moments to as 
well introduce a number of members that are sitting in your 
gallery.  
 
Mr. Speaker, Ministry of Justice and Financial and Consumer 
Affairs Authority staff along with members of the Credit Union 
Deposit Guarantee Corporation and SaskCentral have been 
working diligently over a long period of time to develop a new 
supervisory framework to administer new legislation respecting 
and regulating SaskCentral. Today the fruits of their labour will 
be heard, as the Leader of the Opposition has indicated. We’ll 
be putting forward a motion for first reading of Bill 18, The 
Credit Union Central of Saskatchewan Act, 2016. And as noted, 
with us in the gallery today are Keith Nixon, president of 
SaskCentral; David Meldrum, SaskCentral’s associate 
vice-president of legal; and Leslie Trobak, government relations 
with SaskCentral. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to say that there’s been a tremendous 
amount of work and collaboration between the FCAA 
[Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan], 
the Ministry of Justice, and representatives of the credit union 
system, all to ensure proper credit union regulation in 
Saskatchewan and in turn, of course most importantly, the 
protection of the public through consumer protection, Mr. 
Speaker. So I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming these 



260 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2016 

fine people to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, I ask for leave to make an 
extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you, through 
you, and to all the members in this Assembly, I would like to 
introduce the intern that I’ll be working with through the SLIP 
[Saskatchewan Legislative Intern Program] program, Marnie 
Howlett. Just give a wave; she’s sitting in the Speaker’s gallery 
there. 
 
Marnie’s from Saskatoon and attended high school at the 
Marion M. Graham Collegiate, where she finished at the top of 
her class throughout grades 9 to 12 and was the top graduate in 
the Saskatoon public school division in 2011. During that time, 
she also served as the student council president and executive 
member of both the canoe club and the environmental club, 
directed the school’s variety night, and was involved in the 
school’s musicals and dance academy. She also played 
basketball, volleyball, curled, and wrestled, as well as travelled 
with the travel club to Brazil and Vietnam. 
 
Outside of school, Marnie has always been equally as involved. 
At the age of three, she began Ukrainian dancing and continues 
with it today, as well as has taken classes in jazz, lyrical, hip 
hop, and ballet. Marnie has also taught Ukrainian dance in 
Prince Albert and Prud’homme, as well as ballet, jazz and hip 
hop classes. In addition to dancing, she enjoys singing in the 
Ukrainian Orthodox choir and acted as the director for the 
Green Grove Ukrainian Orthodox youth camp in the summer of 
2015. 
 
Following her high school graduation in 2011, Marnie began 
her post-secondary education at the University of 
Saskatchewan. Combining her love of travel and passion for 
politics, she recently completed her Bachelor of Arts degree 
with high honours, a degree in international studies with a 
major focus in international co-operation and conflict. 
 
During her time at the University of Saskatchewan, Marnie was 
involved with the Greystone Scholars first-year committee and 
the International Studies Students Association. She was also a 
tutorial leader for the beginner Ukrainian language class and a 
marking assistant for the department of political studies. 
Further, she acted as an intern at the Community Legal 
Assistance Services for Saskatoon Inner City, aiding in the 
organization of a self-advocacy workshop and community 
justice course. 
 
In May 2014, Marnie was fortunate to study the Ukrainian 
language abroad in the Ukraine. There she became involved 
with the Canadian organization, Help Us Help the Children 

which hosts summer and winter camps for orphan children in 
Ukraine. Since May 2014, Marnie has returned to Ukraine three 
or more times to volunteer at these camps as well as at 
rehabilitation workshop for families that lost their husbands and 
fathers to the current conflict in the eastern parts of Ukraine. 
Back home in Saskatoon, she also supports the organization by 
doing presentations, hosting events, and collecting donations of 
clothing and other goods to send to the children. 
 
Upon completion of the internship, Marnie hopes to further her 
education in a master’s program and pursue a career in 
international development or humanitarian aid. I look forward 
to working with Marnie and learning from her. 
 
I would like to ask the members of this Assembly to join me in 
welcoming Marnie to her Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you to this Assembly, I am absolutely 
delighted to welcome a good friend of mine to this Legislative 
Assembly. Mr. Speaker, just some quick background. This 
gentleman was in town for a conference a couple of weeks ago. 
He was going to come visit the Legislative Assembly, and I was 
looking forward to introducing him. At the last minute he had to 
cancel. 
 
At that point, Mr. Speaker, I took a lot of cheap shots from 
members on this side of the House about having an imaginary 
friend. Particularly noteworthy was the comment from one hon. 
member who asked me, his question was, is your imaginary 
friend, is his name Mr. Snuffleupagus? 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Snuffleupagus is in the House. He’s here. 
He’s alive. He’s well and, Mr. Speaker, he’s seated in your 
gallery. He also goes by the name of Don McCallum. He’s a 
former colleague, long-time administrator for the RM [rural 
municipality] of Cut Knife, and a good friend of mine. 
 
And I’d ask all members to welcome him to his Legislative 
Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to you and through you and to all members of the Assembly, I 
would like to introduce my friend, Nadeem Naz. He is sitting in 
the west gallery. Can you please raise your hand. Nadeem Naz 
has been migrated in Saskatchewan since 25 years ago, and he 
has been living since that in Regina, Saskatchewan. And he 
said, I am loving it, living in Regina, Saskatchewan. 
 
He is a very good volunteer. He has been working since 14 
years as a volunteer in radio station CJTR 91.3 FM, every 
Saturday from 1 o’clock until 2 o’clock. And, Mr. Speaker, he 
is also a very good musician. He is here to see how the 
proceeding works. 
 
Thank you. I would like to ask all members to join me 
welcoming him in his own Legislative Assembly. 
 



June 2, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 261 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
present a petition again to improve PTSD [post-traumatic stress 
disorder] coverage for Saskatchewan workers. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the petitioners point out that post-traumatic stress 
disorder can severely impact the lives of Saskatchewan 
workers, that the delay in diagnosis and treatment for PTSD can 
be detrimental to recovery. I had an opportunity a few days ago 
to speak to someone. It took them four months to be able to get 
coverage under workers’ compensation before Workers’ 
Compensation paid for their treatment, Mr. Speaker. The 
petitioners point out that many workers suffering from 
work-related PTSD are burdened by these lengthy 
investigations and approval processes, and that presuming 
PTSD is work related will reduce stigma and allow workers 
easier access to services and supports. That’s certainly what 
I’ve heard from workers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Saskatchewan government to 
make the necessary changes to ensure that if Saskatchewan 
workers are exposed to traumatic events on the job and are 
then diagnosed with PTSD, it is presumed to be caused by 
the worker’s employment, and the worker will 
subsequently be covered under workers’ compensation and 
receive the same benefits as others with work-related 
injuries. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Yorkton 
and Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 
again I rise in the Assembly today to present a petition as it 
involves cell service for northern Saskatchewan. And the prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To cause the provincial government to improve cell service 
coverage for northern communities like St. George’s Hill, 
Dillon, Michel Village, Dore Lake, Michel Point, and Sled 
Lake to provide similar quality of cell coverage as southern 
communities currently enjoy. This would provide support 
to our northern industries as well as mitigate safety 
concerns associated with living in the remote North. 

 
[10:15] 
 
And the people that have signed this particular page, as many 
thousands have signed many other pages, are primarily from 
Camp Carmel and the Dore Lake area. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to present a petition from 

the individuals that would like to bring to our attention the 
following: The Surface Rights Acquisition and Compensation 
Act is an old and outdated piece of legislation that remains 
largely unchanged despite amendments over the years. It is in 
desperate need of modernization to reflect the current 
challenges that farmers and ranchers are facing today. I’d like to 
read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the government of Saskatchewan to introduce legislation 
that would modernize The Surface Rights Acquisition and 
Compensation Act, classify land value as industrial rather 
than agricultural when oil and gas development takes 
place, remove pipelines and flow lines from the surface 
rights Act, and establish a new maximum in compensation 
be paid for damages. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals who presented this petition come 
from the city of Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition in support of funding heritage 
languages here in Saskatchewan. And we know that after 25 
years, the Government of Saskatchewan is discontinuing all 
support for heritage language learning here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Since 1991 heritage language schools have depended on this 
modest funding from the Ministry of Education to help sustain 
their programs. And as a result of the announcement by the 
Ministry of Education, many of these non-profit heritage 
language schools will be faced with the difficult decision of 
whether they can . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — . . . continue to operate. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. In addition, the heritage language schools contribute to 
the retention of immigrants in Saskatchewan by helping people 
to maintain their culture, identity, and traditions while at the 
same time learning about Canadian ways of life. Furthermore, 
studying additional languages offers many benefits for all 
Canadians, especially in today’s growing international markets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following actions: 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to reconsider this decision and restore funding for heritage 
language education in Saskatchewan heritage language 
schools. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition today are from 
Saskatoon. Thank you very much. 
 



262 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2016 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Qu’Appelle. 
 

Waste Water Improvement Project 
 
Ms. Ross: — Or Regina Rochdale. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am proud to rise in the House today and 
talk about the newest project at the Regina Co-op Refinery 
Complex. 
 
Last week on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, I 
attended the announcement of a $200 million waste water 
improvement plant. Mr. Speaker, this environmental project 
will reduce the refinery’s use of fresh water by the equivalent of 
3,100 Regina households while cleaning over 2 million gallons 
of waste water per day. The waste water will be purified and 
then used for steam production, which will reduce emissions 
and odours from the refinery. This means, Mr. Speaker, that our 
refinery right here, right in Regina, will be the only refinery in 
North America that can clean and recycle all of its waste water. 
It is expected to be fully operational in the fall of 2016 when it 
will begin recycling water for the use in the refinery.  
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, I am proud that Saskatchewan will be 
at the forefront of developing industry-leading technology. A 
strong Saskatchewan means that corporations are prepared to 
invest right here, right in our province. 
 
I will ask all members of the House to join me in congratulating 
the Co-op Refinery Complex as they near completion of their 
innovative waste water project. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

Recognizing Pride Month 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the Assembly 
today in recognition of Pride month this June. We know that the 
folks in the LGBTQ [lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer 
and/or questioning] community contribute so much to our 
province, and we’re all very proud to stand with them to kickoff 
Pride here in Saskatchewan. This year we’re seeing more and 
more Pride events across our province, including Regina, Prince 
Albert, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, and now Beardy’s and Swift 
Current. And I know that we’ll be seeing more communities 
join in in the very near future.  
 
Pride month is very important because there is so much more 
work to do in the fight for equality for everyone, including our 
queer community. In too many of our schools, workplaces, and 
public spaces, people turn a blind eye to homophobia and 
transphobia. In 2016 we need to be doing so much better to 
build a province where everyone is treated with dignity and the 
respect they deserve and where their basic human rights are 
respected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to especially recognize a recent human 
rights victory that we can all celebrate. Laura Budd is a trans 
woman who took the government to the Human Rights 

Commission to fight for her right to have the right gender 
marker on her driver’s licence, and she won her case. She 
shouldn’t have had to take the province to the commission to 
get her gender marker corrected. This is one more important 
milestone for the LGBTQ community here in Saskatchewan. 
 
I ask all members to join in me recognizing Pride month here in 
Saskatchewan. And let’s all get out and join in the Pride parade 
in our nearest community. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
University. 
 

University of Saskatchewan College of Arts 
and Science Awards 

 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the House today to congratulate the University of 
Saskatchewan College of Arts and Science graduates who 
recently received awards. This week I had the pleasure of 
attending the College of Arts and Science convocation awards 
ceremony to bring greetings on behalf of the province. Joining 
me were Dean Peta Bonham-Smith, Chancellor Blaine Favel, 
and President Peter Stoicheff. 
 
This is a very exciting time of year for graduates as they 
embark on their next adventure, and it was a pleasure to join 
them at their ceremony. Mr. Speaker, during the ceremony, 
awards were handed out for most distinguished graduate in the 
following categories: fall 2015 and spring 2016 overall 
academic, humanities, fine arts, social sciences, science, and 
interdisciplinary programs. Also during the evening were the 
faculty teaching excellence awards awarded to Dr. Wendy Roy, 
Dr. Joseph Garcea, and Dr. Nathaniel Osgood. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also this week the U of S [University of 
Saskatchewan] held its convocation ceremony for all of its 
graduates. It takes a lot of hard work, dedication, talent, and 
vision to make it to a convocation, so congratulations to all the 
students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all the members of the House to join me in 
congratulating the recipients of the College of Arts and Science 
convocation awards. Your hard work has not gone unnoticed. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 

Accomplishments of Northern Student 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Robin Louis is a constituent of mine who 
has so much to be proud of. He has never missed a day of 
school since starting kindergarten at Gordon Denny Community 
School in Air Ronge. This year Robin will complete his final 
year at Churchill Community High School in La Ronge. 
 
But Robin isn’t just a great student. He is also a star football 
player. Robin plays with the Churchill Chargers in the Northern 
Football League. Just recently he was selected to play in the 
2016 Ed Henick Senior Bowl in Saskatoon. Robin’s team won, 
and after the game he was asked to play in the CanAm Bowl. 
Yesterday, Robin signed with the Saskatoon Hilltops for their 
upcoming season where he will be suiting up for one of the best 



June 2, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 263 

junior football programs in the country. 
 
These are amazing accomplishments for any student to fulfill. 
As a member of the Lac La Ronge Indian Band, Robin is a role 
model for many young people in the La Ronge area. His advice 
to young students is simple: go to school. It’s free and will 
determine the kind of life you will have. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating Robin on his 
remarkable accomplishments in sports and academics, and in 
wishing him all the best in his bright future. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 

Africa Day 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this past Saturday I had the privilege to bring greetings on 
behalf of the Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport to the 
attendees at the 53rd annual Africa Day celebrations at the 
MacKenzie Art Gallery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government recognizes that Saskatchewan is 
made stronger from many people’s strength. That’s why our 
government is proud to support multicultural activities, 
programs, and recognize like this one through the funding 
provided from SaskCulture, the Saskatchewan Arts Board, and 
the Ministry of Parks, Culture and Sport. 
 
This year the Africa Day theme was Understanding 
African-Canadian Heritage to Develop Strategies to Support 
Successful Integration. Mr. Speaker, immigration plays an 
important role in keeping Saskatchewan strong. Our province’s 
increasing growth contributes to the diversity and continued 
success of our economy. 
 
The host of this event, the African-Canadian Resource Network 
Saskatchewan Inc., is the leader in the community as it supports 
the development of the diverse African-Canadian community in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask all members of this Assembly 
to join me in acknowledging 2016 Africa Day and to thank the 
organizers and sponsors of the amazing event held last weekend 
celebrating Saskatchewan diversity. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
University. 
 

Fundraiser Supports North Central 
Family Centre Kitchen 

 
Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I had the pleasure to attend the kitchen fundraiser of 
the North Central Family Centre, representing the Minister 
Responsible for Sask Gaming, on the weekend. The North 
Central Family Centre is an important part of the community 
that empowers youth and families by offering a wide range of 
proven, successful, structured programs and activities. This 
year’s fundraiser was an amazing success as funds raised went 
toward upgrades to the centre’s kitchen, which serves daily 
meals to between 50 and 70 people every single day. 

Casino Regina and Sask Gaming committed to matching up to 
$50,000 raised at the event. Mr. Speaker, I can share with this 
Assembly today that the event was a resounding success. The 
total raised, including Casino Regina’s contribution, was 
$136,000. Mr. Speaker, the approximately 280 guests who 
gathered showed the strength of the organization and the pillar 
it is in the community. 
 
It was further great to hear from the special guest introduced by 
my hon. colleague, the Minister of Finance: former Canadian 
Forces chief of defence staff, General Rick Hillier. It was 
incredible to hear from General Hillier as he talked about how a 
leader must listen and collaborate with their peers. It was both 
inspirational and humorous. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in 
congratulating the North Central Family Centre, Executive 
Director Sandy Wankel, and organizer Pam Klein on a 
successful fundraiser, and to thank Casino Regina and all the 
sponsors and attendees that made the event a success. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 

Gender and Sexual Diversity Pride Month 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night the 
Minister for Parks, Culture and Sport and the member from 
Regina University attended the raising of the Pride flag outside 
the legislature, recognizing that the province has proclaimed 
June, Gender and Sexual Diversity Pride Month. This flag 
raising marks the beginning of activities throughout the month. 
It is a province-wide celebration of both recognition and 
support. 
 
Our goal continues to be to support the strongest quality of life. 
Having everyone be part of a proud society that strives to 
eliminate discrimination through inclusion and recognition is 
instrumental to this quality of life. Contributing in any way 
possible, drawing from the creativity and innovation of our 
increasing diversity, is one way to achieve that. 
 
In terms of human rights and the struggle of many different 
groups for acceptance and respect, our society has changed 
profoundly over the province’s first century. For many of us 
who are a bit older, we learned about the LGBTQ community 
through media coverage of the struggle for equality. 
 
Making every effort to contribute to an inclusive, welcoming, 
and understanding society will remain a priority for us. This is 
because diversity is one of the strongest attributes of our 
province, and we see great value in that. I ask all members to 
join me in recognizing June as Pride Month. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Government’s Fiscal Management 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we all know that the Sask 



264 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2016 

Party is out of touch with the reality faced by Saskatchewan 
families. But, Mr. Speaker, honestly I believe that many of my 
colleagues opposite are actually really smart people. So after 
almost two years of slumping oil prices, I don’t think all of 
them were surprised that it’s hurting our finances. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, that’s how they all acted when they 
campaigned. That’s how they all acted when they rise in this 
Assembly, denying the true state of our finances and hiding 
their budget and their planned cuts. But after a decade in 
government they’re still refusing to take responsibility. 
 
Let’s be clear. Their deficit, their climbing and now record debt, 
are not the result of supporting our kids’ classrooms or helping 
seniors get their medication. It’s the result of Sask Party 
mismanagement during boom time. Their waste, their fiascos. 
In fact even in this budget, their bypass boondoggle and its 
billion-dollar overrun is still getting a half-billion dollars. Will 
the Premier stand up and accept that it’s their decade in power, 
their mistakes, and their mismanagement that led us here? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
[10:30] 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just 
share with all members that our government was elected in 
2007, late 2007, so we’re hoping to be around for a decade but 
it’s not been quite 10 years. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I will say this with respect to the record of 
the government over those eight years, is there has been 
certainly good fortune from a revenue perspective for the 
government early on, and so our government took some 
important steps in those early years to invest for the future with 
these additional revenues, these unexpected revenues that were 
coming in. 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, we paid off $2.7 billion of 
operating debt. This is the debt of the province that’s 
unsupported in a structured way to be retired. For example, it’s 
more like a credit card versus a mortgage. Mr. Speaker, it is true 
that the government has moved, like almost . . . well like every 
provincial government in Canada, we’ve moved to finance 
long-term capital with a long-term perspective. But we have 
reduced by $2.7 billion that credit card that we inherited from 
previous governments, certainly not these members opposite, 
but the government before that. 
 
Additionally, Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to point out that as a 
result of actions we took because of some additional revenue, 
we have reduced taxes in Saskatchewan by $6 billion — for 
families, for farmers, for business people. I think that’s part of 
the reason why we’ve seen unprecedented economic growth in 
the province as the market and the economy responds to lower 
taxes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And finally, over and above what the NDP invested in their last 
seven years, we’ve invested $8 billion in infrastructure 
investment. He might consider that as a loss or poor decisions. I 
think the people of Saskatchewan might disagree. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier certainly 
doesn’t let the facts stand in the way. Their own budget 
document, page 50, Mr. Speaker, that clearly shows that during 
a period of record resource revenues, this government’s jacked 
up our debt in a major way — 80 per cent, in fact, $6.5 billion 
in just five years to well over $14 billion. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in this year alone, Saskatchewan lost well 
over 9,000 jobs. Bankruptcies are on the rise in Saskatchewan. 
Wages are declining. But yesterday, did we hear about a plan to 
diversify the economy to help Saskatchewan people get back to 
work and create jobs? No, not a mention. In fact they’re making 
it harder, cutting the programs that help people get back to work 
and to create jobs. Everything from apprenticeship to 
post-secondary education, youth and adult skills training, to 
adult basic education. Mr. Speaker, they even cut economic 
development, trade, and export. All of these cuts from a 
government that said nothing about them during a campaign. 
 
So will this Premier finally get to work helping the people of 
Saskatchewan find and keep good-paying, family-supporting 
jobs? Because this budget clearly hurts them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this budget was precisely 
about keeping the economy strong in Saskatchewan. That’s 
why, unlike other provinces that are facing shortfalls in 
revenue, we didn’t increase any taxes in this budget. 
 
What would have happened if members opposite would have 
been on the government side? They campaigned, in the middle 
of these economic challenging times, they campaigned on tax 
increases. They were going to increase taxes in the last election. 
It’s in their platform. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what’s important for this economy is stability, is 
continuity in royalties, stability in the tax rate. That’s what this 
budget delivers. 
 
And here’s something else it delivers, Mr. Speaker, and this is 
very important. In this challenging year for our economy, our 
government’s going to continue with our building program, 
with our infrastructure program to the tune of I think $1.7 
billion, $1.8 billion. That’s the largest infrastructure investment 
ever, and we’ve been making some significant investments in 
infrastructure. That’s also about maintaining jobs and creating 
new jobs in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Our record on this side of the House with respect to the 
economy and our growth plan, Mr. Speaker, while there’s 
always more work to do, I think is widely regarded as fairly 
successful, and this budget will build on that record. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Funding for Employment Training Services 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, this government really likes to 
talk the talk when it comes to jobs, but we don’t see them 
walking the walk. Mr. Speaker, Social Services is shifting away 
from the Saskatchewan assistance program and pushing people 



June 2, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 265 

towards the transitional employment allowance. Certainly 
helping people transition to employment is a great option if you 
are actually focusing on getting people into the workforce. But 
yesterday’s budget clearly shows that this government is not 
interested in that. 
 
The TEA [transitional employment allowance] program 
requires people to participate in pre-employment programs and 
services, Mr. Speaker. So why, Mr. Speaker, why were the 
programs and services to help people get jobs chopped in their 
budget yesterday? How can the minister possibly justify this 
cruel irony? How can she tell people to get a job, get job ready, 
and at the same time make it harder for them to get the training 
and work readiness they are looking for? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s just factually incorrect. In our budget yesterday, we 
actually increased funding for the Canada-Saskatchewan Job 
Grant, as an example, over $6.9 million. The program has been 
incredibly successful in terms of training new . . . training 
individuals who are employed already, bringing new folks into 
the workforce. And our record is clear, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 
seen, over the course of the period from 2007 to 2015, full-time 
employment increase by over 60,000 people, Mr. Speaker — 
our population reaching an all-time high, more people working 
in the province than at any time in our history. 
 
So as the Premier indicated, Mr. Speaker, our record on 
economic development, our record on the economy I think is 
fairly well acknowledged across the province and across the 
country to have been a very successful one. And we’re going to 
continue to invest in job training. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Funding for Health Care 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, we just heard about one 
program where the government wasn’t upfront about the reality 
of this situation. We see the same misleading tactics from other 
ministers. Mr. Speaker, yesterday this government said we were 
seeing an increase in health funding, but the increase is so small 
it won’t even allow for us to keep up with the status quo. 
 
Let’s be clear. There will be health care cuts in this budget. But 
this government is effectively pushing the buck to the health 
regions. The minister said that this would mean we are going to 
have to make some tougher decisions. But in reality, they have 
pushed those hard decisions on to the health regions. When will 
this government finally stop the spin and acknowledge they are 
simply pushing those cuts down the line to health regions and 
on to families? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, first of all, it was interesting to hear the Finance critic 
yesterday for the NDP [New Democratic Party] talk about how 
anything less than a 6 per cent increase in health would be 
considered a cut, Mr. Speaker. Well if the members opposite 

actually looked at their own platform, they would see that they 
didn’t actually budget for 6 per cent health increases in their 
own platform, so they were looking for . . . Under their own 
definition, they were also going to be cutting health care 
spending. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to work very hard with the regional 
health authorities, as we have over the last number of years, of 
bending the cost curve when it comes to health spending in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, members I think in this 
House know, as the public are starting to become more and 
more aware, that the fact that health, education, and social 
services takes up 75 per cent of the provincial budget, Mr. 
Speaker. We need to do our part, and our regional health 
authorities certainly understand that. And our partners, such as 
the SMA [Saskatchewan Medical Association] and others, 
know that we need to do our part to continue to bend the cost 
curve so that we can have a publicly funded health care system 
10 and 20 and 30 years down the road. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, we see the consequences of this 
government’s mismanagement passed on to the health regions. 
But it gets worse. They are also passing them off to seniors and 
children. This year seniors and children will be required to pay 
66 per cent more for their prescriptions. That’s a significant 
increase for seniors who are living on extremely tight budgets 
and families who are struggling to get their kids the care they 
need. We saw a few things go up in this year’s health budget: 
the cost of drugs for seniors and kids and the minister’s salary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is this government choosing to make up for 
their mismanagement by further burdening Saskatchewan 
families? Why did this government choose to put this on our 
eldest and on our youngest? Why are they the only ones who 
have to pay more? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, there’s a number of things that are going up in the 
health budget this year. The number of cancer drugs that the 
government is funding, that’s going up by 15 new cancer drugs. 
The fact that we’re fully funding drugs for hepatitis C patients, 
Mr. Speaker, that is also up in this budget, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the fact that we have found, in a very difficult budget 
year, $20 million to put into the surgical initiative to bring that 
funding up to $70 million, that’s going up this year, Mr. 
Speaker. Ten million additional dollars this year to increase 
diagnostic and imaging support across the province, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s going up in this budget as well, Mr. Speaker. 
And funding, Mr. Speaker, for important capital projects, Mr. 
Speaker, like the cooling and heating project at RUH [Royal 
University Hospital] Hospital, the electrical renewal here in the 
city of Regina both at the General and the Pasqua Hospital, as 
well as a 25 per cent increase in general maintenance dollars to 
our regional health authorities, Mr. Speaker, those are also 
going up, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ll work very hard with our partner sectors to ensure that we 
are continuing to bend the cost curve, as I said before, to ensure 



266 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2016 

that we do have a sustainable health care system in this 
province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, do you know how much those 
three hospitals need for maintenance? $675 million. They got 
14.1, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday the minister said that the increase was 
due to inflation, and I was shocked, shocked to hear that this 
government does know about inflation. We didn’t hear the 
Finance minister talk about that yesterday, and we certainly 
didn’t see it reflected in their budget for education, health, and 
social services. 
 
The Finance minister said that they were getting increases, but 
the reality is these increases are not keeping up with inflation or 
population growth, and they are certainly not keeping up with 
the demands of our already stressed classrooms and our 
backlogged hospitals. 
 
We heard from the Health minister yesterday that these 
increases acknowledge that we have had inflation over the past 
four years as well as a rise in drug costs. Of course there is 
inflation and of course costs increase, but this government 
ignored that in every other aspect of this budget. They have left 
health regions and school boards to deal with these cost 
increases. 
 
To the minister: why does this government have different 
expectations for seniors and kids than it does for itself? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m glad the member 
opposite has recognized that this government, in a difficult 
budget year, has found dollars to recognize the capital 
infrastructure needs of our facilities. 
 
An Hon. Member: — 675 million. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well and I thank the member for giving 
me the number. How do you think we got there, to the member 
from Riversdale? Mr. Speaker, the fact that in their last budget, 
for something that we call life, safety, emergency, critical 
infrastructure, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite found $4.4 
million for that in their last budget, Mr. Speaker, as the 
government. For life, safety, and critical infrastructure, $4 
million is all they found, Mr. Speaker. In fact this government 
has been able to provide $682 million, a 240 per cent increase, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
In terms of capital, we have spent or invested more than $1.2 
billion in infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. In the last decade of their 
government, they could barely crack $500 million. Yes, we 
have an infrastructure backlog in this province, and the 
members opposite know well about it because they were there, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 

Funding for Employment 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, we also see cutbacks to the 
Aboriginal court worker program and Aboriginal police 
consulting groups. These programs serve the most vulnerable in 
our society and the most overrepresented in the criminal justice 
system. 
 
Last week we heard the Corrections minister say, “. . . we want 
to turn our inmates, the people in our facilities into taxpayers, 
providing them employment opportunities, employment 
training.” 
 
Well we’ve seen cuts to justice and corrections programs in this 
budget, and we have already heard a lot today on the cuts to 
employment readiness programs. They are simply not a priority 
of this government — cuts to both things the minister was 
talking about just last week. How can the minister stand in this 
place, say that they are for more training, and then sit there 
while her colleague makes cuts and offers less? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister in charge of 
Immigration, Jobs, Skills and Training. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to address this head-on in terms of the claims we’ve heard 
from the opposition with regard to apprenticeship training. 
 
The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, apprenticeship training is 
driven by demand. It’s driven from the apprenticeship 
commission. They make a request to government and we 
allocate seats on the basis of the requests that they make, which 
is based on utilization which they hear from industry and from 
providers. The fact is that the apprenticeship commission asked 
for a reduction in the number of seats this year because of 
utilization demand. So that’s the fact. 
 
The other fact I’d put on the record, Mr. Speaker, is in terms of 
the amount of increase over the course of the last number of 
years, since 2007, there has been a 76 per cent increase in the 
number of seats for apprenticeship training, Mr. Speaker, which 
is a reflection of demand from industry. So we’ve seen 76 per 
cent more apprentices trained in this province because of the 
growth in the economy. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, my question was to the two 
ministers responsible for that file, and it’s about problems with 
programming in custody. And I’m going to ask the question 
again. Why do the ministers not defend the cuts that are 
happening to in-custody job training programs? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
[10:45] 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thanks. Mr. Speaker, what occurs in our 
correctional facilities is that we do prepare our offenders for 
employment opportunities. Just recently, Mr. Speaker, we 
opened Whitespruce in Yorkton when it was converted to an 



June 2, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 267 

employment training centre for 39 male adult offenders, and 
that happened in March of 2015. 
 
We realize that we have to get the inmates ready for 
employment opportunities should they present themselves, and 
we’re committed to continuing this initiative. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, it is the responsibility of every 
minister to stand up and defend the issues on their file, not 
defend the cuts. Mr. Speaker, training, rehabilitation, and 
employment readiness are complex issues in our corrections 
system and they need to be managed effectively. There are 
long-term consequences to cutting these programs. 
 
Let me make it simple. Will the minister stand up and fight for 
her ministry and defend these programs that ultimately help 
those in need, grow our economy, and make our communities 
more safe? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister in charge of 
Corrections and Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, we will continue with the 
Whitespruce training program in Yorkton and we’ll hopefully 
expand it over time, Mr. Speaker. We recognize the importance 
of continuing on with employment training. 
 
I will note too that there is a food service training program 
within each of our correctional facilities that prepares offenders 
to be first-line order cooks, Mr. Speaker. We recognize the 
importance and we’ll continue to ensure that offenders do 
receive the training necessary for employment. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In yesterday’s budget, 
this government once again showed that the education of our 
children is not a priority. They let crumbs fall off the table for K 
to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] operating costs. Mr. Speaker, 
increasing operational funding is what school divisions have 
been calling for over the last few years. But this increase 
amounts to point one per cent of the budget for education — 
one-tenth of a per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this will not be enough money to hire the teachers 
required. This will not be enough money to fund new students 
entering the system. This will not be enough money to get 
students the supports that they need. And this will not be 
enough . . . We won’t even come close to addressing the 
shortfalls that schools are already struggling with. To the 
Minister of Education: why won’t this government provide our 
classrooms with the funding that they desperately need? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, once again I’ve got to 

correct the member opposite on what was in the preamble. Mr. 
Speaker, the figures of point one per cent are inaccurate. Mr. 
Speaker, I can advise the House the following: overall 
education budget has increased this year by 7.8 per cent to $2.2 
billion. School operating costs have increased by $30 million. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we include as well $288 million for supports 
for learning, $5.4 million for Syrian refugees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a major commitment to our education. 
This is a responsible budget. We’re going to continue to do 
what’s necessary for the students in our province and we’re 
going to continue to fund education. We want to work with the 
school divisions to find changes to do things as effectively as 
they possible can. And, Mr. Speaker, I met with the school 
boards yesterday morning and they are excited and challenged 
and looking forward to this. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t mind if the minister 
dismisses my comments, but I hope that they won’t continue to 
dismiss the voices of those in the sector, within education in 
this province: the SSBA [Saskatchewan School Boards 
Association], the STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation]. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister and I must have had very different 
conversations yesterday, because what I was told is that this 
government still isn’t giving schools the support that they need, 
period. The president of the STF, the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation, has said, and I quote: “School divisions will be 
forced to make decisions that could negatively affect teaching 
and learning.” 
 
School divisions across the province are facing serious budget 
shortfalls. Last year Regina Public faced a shortfall of over $6 
million. For the Catholic School Division it was 2 million. 
Saskatoon Public, $3 million. But, Mr. Speaker, perhaps the 
most shocking was the shortfall in the Prairie Spirit School 
Division with a shortfall of over $7 million. Hundreds of 
students in schools across Saskatchewan will go without 
adequate government support in their classrooms. So will the 
minister properly fund our schools, or is continuous 
underfunding part of the transformational change that was 
promised in yesterday’s budget? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
raises the specific issue of Prairie Spirit School Division. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to tell you some numbers about Prairie Spirit 
School Division. Over $90 million has gone to school capital in 
the Prairie Spirit School Division alone. Prairie Spirit received 
over $1.3 million in preventative maintenance and renewal this 
year, over $3 million in the past three years. 
 
Emergent funding is available for unforeseen and unexpected 
issues. They’ve received supports for projects of those natures, 
and I’ll read some of them: Valley Manor School, 205,000; 
Delisle, 227,000; Aberdeen, 950,000; Langham, 396,000; 
Hanley, 237,000; Hague, 300,000; Osler, 400,000. Mr. Speaker, 
Prairie Spirit has received a 33 per cent increase in operating 
funding compared to a 22 per cent enrolment since 2007-2008. 



268 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2016 

We’ll work with Prairie Spirit. We’ll work with each and every 
other school division to try and ensure that the best value is 
delivered to our students and that we’re able to continue to 
provide supports for the classrooms. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Provincial Credit Rating 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party brags about a lot 
of things, and some of them are true, but when the news turns 
they sometimes forget to talk about that too. For example, Mr. 
Speaker, we have often heard this government and the Premier 
boasting about their credit rating, but now we see that in fact 
there are some concerns with it. 
 
Can the Finance minister advise when the Standard & Poor’s 
credit attached a negative outlook to our credit rating? We know 
that last year at budget time there was no negative outlook. So 
to the Finance minister: when did this happen? What is the 
overall impact that we can expect from this, and how is he 
planning to manage it? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
let me begin by saying that frankly I’m a little surprised and 
perhaps even disappointed that that member is still the Finance 
critic on that side of the House today, Mr. Speaker. I can only 
imagine that if I or one of my colleagues had breached the 
privileges of the members of this House so egregiously as that 
member did yesterday with respect to leaking the budget, Mr. 
Speaker, they would have been up on their feet with righteous 
indignation demanding my resignation or somebody else’s, Mr. 
Speaker. I can’t believe that leader has not fired that critic for 
Finance at this point in time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Secondly, the negative outlook occurred about six months ago 
when the price of oil was the downturn. They maintained a 
AAA credit rating for our province, one of only two provinces 
in Canada right now with a AAA credit rating. That happened 
about six months ago. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — You want to talk about capacity in this House? 
Mr. Speaker, clearly this minister is not planning for the future. 
He’s not dealing with the negative outlooks that are being 
presented to him by Standard & Poor’s. And, Mr. Speaker, 
there’s more fudged messaging that we’re dealing with. During 
the campaign, their message was steady as we go, but now 
they’re talking about transformational change. Which one is it, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
Yesterday in the budget we saw that this transformation is less 
than meets the eye. They said they’d be asking important 
questions. Well here they are. Here’s the questions: is this 
something government should be doing? Is this program or 
service the role of government? Nearly a decade in government 
and they’re asking these questions now, looking to see if how 
they’re running things is working. And, Mr. Speaker, let me 

save them some time. These are not transformational questions. 
What is transformational about ensuring that programs are 
effective? 
 
So will the minister admit that, had they properly managed 
things all along, Saskatchewan people wouldn’t be facing $4 
billion more in debt, deep cuts, and a drop in credit rating? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Here we’ve seen proof positive this 
morning, Mr. Speaker, the parallel universe that those 10 
members live in in the economic reality of our province. Every 
single one of their members, Mr. Speaker, got up this morning 
and demanded what? Demanded more spending, more 
spending. 
 
The Finance critic and her response to the budget yesterday said 
this, Mr. Speaker, and I quote, “A minimum of 6 per cent 
annual increase is needed just to maintain the status quo 
programs like health care and education,” Mr. Speaker, 6 per 
cent. That translates to 440 more million dollars than what our 
budget provided for yesterday in health care and education. 
We’re currently running a $434 million deficit, Mr. Speaker, 
because of the fact that we lost $1 billion in resource revenues 
in the last year. 
 
That party over there campaigned on a fully costed platform, 
Mr. Speaker, that neglected 18 different items that they 
campaigned on that would have cost $500 million a year. And 
now this Finance critic wants to add another $440 million a year 
to the expenditures with respect to taxpayers in this province, 
Mr. Speaker. I don’t know what world they’re living in. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I caution the members. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 
Bill No. 17 — The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2016 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move that Bill No. 17, The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 
2016 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of the 
Economy that Bill No. 17 be now introduced and read the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 



June 2, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 269 

Bill No. 18 — The Credit Union Central 
of Saskatchewan Act, 2016 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move that Bill No. 18, The Credit Union Central of 
Saskatchewan Act, 2016 be now introduced and read a first 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister of Attorney 
General that Bill No. 18 be introduced and read a first time. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 19 — The Film and Video Classification Act, 2016 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move that Bill No. 19, The Film and Video Classification Act, 
2016 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Attorney General 
that Bill No. 19 be introduced and read for the first time. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Item no. 4, Mr. Wyant. 
 
The Speaker: — No, no. When shall this bill be read a second 
time? 
 
Principal Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 20 — The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 
2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur les juges de paix 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
No. 20, The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2016 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Attorney General 

that Bill No. 20 be introduced and read a first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Question of Privilege 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I have a ruling to 
report to the House. 
 
Yesterday, June 1st, 2016, the Government House Leader raised 
a question of privilege in accordance with rule 12. The 
Government House Leader argued that the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana released confidential, embargoed information 
about the provincial budget before it was tabled in the 
Assembly, and that this consists of a violation of the 
parliamentary convention and a contempt of the Assembly. 
 
Prior to receiving the notice of privilege, the Opposition House 
Leader, the Leader of the Opposition, and finally the member 
from Saskatoon Nutana acknowledged in the Assembly that the 
breach of the embargoed information had taken place. All three 
members apologized to the Assembly for violating the 
conditions of the lock-up. With admissions of the members that 
the leak had occurred, there’s no dispute over the facts of this 
matter. 
 
As the Government House Leader points out and I think all 
members will acknowledge, it is a long-standing parliamentary 
convention that the contents of the budget should be kept secret 
until the Minister of Finance tables the budget in the Assembly. 
The use of lock-ups has been part of the budget process in this 
province and elsewhere for many decades. These lock-ups are 
entirely at the government’s discretion, but when they do take 
place, it is expected that opposition members are permitted to 
access the technical briefings. 
 
In the past when access has been denied, the Speaker permitted 
privilege cases to proceed. It’s appropriate then if a serious 
matter when a member is denied access to the briefs, that a 
breach of the embargoed conditions by a member should be 
treated with equal seriousness. 
 
[11:00] 
 
I reviewed the precedents of this Assembly and elsewhere. In 
1982 a question of privilege was raised by this Assembly 
concerning a leak of budget information to the media prior to 
the presentation of the budget in the Chamber. In that case there 
was uncertainty about the source of the leak, which is a 
different circumstance than the present case. Under the 



270 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2016 

conventions of the day, Speaker Brockelbank ruled no prima 
facie case of breach of privilege. Speaker Brockelbank’s 
decision was historic standards for such matters which are now 
outlined on page 894 of the House of Commons Procedure and 
Practice, Second Edition 2009. 
 
This convention is somewhat out of step with the more recent 
rulings on the premature release of information on bills. On 
April 19th of this year, the Speaker of the House of Commons 
in Ottawa ruled on a contempt case in which the contents of Bill 
C-14 were provided to the media before the bill was introduced 
in the House. Speaker Regan stated that the House rights of the 
first access to legislative information was not respected and the 
bill would have to have been brought to the House first and not 
prematurely released to the public domain. In this case the 
Speaker concluded the incident constituted a prima facie case of 
privilege. This ruling was based on a similar House of 
Commons ruling in 2001. 
 
It is apparent that there is conflicting precedents on these types 
of cases, and parliamentary practice is evolving, as it did when 
Speaker Milliken, a departure from previous House of 
Commons rulings in 2001, found a prime facie case of contempt 
when opposition members were denied embargoed information 
provided to the media. That case became the basis of similar 
rulings by Speaker Kowalsky in this Assembly in April 11, 
2005. 
 
It is my point of view that the leak of embargoed budget 
information is at least the equivalent of denying access to 
members to a lock-up. If one should be thought as 
contemptuous, then so should the other. It is also my point of 
view that the leak of budgetary information is as significant or 
possibly even more significant than a leak of a bill before it is 
tabled in the Assembly. 
 
I noted that the member for Nutana and others of her caucus 
apologized for the leak of information. It is true that in the past 
instances, apology has ended the matter. In this case I don’t 
believe the apology is sufficient enough to end this case. The 
House of Commons in Ottawa has similar conventions, and in 
many cases apologies do not end the case. In the other 
circumstances, the apology is not sufficient. In the case of Bill 
C-14 earlier this year, Speaker Regan acknowledged the 
unequivocal apology of the government Whip for the leak, but 
allowed the case to proceed by finding a prima facie question of 
privilege. 
 
The Speaker ruled last month, establishing a much higher 
standard of conduct for members and respect for the 
parliamentary institution. As in 2005, when Speaker Kowalsky 
was faced with a similar difficult decision, I believe it would be 
appropriate for the Assembly to consider the direction that it 
wishes to take on this matter. Therefore I find a prima facie case 
of breach of privilege and invite the House Leader to move the 
motion. 
 
I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

PRIVILEGE 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I rise today to raise a matter of serious importance. As 

you know, yesterday I filed with your office notice that we 
wished to raise a question of contempt to this House. 
 
Yesterday at 1:10 p.m. the member from Saskatoon Nutana, via 
the opposition caucus, sent an email that broke the 2016-17 
budget embargo. The news release in the email released 
financial information, government initiatives, and proposed 
government policy changes before the Minister of Finance rose 
in his place to read the 2016-17 budget. 
 
We believe that this early and irresponsible release of 
confidential embargoed information constitutes a prima facie 
case of contempt of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 
House of Commons procedure of practice states, and I quote, 
“There is a long-standing tradition of keeping the contents of 
the Budget secret until the Minister of Finance actually presents 
it in the House.”  
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition, having served in government, is 
fully aware of this long-standing parliamentary convention. Not 
only this, but eight members of the opposition and several 
members of the opposition caucus staff signed the 2016-17 
budget embargo guidelines. The budget embargo guidelines 
which the members opposite signed state, and I quote: 
 

All material is embargoed until after the Finance minister, 
Kevin Doherty, begins to deliver his budget address in the 
legislature on Wednesday, June 1, 2016 at approximately 
2:15 p.m. 

 
The irresponsible release of embargoed budget information not 
only violated the privilege of the Minister of Finance and all 
members of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, it also 
caused undue hardship throughout the province by 
pre-emptively alerting third party and government organizations 
to any revenue adjustments or facility closures. For example, 
the 2016-17 budget proposes closing the Buffalo Narrows 
correctional centre. The Ministry of Corrections and Policing 
takes these decisions very seriously and, more importantly, 
strives to ensure employees are notified appropriately and as 
soon as possible. Instead of finding out of the facility closure 
throughout the proper process, staff at this facility could have 
found out through a reckless NDP email. 
 
This emailed news release, which breaches the privileges of 
parliament, disregards all of this work and proper government 
processes and could have a significant negative impact on 
people’s lives and well-being. 
 
Mr. Speaker, although the opposition has apologized for this 
irresponsible action, I do not believe that they have taken this 
matter seriously enough. In 2010 Global News broke the budget 
embargo guidelines when a story on the budget was posted on 
the Global Toronto website. After being alerted to this breach 
by Executive Council, the Global Regina news director swiftly 
apologized, explained how the embargo was broken and 
identified the gaps in their system, and then took immediate 
action so that this would not happen again. As far as we know, 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition, as elected officials, have yet to do 
anything as comprehensive to rectify this situation as the 
actions Global News took at that time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read to you page 82 of the House of 



June 2, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 271 

Commons Procedure and Practice that states, and I quote: 
 

There are, however, other affronts against the dignity and 
authority of Parliament which may not fall within one of 
the specifically defined privileges. Thus, the House also 
claims the right to punish, as a contempt, any action which, 
though not a breach of a specific privilege, tends to 
obstruct or impede the House in the performance of its 
functions; obstructs or impedes any Member or Officer of 
the House in the discharge of their duties; or is an offence 
against the authority or dignity of the House, such as 
disobedience of its legitimate commands or libels upon 
itself, its Members, or its Officers. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it is patently obvious that the actions of the 
opposition caucus on behalf of the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana not only violates a century of parliamentary convention, 
it clearly constitutes contempt of the Legislative Assembly as 
outlined above. The Minister of Corrections and Policing is but 
one example of how the untimely release of confidential budget 
information has negatively impeded her in the discharge of her 
duties and responsibilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the motion I would move is as follows: 
 

That the early release of embargoed budget information by 
the member from Saskatoon Nutana and the opposition 
caucus clearly constitutes contempt of the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan by preventing all members 
from exercising their duties and responsibilities as 
members of the Legislative Assembly; and further 
 
That this matter be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Privileges for a full investigation and a report with a 
remedy to be tabled in the Legislative Assembly. 

 
I so submit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
the following motion: 
 

That the early release of the embargoed budget information 
by the member from Saskatoon Nutana and the opposition 
caucus is contempt of the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan by preventing all members from exercising 
their duty and responsibility of members of the Legislative 
Assembly; and further 
 
That this matter be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Privileges for a full investigation and a report with a 
remedy to be tabled in the Legislative Assembly. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 
Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I guess I 
rise to do a couple of things. You know, certainly as you’ve 
acknowledged in your ruling, we’re not in dispute about the 
facts. And certainly we’ve not apologized once for this, Mr. 
Speaker, not twice, but three times we’ve apologized for this. 
We take our respect for the embargo very seriously, and that 
had a lot to do with the readiness of the apology. 
 

In terms of the motion that has been brought by the members 
opposite, in terms of their proposed remedy, I am very 
interested to see how the majority that exists on that committee 
is used to conduct the business of that committee. I’m very 
interested to see how the majority in this House, which is of 
course the . . . We’re going to proceed to a vote on how this is 
adjudicated. 
 
But that doesn’t take away from some very simple things. The 
member from Nutana, and indeed all members on this side, are 
serious people, are honourable members, and we take the role of 
parliamentarian very seriously. And again, that is why the 
apologies were forthcoming and without reservation. 
 
In terms of actions that have been taken immediately on the part 
of the opposition caucus, there was an immediate review of 
process and procedures to make sure that something like this 
never happens again. 
 
And to speak to how it happened, Mr. Speaker, it was an honest 
mistake. It had nothing to do with personal gain. It had nothing 
to do with malicious intent. It was in fact an honest mistake. 
 
And as we proceed into the committee, Mr. Speaker, that you of 
course Chair, we’ll be very interested to see how the 
government responds to what has in past been matters that have 
been addressed with an apology, and has been a well-accepted 
tradition and precedent in terms of the work of this Assembly. 
That apology again was tendered yesterday, sincerely and 
without reservation. What more they want in terms of how this 
goes forward, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be very interested to see. 
 
But with that, I would conclude by saying that once again the 
member from Nutana is an honourable person and takes her 
responsibilities in this Assembly very seriously on behalf of the 
people of Nutana and Saskatchewan — as do we all, Mr. 
Speaker, as do I as the Opposition House Leader, as our leader 
does, as every member of this caucus does. And certainly the 
folks that we’re privileged to work with take that seriously as 
well. 
 
So to restate, we apologize for the breach of the embargo, and 
we look on with interest to see what comes with the committee 
that is above and beyond the way that these matters have been 
dealt with previously. 
 
Not to take exception or to question the ruling of the Speaker, 
but what comes with the committee we’ll look to see. But we 
think that that is, in and of itself, above and beyond the way that 
these matters have been adjudicated in the past. And again, 
there’s a majority that backs up the way that these matters are 
adjudicated, both in this House and certainly in that committee, 
and how that majority is then utilized on the part of the 
government is a test that remains for them. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Recognizing the House Leader . . . 
Call in the members. 



272 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2016 

[The division bells rang from 11:15 until 11:16.] 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — All those against? 
 
Oh. All those in favour of the motion, please stand. 
 

[Yeas — 47] 
 
Wall Stewart Morgan 
Wyant Duncan McMorris 
Boyd Harpauer Doherty 
Reiter Moe D’Autremont 
Weekes Beaudry-Mellor Cox 
Docherty Campeau Heppner 
Cheveldayoff Harrison Ottenbreit 
Tell Bonk Hart 
Steele Doke Hargrave 
Makowsky Marit Merriman 
Wilson Ross Olauson 
Young Parent Fiaz 
Nerlien Bradshaw Dennis 
Phillips Steinley Lambert 
Lawrence Carr Michelson 
Buckingham Kirsch  
 
The Speaker: — All those against, please stand. 
 

[Nays — 10] 
 
Wotherspoon Chartier Belanger 
Sproule Forbes Rancourt 
Beck McCall Sarauer 
Vermette   
 
Principal Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of this 
motion, 47; those opposed, 10. 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the motion carried. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 25 through 31. 
 
The Speaker: — The Whip has tabled questions 25 to 31. I 
recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 32 through 58. 
 
The Speaker: — The Whip has tabled questions 32 to 58. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that the Assembly approves in 
general the budgetary policy of the government.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just 
want to pick up today with a few more comments about the 
budget that was tabled yesterday and some of the concerns that 
people have been raising with us already as we hear from 
citizens in Saskatchewan across the province. 
 
One of the things I wanted to talk about right off the hop was 
just a brief quote by a gentleman named Scott Clark, and in this 
quote he talks about how a budget can be judged against . . . or 
how we judge a budget. What he says here is that: 
 

The credibility of a budget can be judged against four basic 
principles. First, is the budget based on a realistic and 
balanced assessment of economic prospects, challenges 
and risks? . . .  
 
A second principle is that the budget forecast includes a 
reasonable amount of prudence to guard against the 
underlying economic assumptions in the economic forecast 
being wrong . . . 
 
A third principle is that the budget fiscal framework be 
sustainable by maintaining a declining or stable debt/GDP 
ratio. 

 
And finally, and I think this is the most important one, Mr. 
Speaker:  

 
The last principle is budget transparency. This means 
providing [I’m continuing the quote, for the Hansard 
people] full disclosure of analysis and information since, 
without this, independent experts and other third parties 
will not be able to assess how realistic the economic and 
fiscal forecasts are. Without transparency there can be no 
accountability. 

 
And that’s the end of the quote, and that’s from Scott Clark. 
 
So I think if we want to talk a little bit about transparency, I 
think we have to go back and look back a little bit on what this 
government has done in respect to the way they present 
budgetary information to — I’m not sure what you’re looking 
at, Mr. Speaker — how they present budgetary information to 
the people of Saskatchewan. And I’d like to make special 
reference today to a report that came from our auditor in 2013. 
It’s a very special report, and indeed it’s called the 2013 Special 
Report, and it’s about government budgeting and financial 
reporting in Saskatchewan. 
 



June 2, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 273 

Now there was quite a few things that came out in that report, 
and some of it is quite contradictory to what we heard even the 
Premier say yesterday here in the House. One of the things I 
want to focus on first of all is the annual results of this 
government’s financial performance when it comes to the way 
they result their deficits. 
 
And there’s a . . . What page are we on here now? This is page 
. . . I don’t know if there’s a page number, but it’s section 4.2.2 
of the report. And what this report says, Mr. Speaker, is that 
there’s a figure here and it shows, while the financial results . . . 
Here’s a quote from the auditor: “. . . while the financial results 
of the GRF were reported as balanced in the last eight years, the 
Government actually incurred deficits in three of the last eight 
years.” 
 
Now that, I don’t know why this government has trouble . . . 
And indeed even the Minister of Immigration yesterday was 
barking across the way saying, oh that’s not right. That’s not 
right. But obviously he hasn’t taken the time to read the 
auditor’s reports. And I don’t think the auditor has any 
particularly malicious intent here, to mislead the people of 
Saskatchewan. Indeed it’s quite the opposite. So let’s see what 
the auditor said. And if one of my colleagues could find a 
Kleenex. This cold is . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I sure can. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you. I’m just going to read some of 
these results here. Thank you very much. I’ll just blow my nose. 
Allow me to be indignant. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Allergy season. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Yes. All right. So this government came into 
power in 2007. And this is just their GRF [General Revenue 
Fund] reporting as well, Mr. Speaker. We have to keep in mind 
that under a summary basis, the debt has been climbing I think 
since 2007 . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes, 2009. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Nine. Yes, thanks to my member here, the 
previous Finance critic. But this report, this is from the public 
auditor of the province of Saskatchewan, and she says that in 
2010, the GRF of this government was actually a deficit of 
$409 million. Now that’s almost half a billion dollars. But 
yesterday we heard members over here disputing those facts. 
And I’m not sure why they would have so much trouble 
accepting what an auditor presents. That’s the job of the 
auditor. So maybe they want to go back to this report and take 
another look at it. 
 
2011, Mr. Speaker, similar results. The actual deficit of the 
GRF — not the summary budget, but just the GRF, the 
operations of this government — despite crowing and boasting 
that there was a surplus, we see there was actually a deficit of 
$13 million. So I’m not sure what part of this the members 
opposite don’t understand. 
 
On 2012, Mr. Speaker, this is as far as this report has gone. We 
note that the auditor, despite what the government boasted as a 
surplus in their GRF, the auditor of Saskatchewan said no, in 

fact there was a deficit of $105 million. So it’s really hard to 
understand what kind of math the members opposite tend to 
study or why they have so much difficulty accepting the factual 
report of an auditor of the province of Saskatchewan when she 
reported there was actually deficits in 2010, 2011, and 2012. 
And of course now, we have a deficit in 2016 and deficit in 
2017. 
 
And indeed, Mr. Speaker, if you take a look at what other 
pundits are saying — and certainly I know that there’s been a 
recent report by Stats Canada, and under the Saskatchewan 
Trends Monitor in March of 2016, there was actually a report 
from the Canadian government finance system which shows, as 
they do, apples-to-apples comparison across Canada from 
province to province — in fact, there were more deficits than 
what was reported by this government which they never 
reported any, or by the auditor, depending on how you do the 
apples-to-apples comparison. So I really hope that members 
opposite will start to take a little more seriously what our 
auditor tells us about the way they do their bookkeeping. 
 
Now in that report that I referred to, there were a number of 
recommendations. And sadly, I don’t think this government has 
implemented any of the recommendations, but many of them 
are in relation to a piece of legislation they were very, very 
proud of, Mr. Speaker. They were very, very proud when they 
introduced The Growth and Financial Security Act, I think back 
in 2008. And they said this government’s going to balance 
budgets and, you know, only time we wouldn’t balance the 
budget, we would never do it two years in a row. God forbid, 
we would do it two years in a row. Well no, guess what, Mr. 
Speaker? It happened three years in a row — in ’10, ’11, and 
’12 under their own legislation — and it’s happening again 
right now. 
 
And what do they do? What do they do? Instead of taking the 
advice of the Provincial Auditor and looking seriously at the 
recommendations that were made in that report, what happens 
is that we get them denying what the auditor says. And we also 
get them quietly, as a footnote almost in the very back end of 
the budget or the Estimates, they quietly put a little footnote and 
say oh gee, I guess we’re just going to repeal the Act. We’re not 
going to bother doing what the auditor did. And I think that’s 
egregious, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s absolutely egregious. 
 
We have, I’ll just read some of the recommendations that the 
auditor made. For example: 
 

We recommend that if balanced budget legislation is 
desired [this is recommendation no. 4], the Government of 
Saskatchewan seek changes to current legislation to use the 
Summary Budget as the basis for balanced budgeting. 

 
Now they’ve done that under great pressure and only, I guess, 
when the summary budget financing would actually help them 
paint a better picture of the finances of Saskatchewan. But they 
haven’t changed the legislation to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
Recommendation no. 5: 
 

We recommend that the Government of Saskatchewan 
seek changes to The Growth and Financial Security Act to 
eliminate the use of “rainy day” funds for balancing 
budgets in conjunction with its elimination of the budget 



274 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2016 

for the General Revenue Fund. 
 
Well they haven’t made those changes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Recommendation no. 6, again another change to the legislation. 
The auditor has recommended changes. She didn’t say throw it 
out when it no longer suits you. And this is the change that she 
said in no. 6: 
 

We recommend that the Government of Saskatchewan 
seek changes to The Growth and Financial Security Act to 
publish a debt management plan that includes all of the 
debt of the Government. 

 
Again this has not been done. No. 7: 
 

We recommend that the Government of Saskatchewan 
seek changes to The Growth and Financial Security Act to 
eliminate the existence of the Debt Retirement Fund. 

 
Which again we know is nothing but a little line that means 
absolutely nothing, and it shows up over and over again in their 
reporting. 
 
And a lot of these deal with transparency and accountability, 
Mr. Speaker. There was one section where the auditors really 
recommended that this government do a much better job of 
reporting. And what she said . . . again there’s no page numbers 
on this report, but it’s in section 4.1.4. This is a quote from the 
report, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Summary Budgets are key financial reports that help 
legislators and the public hold the Government to account. 
Multi-year budgets (such as four year financial plans) 
provide legislators and the public with critical information 
about the financial outlook of the Government. 

 
And here’s what she said: 
 

Putting the requirement for a Summary Budget into 
legislation would help ensure legislators and the public 
receive the information they need to hold the Government 
to account. 

 
She made a recommendation right here where she says, this is 
recommendation no. 2: 
 

We recommend that the Government of Saskatchewan 
seek changes to legislation that would require it to provide 
the Legislative Assembly with a Summary Budget . . . 

 
We haven’t seen those changes. We haven’t seen those 
recommendations. We haven’t seen anything come from this 
government, other than burying the idea that they’re removing 
this bill entirely in the footnotes of their Estimates. They’re not 
talking about it to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
[11:30] 
 
They’re not wanting to acknowledge that all the boasting and 
the bravado was nothing but a shell, Mr. Speaker. Instead they 
hide it in the back of the budget on almost the very last page of 
Estimates. And not only that, Mr. Speaker, we’re really 

concerned about how the tail end of the fund was actually 
managed. 
 
I just want to give a quote from one of my constituents, and I’ll 
amend it a little bit because his words are stronger than are 
allowed in this House, Mr. Speaker. But in general, what he 
said is on March 19th the Sask Party released its platform. In it 
they promised to rebuild the rainy day fund. That’s a promise 
that this government made in their platform on March 19th. 
 
Before election day, April 4th we all recall, the remaining 
money in the account had been drained. We were told that by 
Finance officials. We know this because the budget estimates 
now show that it was already gone in the 2015-16 budget year, 
which ends March 31st. So they had completely drained the 
rainy day fund before March 31st, but on March 19th they’re 
telling the people of Saskatchewan they’re promising to rebuild 
the rainy day fund. And so all we know, that money could have 
been gone before the writ was even dropped. So that means the 
Sask Party made a promise it had no intention of keeping. 
 
What the minister should really come clean on, when that last 
penny was squeezed out of the fund. I think that’s something 
that we in the opposition want to know, and I think it’s 
something my constituent wants to know. I think it’s something 
that the public would be very interested in. When did they 
squeeze out that last drop of the $2 billion that they received 
when they came to power? And in the sunniest times this 
province has ever seen, they have squandered all of that money 
and more, and our debt is climbing and climbing and climbing. 
 
What were their intentions on closing the fund? What were their 
real intentions on closing this fund? And when did they make 
those decisions? When they were making promises, they were 
making promises to the people of Saskatchewan in their 
platform, and they were secretly draining the fund and getting 
rid of the fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier has problems with what 
economists are saying. I don’t know what his problem is; he 
seems to think that economists don’t know what they’re talking 
about. But I don’t know why he’s interjecting here in this point 
in the discussion, other than he doesn’t want to talk about the 
rainy day fund and what his party did to it. That’s part of the 
problem here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think at this point I don’t want to take too much of the time 
today. I know others want to speak, and so I want to talk just a 
little bit about some other areas that I am the official opposition 
critic for. First of all is in the field of agriculture. I’m the critic 
for Agriculture. I just wanted to make a couple of comments 
about what we’ve seen in this budget. What we haven’t seen, I 
think, is more important than maybe what we are seeing. 
 
First of all, I think it was December 2014, the Minister of the 
Economy tabled, or planned to table, a piece of legislation for 
surface rights. And I know farmers have been asking for that 
legislation for a long, long time, and they were very looking 
forward to seeing the contents of that bill. 
 
But inexplicably and suddenly the Minister of the Economy 
yanked that bill off the order paper, so we have no idea what the 
plans were. And when asked, well what’s going on? Why aren’t 



June 2, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 275 

we introducing that bill? He says, well there’s been a change in, 
you know, the price of oil so it’s not a good time now. Well 
when is it going to be a good time, Mr. Speaker? You’re a 
farmer. You understand the kind of things that this, this affects 
farmers. And actually I even introduced a petition today that 
talks about the impact of having this old, antiquated legislation 
in place. The compensation limits are minimal. There’s no real 
hammer to it. So when is this government going to take those, 
those concerns of farmers into account? 
 
Farmers have also been asking for a farmer’s advocate office. 
We see nothing in this budget that’s going to establish and set 
up the necessary advocacy for farmers to help them work 
through issues like surface access, and also, Mr. Speaker, in 
terms of difficulties with grain transportation.  
 
We know that farmers have been asking for tools to make best 
decisions to market their grain and procure inputs. And there’s 
nothing on the part of this government to assist farmers in this 
world where they now have to deal with input prices that are 
scattered across the board, and also the grain sale prices. Those 
prices aren’t available to farmers in any sort of published way, 
so it makes decisions very difficult for farmers. And we’ve been 
calling for that. Farmers have been calling for that. What do we 
see in this budget? We don’t see anything in relation to that. 
There’s nothing in this budget that’s going to improve rail 
access to United States markets. 
 
And also curious — and the minister’s not here today and we 
don’t know what he’s been up to — but in terms of grain 
transportation, we know the bill that was in Ottawa, the fair rail 
bill, is expiring on August 1. And I believe that the 
transportation committee in Ottawa met earlier this week, and 
they have recommended that the Fair Rail for Grain Farmers 
Act, that it be postponed, that the retirement of that bill be 
postponed. And again I think, Mr. Speaker, you know, other 
farmers here in the province who would like to see that those 
protections, as least those minimal protections against the 
unilateral and monopolistic rights of the railways, that they 
somehow be suspended for a bit longer until the review that has 
been, the CTA review and the recommendations have been 
fully reviewed and hopefully not put on the shelf, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s some concerns, and this is an article that came out 
yesterday about the review of the Canadian transportation Act. 
And I think, you know, we need to know what our minister’s 
been up to and what sort of provisions are going to be made to 
look after the issues, the serious transportation issues that 
farmers are facing here in Saskatchewan today. 
 
We don’t see anything in, you know . . . The surface rights 
arbitration Act should also deal with some other issues that 
farmers have been raising and that is, obviously, concerns about 
sour gas in the southeast part of the province. We know that the 
Minister of the Economy has enacted some regulations to deal 
with associated gasses, but what we’re hearing on the ground, 
Mr. Speaker, is there aren’t enough resources within the 
ministry to adequately monitor sour gas emissions, and that it’s 
proving to be very dangerous to human beings as well as cattle, 
Mr. Speaker, and that farmers and producers in the southeast 
corner of the province would like to see much more being done 
in order to ensure that their cattle and that their children and 
their families are safe from that deadly and poisonous sour gas. 

Other concerns I’ve had farmers raise is concerns about 
clubroot, and again a surface access legislation bill could go a 
long ways to ensure that producers are feeling safe when oil rigs 
come onto their lands. We don’t know where they’ve been 
from. We know that clubroot is prevalent in southeastern 
Alberta. We don’t know where those rigs are coming from, and 
there’s no thorough and safe procedures. They have adopted a 
procedure that has been used in southeastern Alberta but, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s been proven to be inadequate. And I think we need 
to see some leadership from this government to ensure that 
farmers are not forced to allow clubroot onto their land. And as 
you know, Mr. Speaker, that’s something that many producers 
are concerned about and, I think, rightly so. 
 
And I’m not sure if this is an Environment issue or an Ag issue 
— I represent and I’m critic for both areas, Mr. Speaker — but 
we’ve heard time and time again from producers and 
conservationists, including Ducks Unlimited and other wildlife 
agencies, that we need some innovation and we need initiatives 
in terms of wetland conservation. We’re not seeing that, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re not seeing any initiatives in that way, and 
certainly no incentives for producers to take initiative 
themselves and make sure that wetlands are protected and 
preserved as best they can be in this day and age. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I know I’m taking more time than I 
should, so I just want to make a few comments about the 
Ministry of the Environment, or probably the lack thereof, 
because in this budget we saw further cuts to the ministry. 
 
Certainly I think there were enhancements to wildfire 
management, and I think that’s a very important and welcome 
addition to the budget, Mr. Speaker. As we know, wildfire 
management is becoming more and more of a concern, and 
certainly with dry summers and what we see happening in the 
northern forests of Alberta and Saskatchewan, certainly I think 
those are initiatives and investments that are well made. And we 
look forward to making sure that the northern people are also 
included in those discussions and properly reflected in terms of 
their . . . you know, again what we saw happen in La Ronge last 
summer where the northern people stepped up and made sure 
that their community was safe and that the damage from the 
wildfires was as minimal as they could make it, given the 
limited resources they had. 
 
There’s nothing in this budget to help us protect biodiversity. 
There’s nothing to take us from the bottom of the pack as far as 
The Conference Board of Canada is concerned. And there was a 
report that came out I think a couple of months ago from The 
Conference Board of . . . oh yes, April 21st, 2016. And they 
gave us a D-minus grade, Mr. Speaker, in terms of our . . . how 
we perform in the environment. It was released, yes, on April 
21st. It compared the environmental performance of Canada, 
the provinces, and 15 peer countries, so there was 26 marks that 
were given. And sadly and embarrassingly, Saskatchewan got a 
D-minus grade and came in 26th out of 26 as the worst 
performer in terms of environment. 
 
They pointed out some of the highlights. I don’t know if they’re 
highlights; they’re really lowlights. Saskatchewan emits nearly 
70 times the GHG [greenhouse gas] emissions per capita, over 
three times the national average. That’s not something to be 
proud of, Mr. Speaker. Canada as a whole gets a D grade on the 



276 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2016 

environment report card and ranks third to last among the peer 
countries, so Canada isn’t doing so well either. 
 
I think one of the things I was looking for in this budget and 
hoping to see this government pay some attention to is air 
pollution. We got a D grade there. We did very poorly in air 
pollution. We got a D grade on sulphur oxides, SOx emissions. 
We got a D-minus grade on nitrogen oxides, NOx. We also got 
a D-minus grade on volatile organic compounds, VOC, and 
particulate matter emissions, PM10 emissions. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s again . . . You know, you can hear this 
government boast and crow a lot about some things, but you 
sure don’t hear them boasting about our environmental 
performance. In fact it doesn’t even form part of their lexicon, 
Mr. Speaker. And I think that’s really of concern, certainly to 
people in my riding in Saskatoon Nutana who raise these 
concerns with me repeatedly and often on Facebook and 
conversations on Broadway Avenue. And I certainly hear those 
comments from people across the country, Saskatchewan in 
particular, about why aren’t we doing better in this area. And I 
think one of the things that . . . This Premier has put us in kind 
of a tough position because by refusing to talk about the 
environment, even talk about the environment . . . Back in the 
Keystone debate, he just refused to talk about it. And he has 
actually put us in a worse position in a geopolitical sense, Mr. 
Speaker. And another question we have to ask, despite his 
entire avoidance of dealing with issues that this planet and 
nation are facing, he still hasn’t gotten our natural resources to 
tidewater. He hasn’t made any progress despite all his 
complaining. And you have to wonder why, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the Sask Party has ignored concerns from stakeholders and 
communities. They’ve ignored concerns from indigenous 
peoples and the duty to consult. They’ve alienated other 
governments; we’ve seen that happen, even his progressive 
friends in Alberta and Ottawa. And for what, Mr. Speaker? No 
progress. No progress for our economy and, to top all of that 
off, we’re now seeing significant job losses both in the oil and 
gas sector, but across the province. We’re seeing bankruptcies 
on the rise, 3,000 jobs lost in the oil sector, and he’s crowing 
about that, Mr. Speaker. It’s hard to understand. Even while 
he’s proudly ignoring the protections that we need for the air 
that we breathe and the water that we drink, he is failing our 
workers. And even while this Premier is cheering for pipelines, 
he can’t deliver them even in the good times. So, Mr. Speaker, 
this isn’t working and I think this government has to take a 
serious look at that. 
 
[11:45] 
 
We’ve said yesterday, look in the mirror and the problems are 
facing this government right in the face. How can someone who 
has not built pipelines and lost thousands of resource workers, 
how can he possibly claim to be a champion of our resources 
and our economy? Mr. Speaker, we have to look at his record, 
and that’s what we need to stay focused on here. 
 
So again, Mr. Speaker, I know I’ve gone on at length and so I 
think at this point I’m going to allow other of my colleagues to 
speak. But before I do that, I do have a motion that I would like 
to present. And I would like to move the following, Mr. 
Speaker: 

That all words after “that the Assembly” be deleted from 
the budget motion and the following be added: 
 

disagrees with the government for tabling a budget 
months late, failing to be transparent to Saskatchewan 
people, and for failing to deliver opportunities to create 
jobs, diversify the economy, and support kids in the 
classroom. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 
has moved the following motion: 
 

That all words after “that the Assembly” be deleted and the 
following be added: 

 
disagrees with the government for tabling a budget 
months late, failing to be transparent to Saskatchewan 
people, and for failing to deliver opportunities to create 
jobs, diversify the economy, and support kids in the 
classroom. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to rise in my place today to second the amendment that 
my colleague from Saskatoon Nutana has made. 
 
And I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that my colleague, the 
current Finance critic, has done a remarkably fantastic job in the 
short time that she has risen to the occasion to accept the critic 
portfolio, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I can tell you basically that based on her background and 
legal training and certainly her intelligence, Mr. Speaker, she’s 
going to do a profoundly fantastic job as our Finance critic. And 
some of the points that she raised yesterday certainly apply to 
the people of Saskatchewan, exactly what the challenge is with 
this particular budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are three components I want to basically add my support 
and my voice to some of the comments made by the current 
Finance critic, Mr. Speaker. First of all, the number one 
challenge that we see . . . Well there are a number of challenges 
we see with the budget. The first one is putting our province 
into debt. That’s one of the common themes we’ve seen from 
this particular government over time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The second compelling trend that we noticed and I noticed, Mr. 
Speaker, is also putting our Crowns in debt, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ve seen that particular action happen on numerous 
occasions. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, they’re putting our future in debt. 
And that’s the most bizarre part of how the Sask Party has 
managed the finances of the province, is now our own future 
through their P3 [public-private partnership] schemes is now 
being put in debt as well. 
 
And then you combine that, Mr. Speaker, with the fact that they 
have mismanaged millions of dollars, billions of dollars, Mr. 



June 2, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 277 

Speaker, and they’ve wasted a ton of money on things like their 
pet project, in particular the lean exercise. 
 
And all the while, Mr. Speaker, as we see the debt of 
Saskatchewan mounting, as we see the Crown debts mounting 
and people paying more for our services, Mr. Speaker, and we 
see the amount of money that this province is going to owe for 
the next 20 or 30 years to foreign companies, Mr. Speaker, it is 
an alarming amount of money that Saskatchewan people are 
going to be put on the hook for, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to be able to tell the people of Saskatchewan exactly 
what my perspective is on this particular budget, Mr. Speaker. I 
alluded to yesterday the fact that the Premier didn’t have the 
courage to bring this budget forward prior to the election, and 
that’s why we’re having budget day June 1st. 
 
Had the Premier come forward and shared with the people of 
Saskatchewan exactly what our state of finances are, Mr. 
Speaker, the makeup in this Assembly would have been entirely 
different, Mr. Speaker, and that’s why it’s important, Mr. 
Speaker, to point that out. 
 
June 1st, when we have traditional budget day, Mr. Speaker, at 
the start of April, Mr. Speaker, we didn’t have it until a full 
three, two or three months later. And the bottom line, Mr. 
Speaker, it won’t be passed until the end of June. 
 
But the bottom line is the budget was hid by the Premier and 
cabinet. In fact I would suggest that even his own backbench 
and candidates had no idea the details and certainly no idea as 
to where we’re heading when we come to the incredible debt 
that the Premier and the Government of Saskatchewan is 
putting on the future of Saskatchewan people overall, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now one of the things that I was really quite disturbed by, Mr. 
Speaker, is the fact that when you look at some of the decisions 
made by this particular government, Mr. Speaker . . . And I was 
sickened yesterday, Mr. Speaker, I was sickened yesterday 
when I heard the news when the Finance minister stands in his 
place and he used as the centrepiece of his budget address, Mr. 
Speaker, the fact that they’re shutting down the Buffalo 
Narrows correctional centre. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, to have the Finance minister so callously get 
up and say that as part of their exercise to curb costs that they’re 
going to shut down the Buffalo Narrows correctional centre, 
Mr. Speaker, where 17, 18 families depend on that income, Mr. 
Speaker, where a number of people in the community of 
Buffalo Narrows also depend on the economy attached with that 
correctional centre, Mr. Speaker . . . These are mortgage-paying 
jobs that people are losing. And for the Minister of Finance to 
get up in the Assembly and use the closure of the Buffalo 
Narrows correctional centre as the centrepiece of his 
presentation to this Assembly is very cold and very callous, Mr. 
Speaker, because these are families that now have to struggle, 
families that now have to struggle with making mortgage 
payments, legal payments, and to raise their family. And I can 
tell you, I spoke to a couple of them already and they are very 
distraught and they are very angry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the points that I would raise is that when the 

Saskatchewan Party had money, Mr. Speaker, they ignored the 
North. They ignored the North and they ignored a lot of other 
sectors as well. But the North is where I’m from and I’m going 
to explain a bit how people felt in the North. When they had 
record revenue, Mr. Speaker, the North was not important to 
them. They ignored the North. And the moment they started 
running into trouble, Mr. Speaker, two or three years ago, the 
cuts began. And this year, Mr. Speaker, when it came to cuts, 
all of a sudden they found out where the North was, Mr. 
Speaker. And they went into an area where jobs are desperately 
needed, jobs are desperately needed, Mr. Speaker, and that’s 
where they cut more jobs. 
 
And I don’t know, Mr. Speaker. When I talk about cold and 
callous, those are the two words that come to my mind when I 
see the Minister of Finance get up in this Assembly and say, as 
part of our cost cutting exercise we’re going to go into the 
community that needs the jobs and the region that desperately 
needs an injection into the economy. That’s where we’re going 
to cut, Mr. Speaker. And like I said, there’s 17, 18 families and 
employees that are affected by this, and I was absolutely 
sickened to the extent that the Minister of Finance would use 
that as part of his budget address to the rest of the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s no question, there’s no question, Mr. Speaker, that I’ve 
always maintained that the North is strong and resilient, but this 
particular cut is cold, it’s calculated, and it’s very callous, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now what I would point out to the people of Buffalo Narrows is 
this, and the staff and the families that have this loss in their 
jobs is, we will stick by you. We will stand by you, and this will 
not end here. There are people out there that are very concerned 
at the cold, calculating way that the Saskatchewan Party 
government shut down this facility. They know — the people, 
the workers know — that this was very cold and very 
calculating. And now the stress that they’re facing to this day, 
Mr. Speaker, that government should be ashamed of the stress 
that they’ve caused working families in the community of 
Buffalo Narrows, people that have given their lives and their 
service over many, many years. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is one of the points that I think a lot of 
them want to wait and make is that they know, they know, Mr. 
Speaker, that the Saskatchewan Party government has wasted 
tons of money, billions of dollars they have wasted. And had 
they not wasted that money, they wouldn’t be in the 
predicament today. But when they needed to make cuts and 
they needed to find money, Mr. Speaker, they again chose the 
workers of this province. They went to a region where jobs are 
needed, Mr. Speaker. They went to a community where people 
have always been very proud of the fact that they have a very 
strong work ethic. And that’s where they went to make the cuts, 
Mr. Speaker. And what I was absolutely sickened, disheartened, 
and astonished at yesterday was the fact that the Minister of 
Finance used that as the centrepiece for his provincial address 
when we talk about the finances of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now one of the things I think is really important is that I am 
going to rally the community and I’m going to rally the region. 
And my open comment to this morning, Mr. Speaker, is that the 
people of the North are going to band together. They’re going 



278 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2016 

to band together. We know that these families are struggling, 
Mr. Speaker. This morning was a huge shock to them. There’s 
many young families that are shocked and saddened and 
disheartened, discouraged, and totally stressed out as a result of 
the cold, calculating move made by the Saskatchewan Party 
government, Mr. Speaker. And I’m going to ask the region — 
the neighbouring communities, the people — to come up with 
some ideas and concepts and support and organize themselves, 
organize themselves to fight back, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s no question that we have to lean on each other and try 
and support these families that were quite frankly forgotten, 
these families that were treated so badly, and these families that 
needed these jobs, Mr. Speaker. There is no question that they 
are hurting. There is no question that they feel the stress this 
morning when they know they’ve got to make their mortgage 
payments, when they know they’ve got to make their vehicle 
payments, when they know they’ve got to buy food for their 
children to put on their tables, Mr. Speaker. That was all ripped 
away because the Sask Party couldn’t manage their finances. 
And what is really callous about this whole process, Mr. 
Speaker, is again the Minister of Finance getting up and using 
that as an example of cost-cutting, in an area that we can ill 
afford to lose jobs, Mr. Speaker. And I find that sickening and I 
find that totally disrespectful, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what’s really important as well is to tell the 
people of Buffalo Narrows and the staff and the people that lost 
their jobs, and the region as well, that you’re going to see a lot 
more cuts coming down on the Saskatchewan people. It hits us 
today. It hits us now. It hits us immediately. But there are other 
areas in the province that are going to be hit just as hard and 
drastically. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to see those cuts 
come in health care. We’re going to see those cuts come in 
education. We’re going to see those cuts come in social 
services, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Why are all these cuts happening despite the fact that the 
Saskatchewan Party has had record revenue the last eight or 
nine years? They have had record revenue, revenues coming to 
this government that are unprecedented in the history of 
Saskatchewan. No other government in the history of our 
province has ever received the type of revenues that the Sask 
Party enjoyed for the last eight or nine years, Mr. Speaker. No 
other government in the history of Saskatchewan. And yet this 
government comes along; they blow all that money, Mr. 
Speaker. They drain the rainy day fund. They add $5 billion to 
the debt. They certainly have added incredible debt to our 
Crowns, Mr. Speaker. And yet again this is the reason why the 
Premier wouldn’t come forward and share the budget and the 
news with the people before the last election. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, he hid that budget. 
 
Now I want to point out that the biggest thing that I’m 
encouraging people back home to do is to rally together and to 
organize. And that’s one of the important messages I think the 
labour movement has as well. And I want to recognize the 
labour movement and to point out that the SGEU 
[Saskatchewan Government and General Employees’ Union] 
officials will be there, Mr. Speaker, will be there to work with 
the workers. And this is an important lesson for us to learn, and 
this is an important lesson for all the union members to learn. 
 

The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that we’re going to have to ensure that 
our labour movement is strengthened over the next number of 
years and months. Mr. Speaker, we’ve got to make sure we 
appreciate the labour movement even more because they’re the 
ones that are going to protect jobs from callous cuts like this. 
They’re going to stand by the workers and do what they can. 
Now more than ever, it’s important that the labour movement, 
the union movement strengthen themselves and really, really 
begin to reach out to their members because we’re going to 
need their strength and support as well. 
 
But the point being, Mr. Speaker, is that all the members of all 
the union movements across the province have got to band 
together because the simple point today is that your 
union-working brothers and sisters in the northern community 
of Buffalo Narrows are now suffering the worst fate ever for a 
working person that has dedicated their lives to serving the 
people of Saskatchewan. They’re being dismissed. They’re 
being terminated. That facility is being closed down coldly and 
callously by the Saskatchewan Party government, and they 
made that a centrepiece of their financial address here in the 
Assembly. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that aside, the union movement is really 
important. We must find ways to strengthen them, to respect 
them, and to speak as loud as we can about their value to the 
people of Saskatchewan. You’ve got to have a strong labour 
movement. You’ve got to protect working people. And you’ve 
got to have the collective bargaining process that everybody 
respects, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’m going to say this, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to say this. 
Had it not been for the Sask Party mismanagement of the . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Weekes: — With leave, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to introduce 
guests. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Biggar-Sask 
Valley has asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member may proceed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a great 
pleasure to introduce 48 grade 6 students from Prairie View 
School in Dalmeny, Saskatchewan. With the 48 grade 6 
students are Mrs. Roxanne Bitner, Mrs. Amber Quinlan, and 
Mr. Aaron Schafhauser, and also a chaperone, Mr. Scott Burant. 
So please join me in welcoming this class of grade 6 students 
from Dalmeny, Saskatchewan. 
 
[12:00] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I would also seek leave to 
introduce guests. 
 



June 2, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 279 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Premier has asked leave to 
introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
need to join with the hon. member who has just introduced this 
group of students from Dalmeny. This is a great group of 
students, Mr. Speaker, and a great school from a wonderful 
community. 
 
This is a very special class though because my niece Samantha 
Kildaw is here and in this class. So I need to give . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . The Deputy Premier says she’s the one with the 
red face. I hope I’m not embarrassing her but I want to welcome 
all of them, and especially Samantha, to their Legislative 
Assembly today as well. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that the Assembly approves in 
general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Ms. 
Sproule.] 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, one other point that I want to 
raise in the address is that this government knew what was 
going on six months ago. And typically, Mr. Speaker, the 
budget comes through on April 1st. Now here it is June 1st, not 
to be passed until the end of June, almost three months. And the 
fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that when the budget was 
released yesterday, there was no mention of this, of any of the 
cuts coming forward and the stark financial position that we’re 
now at as a province. 
 
But I want to again go back to the community of Buffalo 
Narrows and tell them this, that it’s important that you know 
that the rest of the region and labour organizations like SGEU 
will stand beside you. I want you to also know that certainly 
from the communities around the community of Buffalo 
Narrows, we’ll stand beside you as well. And we will reach out 
to the rest of the province to make sure that people know how 
cold, how callous, and how, quite frankly without any regard 
for the years of service by these valued employees, that they 
have now affected 17 to 18 families by simply terminating their 
positions at this correctional centre, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s also important to note that we have got to organize, that we 
have got to organize. And I say to northern people this, that the 
northern people are gradually beginning to build an alliance 
amongst themselves. The First Nations, the Métis people, the 
northerners that call the North their home, Mr. Speaker, they are 

beginning to realize more and more that they have to get more 
active, more organized, and stronger. And they’re doing that 
work, and this is a good example of why the North must 
strengthen from within because the fact of the matter is, Mr. 
Speaker, we have governments that have failed miserably to be 
able to respond to the needs and services in our region. We have 
governments that have failed miserably on protecting valuable 
jobs like the jobs at the correctional centre in Buffalo Narrows. 
 
So it’s important that we get organized. It’s important that we 
support each other. It’s important that we reach out to natural 
allies like the labour movement to start supporting and 
protecting and showing compassion, Mr. Speaker, to those 
people that are losing their jobs, now in danger of losing their 
home or their vehicles, and totally stressed of being able to 
provide for their families. This is a good lesson on how we must 
do more to appreciate the value of our unions, the value of the 
labour movement, the value of those organizations that protect 
the working men and women of this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to underline that statement time and 
time again as we continue looking at this budget and how they 
have quite frankly hurt a lot of people. And my first response, 
Mr. Speaker, as a result of the budget address, is that quite 
frankly I was sickened by the callousness and the coldness that 
this government has shown to many working people across the 
province. And I was also sickened, Mr. Speaker, to see that 
come June 1st, that was the only time they had the courage to 
present the budget when they knew all the details as far back as 
January, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In the North, as I also mentioned, we have to learn a hard lesson 
from this as well, Mr. Speaker. We have to learn a hard lesson 
from this as well. And I’m going to ask the Premier as well, did 
he or is he planning on sending his rapid response team to the 
community of Buffalo Narrows to deal with the trauma that he 
created as a result of these employees losing their job? Will the 
Premier send his rapid response team as he’s done in other 
occasions, Mr. Speaker? I don’t think so. I don’t think so. And 
that’s where the basis of callousness comes from, Mr. Speaker, 
because there’s no regard for the region, no regard for this 
community, no regard for these families that were impacted as a 
result of the closure of the Buffalo Narrows hospital. 
 
But it’s not going to end here, Mr. Speaker. We are going to 
fight back. We are going to fight back as a region and as a 
community and as a band of workers that desperately need 
these jobs. And I will point out again, Mr. Speaker, the number 
one challenge in the North . . . And I’m going to say it again. As 
a result of a poor government, Mr. Speaker, as a result of a poor 
government, that we must be more determined as a people and 
our region to work towards an independence as a region and a 
sense of us working together and strengthening ourselves so the 
government never does this to us again, either ignoring us or 
when they need to find places to cut, that’s the first place they 
look, in the place in and amongst people that could least afford 
to lose these good-paying jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would encourage northerners right across the board at 
this time to show compassion and support to the community of 
Buffalo Narrows and in particular the workers in that 
community that lost their jobs. It is going to affect their 
economy. It’s going to affect the service delivery in that area. 



280 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2016 

It’s going to affect everything in that particular region, Mr. 
Speaker, as a whole. But it’s going to most adversely affect 
those families. 
 
Now what do we do when we start losing good families that are 
working, Mr. Speaker, that are sending their kids to school, that 
are purchasing goods? These are all highly valuable assets that 
any community has when you talk about hard-working families, 
Mr. Speaker. Well the Saskatchewan Party ripped away that 
opportunity from 17 or 18 families, and I say shame on them. 
Shame on them, Mr. Speaker. If I could say it a million times in 
this Assembly, I would, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But there is hope on the horizon, Mr. Speaker, because a lot of 
people are starting to rally together. They’re starting to rally 
because they know in the absence of good government, we’ve 
got to take charge of our own region. We’ve got to take charge 
of our own communities. We must band together as northerners, 
as First Nations, as Métis people. And one of the things that we 
have to do is form an unbreakable alliance in a sense of saying, 
no more is the government going to come along and treat us 
with such disregard and disrespect. We’re going to start 
asserting ourselves on our shared territory, Mr. Speaker. 
There’s a lot of people really upset about this. 
 
And I would urge the government to pay very close attention 
because the community is going to rally behind these workers. 
The region is going to rally behind this service, Mr. Speaker, 
and we haven’t heard the last of this issue yet. There’s going to 
be a lot of people that are going to get organized, Mr. Speaker, 
and I’m quite confident that we’re going to bring them here. I 
hope to bring the workers here. I hope to bring the workers here 
and have them in the Assembly so this party and this 
government can see the faces of the people that they affected, 
Mr. Speaker. So they can meet the men and women that have 
served this province for years. So they can see the stress that 
they’re under as a result of losing their employment, and the 
challenge that they face as a family and the challenges that they 
face on the community and that they place on the community. 
 
And I want to say again to the Premier, to the cabinet, and to 
the Sask Party, shame on you for doing that. Shame on you 
because these people really were good workers. They were 
good employees. They are good families. They’re from a good 
community. Why would you do that to them? Why would you 
single them out, especially in an area that desperately needed 
those jobs and that service, Mr. Speaker? 
 
That’s why I’m supporting my colleague from Saskatoon 
Nutana who is doing a remarkable job identifying how they 
have poorly managed our finances, wasted billions of dollars. 
And when it’s time to come and try and mend their ways, Mr. 
Speaker, or fix their problems, where do they go? To a region 
that cannot afford to lose those jobs. That’s the Sask Party style. 
That’s the Sask Party way. And I say again to them, shame on 
them. And that’s why I’m standing up today, and I’m going to 
support the amendment made by my colleague from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
University. 
 
Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is very 

much an honour to be the seconder on the Finance minister’s 
motion to pass the 2016-2017 Saskatchewan budget. I’d like to 
thank my esteemed colleague for his gravitas in leading this 
budget and for the excellent support of the deputy Finance 
minister, Clare Isman, along with Denise Macza and Arun 
Srinivas for their thorough presentation and patient responses to 
our questions. 
 
Sometimes, Mr. Speaker, it’s difficult to see the forest through 
the trees. I believe that was the case yesterday when the 
opposition Finance critic presented comments for the 
2016-2017 budget. In her comments, three primary critiques 
were mounted. Those were: that we were cutting health and 
education; that we were no longer interested in diversifying the 
economy; and that we were cutting ABE [adult basic 
education], advanced education training, and apprenticeships. 
Another outside commentator noted that the budget lacks 
compassion and attacks the most vulnerable. 
 
I like budgets, Mr. Speaker. I like budgets because I’m an 
action-orientated person, and whereas election campaigns and 
even to some extent speeches from the throne are about 
promises and dreams, budgets are where the rubber meets the 
road; in our case, both figuratively and actually. 
 
I’ve been really struck by the focus on a tree rather than the 
forest as I’ve watched these debates over the last several years, 
and so I decided to spend some time reviewing all of our 
budgets from the election of 2007 onwards. Our budgets tell our 
story, Mr. Speaker. And though individually planted, they’ve 
collectively created a pretty remarkable forest. A few key 
themes have run through our story of budgets, but the most 
remarkable one is that, in each case, we’ve had a very clear plan 
and that we have consistently, methodically, and steadfastly 
moved forward. 
 
In our first budget delivered as a newly-elected government, 
then Finance minister Rod Gantefoer focused on readying our 
province for growth. That year, it was reported that 
Saskatchewan was the number one jurisdiction for exports, and 
we experienced an economic surge and an accompanying 
population growth that was placing significant strain on our 
infrastructure. Minister Gantefoer talked about the need to 
upgrade and renew schools to ensure that educators had proper 
facilities to teach our future leaders, and that our hospitals and 
health facilities needed investments, and that our roads and 
highways were crumbling under the weight of traffic with 
heavy loads. 
 
It was recognized that if we wanted to be ready for the projected 
growth, we needed to address the infrastructure deficit we 
inherited when we took office. And I think it is worthwhile to 
point out, Mr. Speaker, that as we go through the list of the 
number — really extraordinary number — of new and 
renovated capital projects this government has taken on since 
coming to power, what is startling is not just the sheer number 
of capital projects that we have engaged with, in record 
investment numbers in many of the 10 years we’ve been in 
power, but also just how neglected this critical infrastructure 
was by previous governments. 
 
I often wonder how many more Aboriginal people would still 
be in school or how many victim and perpetrator support 



June 2, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 281 

services for domestic violence there would be if our 
infrastructure had been kept in better shape. The thing about 
capital investments, Mr. Speaker, is that they are legacy 
projects. When they are left in disrepair or grossly inadequate to 
meet the needs of citizens, that is a legacy and a culture. 
Conversely when they are a priority and they are invested in, 
that is also a legacy. Both last beyond any government in 
power. 
 
The ready-for-growth initiative back in 2008 began 
year-over-year investments in critical infrastructure. This 
infrastructure has been focused on five key areas: educational 
infrastructure, housing infrastructure, highways infrastructure, 
health infrastructure, and innovation infrastructure. All of that, 
Mr. Speaker, serves people. 
 
Returning to the theme of it being difficult to see the forest 
through the trees, let’s take a look at the story that our budget 
tells. In 2008-2009, the Hon. Rod Gantefoer talked about being 
ready for growth. And in her comments, the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana argued that, in real numbers, we are cutting 
health and education. She further argued that a minimum of 6 
per cent is needed to keep to the costs of living. 
 
Let’s look at what we’ve done in health and education. The 
ready-for-growth initiative included nearly $200 million for key 
repairs and upgrades to our hospitals and health facilities as 
well as the purchase of new medical and safety equipment. It 
also fixed leaking roofs left over from the previous 
government’s infrastructure deficit in health centres in Leader 
and Climax. 
 
[12:15] 
 
Over 160 million was focused on upgrades to schools in rural 
and urban communities including giving the green light to 11 
new school projects. Four hundred million was devoted to 
fixing the condition of highways and roads including of note, 
investments to northern First Nations access roads in order, and 
I quote, “. . . to lessen the isolation they feel and ensure they are 
fully able to participate in our growing economy.” 
 
As part of keeping promises from the election that fall, the 
budget also included investments to provide cancer patients to 
have access to drugs to help prolong their lives. We committed 
and delivered on doubling the caregiver tax credit for family 
caregivers who look after elderly, sick, or disabled family 
members. In that year, the government promised and delivered 
on its promise to devote one million to support transition houses 
and sexual assault centres. We addressed the nursing shortage 
in the province, added training seats, increased support for 
cancer patients, and conducted the Patient First Review, and 
patient exit surveys. That was only in one budget year. 
 
In terms of investments and social infrastructure, in ’09-10 Rod 
Gantefoer also began to look at how we serve and include 
people with disabilities in our growing economy and 
community. We began to look at wait-lists in the community 
living division, expanding facilities, and creating more spaces 
for people with disabilities. 
 
We invested in transit support for people who had disabilities. 
We also created, of note, 1,000 new child care spaces and over 

$12 million in added funding towards space expansion and 
increased pay for early learning and child care workers. That 
year we committed to the children’s hospital in Saskatoon and a 
mental health plan. 
 
The following year capital projects were engaged to improve, 
repair, and replace facilities, and increase the number of 
medical professionals were key focuses. The Cancer Agency 
was well funded again to support patients, and we invested in 
reducing surgical wait times. Twelve new postgraduate seats in 
the College of Medicine were added, which doubled the number 
of new seats since elected. These obviously were and are 
critical front-line medical professionals in our health care 
system. We also began to provide support for autism, another 
enduring theme. 
 
In K to 12, funding announcements were made for six new 
schools and upgrades to seven existing schools, and an increase 
of 33 million in operating funds for school divisions. 
 
We also invested in housing as many people in those days were 
struggling to make ends meet in a market where housing had 
reached a shortage. So we started Headstart on a Home which 
allowed more people to own their own home by providing a 
low-cost, fixed mortgage, which provided home ownership 
opportunities to about 1,000 families that year. 
 
Social Services received an increase to help for spaces for the 
intellectually disabled, an enduring theme throughout our 
government, and of course continued investments in 
infrastructure like the children’s hospitals, the twinning of 
Highway 11, and so on continued. 
 
We also continued to increase our share of the cost of 
education, bringing it to 65 per cent from only 40 per cent prior 
to 2007. Pre-K [pre-kindergarten] to 12 got a 9.1 increase in 
funding and the approval of 120 school renovation projects in 
65 Saskatchewan communities, 2.6 million to develop an 
additional 40 pre-K programs and another 500 child care 
spaces. 
 
We set a goal to hire 800 new nurses, and achieved that. The 
RHAs [regional health authority] received increases to 
revitalize the kidney transplant program. The Saskatchewan 
Cancer Agency kept getting money to increase access to chemo, 
mammography, and bone transplants. And additional funding 
for increased access to MRIs [magnetic resonance imaging] and 
CT [computerized tomography] scans, the reduction of surgical 
wait times, more spaces in the medical and teaching units at the 
U of S, general hospitals, and, of importance, the introduction 
of STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society]. More supports 
for people with autism. 
 
And in addition to the Headstart on a Home, we partnered with 
the municipalities on two programs. The first was a property tax 
abatement on designated new home construction, and the 
second was incentives to develop new rental housing. And we 
also increased our support for Habitat for Humanity to build 
another 30 homes. As well investments at the U of S campus for 
student housing, as well as group homes for people with 
intellectual debilities and the elimination of wait-lists for that 
service. The next year, affordable housing continued. We added 
the rental home construction incentive, and a corporate income 



282 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2016 

tax rebate was introduced to qualifying companies to build new 
rental accommodations. First-time homebuyers credit was 
added. All of this resulted in the doubling of housing starts in 
four years. 
 
PST [provincial sales tax] exemption was extended to 
children’s clothing under the age of 17. Medical professionals 
were added. They were forgiven part of their tuition expenses at 
universities and so were nurses, by the way. In the first four 
years of government, benefits to low-income seniors doubled 
under the seniors’ income plan. In this budget, the benefit was 
pledged to be increased by triple, and the seniors’ personal care 
home benefit was also introduced. 
 
We expanded the SAID [Saskatchewan assured income for 
disability] program which enabled the tripling of the number of 
people eligible. There were another 15 pre-K programs and 
another 500 child care spaces. Investments in programs targeted 
fetal alcohol syndrome and autism programming. Another six 
new school projects, and overall funding for school operating 
costs rose by 5 per cent. And more investments in health, 
surgical wait times, Cancer Agency, and so on. 
 
The beginning of key investments in long-term facilities began. 
That year six facilities were completed and seven additional 
ones were started. The replacement of the North Battleford 
Hospital was added and also the new hospital in Moose Jaw. 
 
The next year tripled the seniors’ income plan, increased 
support again for SAID, increased operational funding for all 
women’s shelters in Saskatchewan, including facilities in 
Regina and Prince Albert which were expanded with those 
resources, and started work on the shelter in Melfort. 
 
Health care partnerships to coordinate the purchase of six new 
generic drugs, the reduction of wait times, a home care services 
pilot program for seniors in Regina. The Sask Cancer Agency 
was again well funded. We also had the rural doctor locus 
program, increasing the available pool of rural doctors. The 
Moose Jaw Hospital and a seven-fold increase in Alzheimer’s 
First Link services. 
 
Pre-K operating funding was up by 2.3 per cent which included 
a boost of 17 million to address enrolment increases. Another 
15 pre-K programs. Continued investments to expand the 
number of seats for RNs [registered nurse]and physicians and 
front-line workers. Investments in FAS [fetal alcohol 
syndrome] and autism, and in affordable housing. The U of R 
[University of Regina] residence. Thirteen hundred new rental 
under the rental and construction agreement, 240 new units 
under the affordable homeownership program, support for 70 
secondary suites, 40 homes for Habitat for Humanity, and 
investments in the Saskatchewan repair program to keep 
existing affordable housing units viable. 
 
The next year again, continued investment in education capital 
including the replacement of Connaught and Sacred Heart in 
Regina. Renovation of Saskatoon’s care home. The new 
provincial laboratory. More funding for medical imaging 
equipment. The Swift Current long-term care facility. Extension 
of the affordable housing agreement. Additional supports for 
the Habitat for Humanity with another 12 homeowners. 
 

Record funding of health of nearly $5 billion reducing surgical 
wait times again. Cancer treatments, screening, diagnostic 
imaging services. More investment in the rural physician 
recruitment program. A hot-spotting program to identify and 
provide more appropriate services to frequent users and 
intensive users of the health system. Care for seniors. 
Additional monies for the Home First/Quick response program. 
Increasing the seniors’ income benefit plan, seniors’ care 
Urgent Action Fund to address issues in the long-term care 
facilities, and a house call program. 
 
People with disabilities, again 55 per cent increase in the SAID 
[Saskatchewan assured income for disability] program. Mental 
health and addictions plan. Two point four per cent increase in 
K to 12 operating funding with another 90 million top-up to 
address projected enrolment increases. Investments in bullying 
and cyberbullying action plans and CommunityNet bandwidth 
and upgrades to schools. Fifteen again new pre-K programs, 
bringing the provincial total to 316. Another 500 new child care 
spaces, bringing the total to 14,200 or a 55 per cent increase 
since 2007. 
 
This brings us to today where we have three-quarters of all of 
our expenses are in health, education, and social services. We 
have the largest allocation for school construction and 
renovation in the province’s history, nine new joint-use schools, 
and the elimination of school division portions of their local 
share for major capital projects, meaning that the province took 
over 100 per cent of the capital cost of school projects. 
 
On her second critique, the Finance critic said we’re no longer 
interested in diversifying the economy. Okay. Again looking 
through all these budgets, the story is a bit different. In ’08-09 
we were reported as being the number one jurisdiction in 
Canada for growth and exports. We began investments in 
agriculture, which have continued on to today, which was 
curious, since the Finance critic raised agriculture today. Year 
over year it’s been somewhere where we’ve invested. The 
government had campaigned on fully funding agricultural risk 
programs like crop insurance, AgriStability, and AgriInvest 
programs, and we delivered every single year. Actually not only 
did they deliver, but the crop insurance program was not only 
fully funded but was increased that year by $25 million. 
 
Municipalities got part of a revenue-sharing agreement that got 
the first of a series of increases in ’08-09. Revenue sharing was 
increased to 7 per cent, of importance, as far back as 2008-09 
because yes, we’ve been in power for 10 years. We recognized 
and committed to initiatives designed to try to facilitate the full 
participation in the economy by First Nations and Métis people. 
The approach then, as it was now, is to work with First Nations 
and Métis entrepreneurs, particularly to boost northern 
employment and business development. 
 
In ’10, 2009-10 the housing collapse happened in the United 
States, contributing to a global recession. In some ways, the 
conditions of that time are similar to the ones today. And we did 
not stand idly by. In fact, we adopted many of the same 
approaches we have today, keeping taxes low and continuing to 
invest in infrastructure. In fact, in the ’09-10 budget, we made 
the largest education property tax cut in Saskatchewan history 
and increased our own educational funding to two-thirds of the 
cost. 



June 2, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 283 

We also began to chip away at the infrastructure deficit we 
inherited, and we gave an economic booster shot in the fall to 
invest in schools, long-term care facilities, better municipal 
infrastructure, better and safer highways, increases in housing 
and jobs and, in this budget, invested another 1 billion on top of 
that in all of those areas. This all totalled an investment of 2.5 
billion in capital funding in just two years. 
 
This also included moves to begin a new revenue-sharing deal 
with the municipalities. We also did something . . . We also 
added the Saskatchewan research and development tax credit, 
making it fully refundable to provide financial support 
incentives to leaders in innovation in our province. And of 
course we continue to invest in AgriStability, AgriInvest, crop 
insurance, and PTRC [Petroleum Technology Research Centre]. 
 
In the ’10-11 budget we started off by talking about the 125th 
anniversary of the Battle of Batoche, the anniversary of the 
Riders, and so on. But some of the headlines that year were like 
this: “Saskatchewan job numbers surge.” “Saskatchewan 
economy expected to lead.” A description by the RBC [Royal 
Bank of Canada] that our province was off to a rip-roaring start. 
The CIBC noted that we would lead the country’s economic 
growth that year, and economic growth that was then predicted 
to be the third best in the country at 3 per cent, and that we were 
the only province noted to have posted significant job growth 
the previous year. 
 
Small-business owners were among the most optimistic in the 
country. Our provincial unemployment rate dropped to 4.3 per 
cent, by far the lowest in Canada. And our population continued 
to grow. 
 
That budget was all about innovation and agenda and building a 
knowledge economy by focusing on Saskatchewan export and 
trade markets, agricultural biotech, value-added development in 
nuclear and carbon capture. We put resources into the 
synchrotron on the U of S campus, the PTRC, and 
telecommunications research. 
 
The Premier made several trips that year to the United States 
where he personally made the case on Capitol Hill. The energy 
made the case to China. Missions went to Asia and India. And 
as a result of these efforts, canola sales to China went up by 80 
per cent. Peas were up by $105 million. Linseed was up by 341 
per cent. And we sold 970 million worth of goods to India, 
setting up Saskatchewan to contribute 45 per cent of all trade to 
that country from Canada. 
 
[12:30] 
 
Much of this was attributed to our increased support of STEP 
[Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership], our focus on 
agricultural exports and crop diversity, and similar investments 
in agricultural research and development. We also reduced red 
tape and regulations for businesses and began to reduce our 
own spending by finding efficiencies and measuring our 
performance. We were still the lowest tax jurisdiction in 
Canada. 
 
In 2011-2012 we noted that the population of our province 
continued to rise and that Saskatoon and Regina were the fastest 
and third-fastest growing cities in the country. Housing starts 

were up, wages were up, and we had the lowest unemployment 
in the country. 
 
In that we noted that our very first act after getting elected in 
2007 was to eliminate the PST on used cars. That same year, 
the basic spousal and personal exemption for dependent 
children was raised, which took 92,000 people off the tax rolls. 
 
In 2009 the education property tax was cut. In 2011-2012 the 
basic spousal and tax exemption was raised by another $1,000 
and the children exemption raised by another $500, resulting in 
a total of 114,000 people coming off the provincial tax rolls, 
giving us the highest income threshold in Canada. 
 
We also again reported high on business optimism. We cut 
small-business income tax rates by more than half, which gave 
us one of the lowest business tax rates in the country. We 
reduced approval and licensing times. The potash industry 
invested nearly double their capital expenditure in this province, 
creating thousands of new jobs, and these were facilitated by a 
stable tax and royalty structure. 
 
Again we fully funded the farm income stabilization programs, 
highway increases, police services increase, and again the 
fulfillment of a new funding model based on a full percentage 
of the PST [provincial sales tax] for our municipalities. And on 
innovation, Canadian Light Source, investments in ag biotech, 
Sask Research Council, PTRC, and a knowledge-based 
economy. 
 
Moving from there, our crop production was up by 15 per cent. 
The economy continued to grow. International exports grew by 
25 per cent. Oil and potash production and sales were up. 
Building permits grew by 25 per cent. The economy grew by 
3.5 per cent. We had the lowest unemployment in the country. 
Our debt-to-GDP [gross domestic product] ratio was the second 
lowest, and we were among Canada’s leaders in economic 
growth. 
 
We also continued to invest in infrastructure in schools, health 
care facilities, highway, and infrastructure; 6000 kilometres of 
highways were improved over this time. 
 
We did research and technology grants in agriculture, 
investments in SRC [Saskatchewan Research Council] who did 
things like helping Canadian vaccine companies export their 
products to Brazil. We focused on value-added opportunities for 
natural resources, water security research strategy, boreal water 
strategy for the northern lakes. The institute for food security 
was established, and we invested once again in the Canadian 
Light Source. 
 
The unemployment rate was only 3.8 per cent, by far the lowest 
in Canada. And we increased funding to the Saskatchewan Arts 
Board and to Creative Saskatchewan’s investment programs, 
again keeping building highways and hospitals as well as the 
southeast bypass. 
 
The opposition critic also talked about cuts to ABE, advanced 
ed training, and apprenticeship. Again in ’08 we froze tuition to 
advanced ed and had an 8 per cent increase in university 
operating costs. We also supported the Johnson-Shoyama 
Graduate School. We addressed labour shortages by increasing 



284 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2016 

training opportunities, including 300 more on-reserve ABE 
seats for Aboriginal people to be delivered through local 
colleges and the Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies. 
Again we increased operating funding for K-12. 
 
We also started the graduate retention program, the most 
aggressive youth retention program in Canada that year. We 
invested in the Aboriginal Workforce Development Fund as 
well as new regional colleges to improve the accessibility to 
post-secondary education by people in our rural environments. 
We had 1,100 new apprenticeship training seats. We also 
increased the operating grant in the next year to our universities, 
which included an extra 16.3 million to keep tuition increases 
down. The funding for the graduate retention program increased 
by another 4.3 per cent. 
 
The following year, 24.6 million to the universities to limit 
tuition growth; 6 million devoted to expanding physical and 
nursing training programs; and, of importance, 48.6 million in 
direct support for Aboriginal education institutions, including 
ABE and provincial training allowance, all of which increased 
funding to educational opportunities for Aboriginal people by 
$30 million. 
 
Next year, 2 per cent increase to support operating costs at the 
university; the northern action plan to work with leaders to 
address issues that hinder social and economic progress in the 
North; additional resources for First Nations people resulting in 
almost 600 more Aboriginal, Métis people who were employed; 
as well as a 24 per cent increase in the number of First Nations 
and Métis apprentices and a doubling of the First Nation and 
Métis journeymen’s, journeyperson’s certifications. Advanced 
Ed got a 9 per cent increase, resulting in a 40 per cent increase 
in funding for Advanced Ed since 2007. 
 
We eliminated the wait list for ABE for Aboriginal people. 
Work readiness, we had work readiness employment 
development, the northern career quest program, the 
Saskatchewan industrial trades and employment partnership, the 
inroads to agriculture career program, and the aircraft 
maintenance program at the Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 
Technologies. Additional funding was put towards the 
recommendations by the joint task force on improving 
education and employment outcomes for Aboriginal people in 
partnership with FSIN [Federation of Sovereign Indigenous 
Nations]. The result of all this? Close to half of the people 
employed in the uranium industry at that time were Aboriginal. 
 
Again, the following year, more increases to post-secondary 
education, expansions of RN seats, technical institutes and 
regional colleges, medical undergraduate seats, medical 
residency, as well as nurse practitioner seats. Not only was the 
ABE wait list eliminated for Aboriginal people, but 300 seats 
were added last year and another 700 were added in this 
particular year. Three hundred apprenticeship seats were also 
added. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this brings me to today, this long story brings me 
to today. And it’s this: today — in response to the three 
criticisms by the member opposite — today, STEP 
[Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership] members forecast 
an increase in exports in 2016. Today, we beat our own target to 
export agri-foods, which was projected to be 15 billion by 2020. 

We’re here in 2016 and we already hit 15.1 billion. 
 
Today still, we are the most attractive jurisdiction in the world 
for mining and second globally. Today still, we have a number 
of achievements in manufacturing, and today still we have 
invested year over year over year in supporting our agricultural 
producers. 
 
The point of growth, as the Premier has said often, is to secure a 
better quality of life for Saskatchewan people. I don’t think, 
having read all of this, that we can be characterized as cold and 
callous. Instead I would say that a family of four with an 
income of $50,000 pays the lowest taxes and utilities in Canada, 
Mr. Speaker. Again, three-quarters of our budget is in Health, 
Education, and Social Services. Cold and callous people don’t 
do that. 
 
We have a continuation of 9,000 ABE spaces and a 76 per cent 
increase in apprenticeship training seat growth, 9.7 million 
increase for the SAID program, and investments in targeted 
supports for classrooms which includes support for our Syrian 
students. 
 
I end by noting that we have a deficit. It is a conscious deficit, 
not to hurt our most vulnerable people. And like all the plans 
we’ve had so far, we will deliver on reducing that deficit 
because our Finance minister has a plan and he will deliver. 
 
I close, Mr. Speaker, by saying I will be supporting the budget 
presented by the Minister of Finance with no amendments. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know whether 
we should just wait a little bit until the rest of the members 
opposite come in the House and want to hear this or . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, they’re probably in the lounge 
listening. Okay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to enter into this budget debate today, 
but before I do I would like to say a few words, a few thank 
yous that I was unable to respond to during the Throne Speech 
because the member from Yorkton talked too much. 
 
Firstly, Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate you on your 
election to be Speaker. I would like to congratulate the member 
from Last Mountain-Touchwood on his appointment as Deputy 
Speaker, and the campaign that he ran. Mr. Speaker, I also 
would like to congratulate all new and returning members on 
their successful election campaigns. Mr. Speaker, I was very 
impressed with the maiden speeches from all the new members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank my campaign team, which 
consists of some 100 workers, with a special thanks to Carole 
Carlson, business manager; Vi Cardinal, phone bank 
coordinator; and Mike Carlson, signs. Mr. Speaker, a special 
thanks to my best friend — my wife, Valerie, who was my 
campaign manager who worked tirelessly. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
believe a true test of a marriage is to have your spouse as your 
campaign manager. We made it through, Mr. Speaker, and 
today we celebrate our 37th wedding anniversary. She 



June 2, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 285 

definitely is a lucky woman, I tell you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the constituents of Cut 
Knife-Turtleford for their support in the election, supporting 
myself and my team with 80 per cent of the popular vote. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the past four years I have sat in this 
Assembly and listened to the opposition, and I had hoped that 
they were past the Regina Manifesto, the tree book, 
Brotenomics. But their federal counterparts have now 
introduced the Leap Manifesto, which members opposite have 
endorsed, Mr. Speaker, a document that would truly devastate 
the Saskatchewan economy. I think the biggest devastation in 
this is that the former member from Saltcoats, Bob Bjornerud, 
isn’t here to speak to this because I’m sure he’d have done a 
job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think members opposite would be well served if 
they stuck to getting the facts straight, and not worrying about 
manifestos and unfounded campaign promises. Mr. Speaker, 
good factual debate makes for good decisions in government, in 
business, and everyday life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think all of us in this Assembly are familiar with 
cowboy poetry, an art in which a person takes storytelling, tall 
tales and myths, and creates entertaining poetry. Mr. Speaker, 
we in this House were blessed with poetry from the former 
member from Lakeview, and we’re glad that that’s over with. 
But, Mr. Speaker, we may not have cowboy poetry, but we do 
have Athabasca poetry in which storytelling, tall tales, and 
myths are truly applied. 
 
Now that I’ve got that off my chest, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk 
about the budget. Congratulations, first of all, to this Finance 
minister’s first budget — a job very well done. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to thank all the ministries for their dedication to this very 
tough budget, and I’d also like to thank the treasury board 
members for their hundreds of hours of deliberation in 
finalizing this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan 2016-17 budget will keep 
Saskatchewan strong by controlling operational spending and 
investing in people and infrastructure. This year’s budget 
contents have no tax increases and no new taxes. Mr. Speaker, 
by keeping taxes low, controlling spending, and investing in 
much needed infrastructure projects like highways, schools, and 
hospitals, we will help Saskatchewan’s economy through a 
difficult year before economic recovery is expected next year.  
 
Clearly, Mr. Speaker, a $968 million drop in resource revenue 
is having an effect. Our government opted for a manageable 
deficit in this budget rather than cutting funding to priority 
areas such as health, education, and social services. Mr. 
Speaker, to ensure the sustainability of high-quality public 
services delivered in the most efficient, effective way possible, 
this budget also marks the beginning of a government-wide 
process of transformational change. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we recognize agriculture’s role as a resilient and 
stable contributor to Saskatchewan’s economy, and continue to 
offer the programs and services producers need to keep their 
operations and their entire agriculture industry strong. Mr. 
Speaker, the Ministry of Agriculture budget for 2016-17 will 

increase by 7.5 per cent for a total of $389.8 million. This 
includes $254.6 million to fully fund business risk management 
programs, a $14.6 million increase from the previous year. Mr. 
Speaker, from the very start our government has been 
committed to building a strong agriculture industry. We have 
been focused on supporting our farmers and ranchers with 
strategic investments and effective programming. The budget 
continues that commitment. 
 
[12:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, record funding for municipal revenue sharing 
highlights the $406.3 million in direct government support to 
Saskatchewan municipalities in the 2016-17 provincial budget. 
Mr. Speaker, the overall funding represents an increase of $56.7 
million or 16.2 per cent from the 2015-16 budget, and an 
increase of 164.4 million or 67.9 per cent from the 2007-08 
budget. Mr. Speaker, urban revenue sharing for all cities, towns, 
villages, and resort villages will amount to $174.6 million in 
2016-17. Revenue sharing for rural municipalities, which 
includes organized hamlets, will total 76.6 million, and northern 
municipalities will receive just under $20.3 million this fiscal 
year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a record $5.17 billion health budget will be 
invested in health infrastructure, improving access to care, and 
reducing wait times for surgery and diagnostic services for 
Saskatchewan people. The 2016-17 health budget is an increase 
of 57.4 million or 1.1 per cent over the 2015-16 budget. There 
has now been a 50 per cent increase in the health budget since 
2007. Mr. Speaker, regional health authorities will receive $3.4 
billion for an operating funding increase of 2.3 per cent 
provided to regional health authorities last year, and 56 per cent 
increase since 2007. 
 
Included is $20 million in additional funding to reduce surgical 
wait times. The demand for surgeries continues to rise in 
Saskatchewan, with an estimated 3 per cent more surgeries 
needed in 2016-17 compared to 2015-16. Surgical funding in 
2016-17 will be above both the 2015-16 and the 2014-15 levels. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has gone from the longest surgical 
wait times in Canada in 2007 to the shortest wait times in 2015. 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, we have seen wait times creep 
back up a bit in recent months. This additional investment in 
surgery should reverse that trend and ensure we continue to 
have the shortest wait times in the country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency is receiving 
more than 167 million in funding in this budget, up 9.8 million 
from last year or 6.2 per cent. The substantial increase in 
funding will help pay for the additional 15 new cancer drugs 
that were approved last year. Since 2007, funding for 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency has increased by nearly 113 per 
cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the first time in Saskatchewan history, the 
highways and infrastructure budget tops $1 billion. This marks 
another record investment in provincial roads and 
infrastructure. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan drivers can expect to 
see work on projects in virtually every corner of the province. 
This year’s plan includes major projects in addition to much 
needed repairs to many of our rural highways that will keep our 



286 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2016 

growing economy strong. Mr. Speaker, the $1.15 billion 
2016-17 highways and infrastructure budget includes 355 
million for capital construction; 30 million in new funding for 
the first year of the highway 2020 plan, a three-year $70 million 
surge in highway repair and maintenance; and $500 million for 
the Regina bypass. 
 
Mr. Speaker, more than 1300 kilometres of provincial highways 
will see repairs or upgrades this year. Highlights include 
continuing work on major projects like the Regina bypass and 
the twinning of Highway 7 and 16 near Saskatoon, and 
Highway 39 between Estevan and Bienfait; starting 
construction on new overpasses at Warman and Martensville, 
upgrading more than 100 kilometres of rural highways to 
improve safety and access including Highway 322 north of 
Silton and Highway 354 near Dilke, and 200 kilometres of 
repaving. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as part of the highways 2020 plan, $30 million 
will be invested in repairs to many highways throughout the 
province including Highways 220 and 322 in the 
Silton-Strasbourg area, Highway 924 to Dore Lake, Highway 
340 north of Radisson, Highway 376 between Maymont and 
Asquith, and Highway 45 south of Outlook, and Highway 58 
between Chaplin and Shamrock. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our track record when it comes to highways is 
clear. Since coming into office, we have invested more than 
$6.3 million, including the funding in this budget, to improve 
more than 11 000 kilometres of roads and highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to focus a little bit on highway and 
infrastructure projects in the Cut Knife-Turtleford constituency. 
Approximately 6.5 million will be spent in the 2016-17 budget 
year. This investment will include the following projects: bridge 
rehabilitation on Highway 17 over the Battle River; micro 
surfacing on Highway 26 from approximately six miles south of 
Mervin to Turtleford; bridge replacement on Highway 40 east 
of Cut Knife; and medium preservation on Highway 21 north of 
Maidstone. These projects are all part of the $30 million surge 
project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in regards to Highway 26 from the junction of 
Highway 4 north of The Battlefords to Turtleford, this has seen 
very high traffic counts due to construction of four new SAGD 
[steam-assisted gravity drainage re oil extraction] recovery 
plants in the Edam-Vawn area. Mr. Speaker, even in low oil 
price situations, Husky Energy and Serafina Energy have still 
moved forward with these major capital projects. They have 
employed some 300 to 400 people during construction phases 
giving a major boost to the local economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a recent quote from The StarPhoenix news release 
said about Husky Energy’s SAGD investments: 
 

“We are ahead of schedule and under budget with Vawn, 
an indication of our growing expertise in developing these 
thermal projects,” Husky Energy CEO Asim Ghosh said in 
a statement. 
 
“These developments are leading our transition into a low 
sustaining capital business, with among the lowest 
operating costs in the industry.” 

The Vawn Project is expected to enter production in the 
third quarter of 2016 and ramp up its full capacity of 
10,000 barrels per day, the company said in a news release. 
 
Husky Energy’s 10,000 barrels-per-day Edam East thermal 
project [came on stream last month] . . . The Calgary-based 
energy firm’s 4,500 barrels-per-day Edam West 
development is set to enter production in the third quarter.  
 
The company said it expects 40 per cent of the total 
production to come from low sustaining capital operations, 
up from 8 per cent in 2010. 

 
Husky’s heavy oil production is currently about 135,000 
barrels per day, 74,000 barrels of which will come from 
[these] thermal projects. The three new Saskatchewan 
projects are expected to add an additional 24,500 barrels per 
day of production capacity. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Serafina Energy’s Edam facility currently is in 
operation and has a nameplate production capacity of 6,000 
barrels per day. This facility uses proven SAGD technology to 
recover remaining reserves from existing heavy oil pools that 
have come to the end of their primary production ability. Future 
Serafina facilities in the area will replace this design, increasing 
recovery from additional existing pools. The Edam project is 
conveniently situated between Lloydminster and North 
Battleford. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many more projects are on the drawing table, so to 
speak, for Husky Energy, which they’re talking of another 
SAGD plant at Spruce Lake, another one at Meota, and another 
one at Prince. Serafina is also planning to do another project at 
Meota. These plants, like I said earlier, will take at least 3 to 
400 people to help build them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk a little bit . . . I think we hit a 
nerve with this from members opposite about transformational 
change. Starting this year, we are commencing a 
government-wide process of transformational change. Our goal 
is to ensure that sustainability of high-quality public services 
delivered in the most efficient, effective way possible. 
Transformational change can’t be achieved overnight, and it 
can’t be accomplished by government alone. 
 
As part of this transformation, important questions will be 
asked about every program, initiative, and expenditure. 
Questions like: is this program or this service the role of 
government? If so, is it being delivered in the best possible 
manner at the lowest possible cost to taxpayers? Where similar 
programs with similar objectives exist, can those multiple 
programs be combined into one that provides better results at 
less cost? Could a different governance model provide 
administrative savings while still remaining responsive to the 
needs of Saskatchewan people? 
 
We will also take a deep look at government’s sources of 
revenue. The overall objectives of our province’s revenue 
system must always be to keep Saskatchewan strong by keeping 
our economy strong and to ensure government revenues are 
sufficient to ensure important programs and services are 
sustainable now and into the future. That includes a tax system 
that is competitive, simple, and fair for all Saskatchewan 



June 2, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 287 

taxpayers. Those will be the principles of change to our tax 
system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our province’s credit rating is among the highest 
in the country. Saskatchewan’s percentage of total debt to GDP 
— 17.6 per cent as of March 31st, 2016 — is the second lowest 
among provinces. Combined with low interest rates, it is a 
cost-effective time to financial capital. Crown corporations are 
borrowing just over 744 million in 2016-17 through finance 
capital, and executive government will borrow one billion 
specifically for investment in capital outlined in Saskatchewan 
Builds capital plan. Combined with a sound repayment plan, we 
were taking a disciplined approach to borrowing. 
 
As we meet the challenge created by falling resource revenue, 
we will continue to control spending. Controlling spending 
means making some difficult but necessary decisions. Mr. 
Speaker, continuing low oil prices for oil, potash is putting 
pressures on revenue and on our province’s economy generally. 
This year, resource revenue will be down nearly $1 billion 
compared to last year’s budget. This budget forecasts total 
revenue of 14.02 billion, 1.8 per cent lower than last year, and a 
total expense of 14.46 billion, up just 2 per cent from last year. 
That combines for a projected deficit in 2016-17 of 434 million. 
Our GDP is forecasted to deliver by .06 per cent this year with a 
return to growth of 2.5 per cent forecast for 2017. A lot of paper 
here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are years where unforeseen events — drops 
in the price of oil or potash, or costly natural disasters — make 
it prudent to run a manageable deficit rather than implement 
severe cuts to programs and services or increase the tax burden 
like members opposite did. I mean, it used to be a fear when I 
was in business. I could remember that we dreaded every 
budget because we knew there was either going to be income 
tax, personal or corporate, or else the PST was going up, but 
there was definitely going to be a tax increase. This is one of 
those years. By keeping taxes low, controlling operational 
spending, and investing in much needed infrastructure projects 
such as highways, schools, and hospitals, we will keep 
Saskatchewan through a difficult year before the economic 
recovery expected next year. And we remain committed to 
return to a balanced budget in 2017-18. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m getting near the end here, but I would like to 
say that, along with the member from P.A. [Prince Albert] here 
and the member from Melfort, we all were in the car business. 
And I can remember, it wasn’t that long ago during those, as I 
mentioned before, the dark days, the 16 years of that 
government, where we constantly had an ad in the paper for 
mechanics or salesmen or whatever. And it was almost 
impossible to hire anybody because nobody wanted to move 
into the province. They were thinking of leaving. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during our campaign, we had nine town hall 
meetings, and we put on some 8000 kilometres. And in the 
seniors’ centre in Wilkie, there was a saying on the wall there 
that I think applies to everybody in this House, and it goes like 
this: 
 

The value of this day is impossible to measure, for it will 
never come again. I do not wish to regret its passing. What 
I do today is up to me and no one else. I can use it to good 

advantage or squander it away. The choice is mine. I will 
try to make it my day of success rather than failure; 
satisfaction rather than frustration; joy rather than pain; 
laughter rather than tears, contentment rather than worry, 
and love rather than hate. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the budget, and I definitely 
will not be supporting the amendment. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — It now being 1 p.m., this Assembly stands 
adjourned until Monday at 1:30. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .................................................................................................................................................................................... 259, 279 
  Cox ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 259 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 259 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 259 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 260 
  Reiter ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 260 
  Fiaz ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 260 
  Weekes ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 278 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 261 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 261 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 261 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 261 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Waste Water Improvement Project 
  Ross ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 262 
 Recognizing Pride Month  
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 262 
 University of Saskatchewan College of Arts and Science Awards 
  Olauson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 262 
 Accomplishments of Northern Student 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 262 
 Africa Day 
  Fiaz ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 263 
 Fundraiser Supports North Central Family Centre Kitchen 
  Beaudry-Mellor ......................................................................................................................................................................... 263 
 Gender and Sexual Diversity Pride Month 
  Lambert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 263 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Government’s Fiscal Management 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 263 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 264 
 Funding for Employment Training Services 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 264 
  Harrison ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 265 
 Funding for Health Care 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 265 
  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 265 
 Funding for Employment 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 266 
  Harrison ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 266 
  Tell ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 266 
 Funding for Education 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 267 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 267 
 Provincial Credit Rating 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 268 
  Doherty ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 268 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 17 — The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2016 
  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 268 
 Bill No. 18 — The Credit Union Central of Saskatchewan Act, 2016 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 269 
 Bill No. 19 — The Film and Video Classification Act, 2016 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 269 
 Bill No. 20 — The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur les juges de paix 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 269 
STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Ruling on a Question of Privilege 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 269 
 



 

PRIVILEGE 
  Cheveldayoff .............................................................................................................................................................................. 270 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 271 
 Recorded Division......................................................................................................................................................................... 272 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Merriman .................................................................................................................................................................................. 272 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 272 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 276 
  Beaudry-Mellor ......................................................................................................................................................................... 280 
  Doke ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 284 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 




