






















































Hansard: November 30, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 51A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 30, 2016, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (Ind.) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Saskatoon Meewasin 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 49; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10 
    Independent (Ind.) — 1; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1531 
 November 30, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would ask for 
leave of the Assembly for both myself and the Leader of the 
Opposition to make a statement of condolence. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 
 

STATEMENT OF CONDOLENCE 
 

Roger Parent 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — “That in all our works begun, continued, 
and ended in thee we may glorify thy holy name and finally, by 
thy mercy, attain everlasting life.” These words you just led us 
in in the daily prayer that begins each proceeding, Mr. Speaker. 
Though sometimes the routine of a prayer can rob it of its 
petition or its aspiration, but not today, Mr. Speaker. For in that 
prayer, in those words, rests the hope we have for the family of 
our friend Roger Parent, MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] for Saskatoon Meewasin — that last evening, when 
he passed away, was not the end. For his family gathered in this 
House today, this legislative family, it is where our hope rests 
too. 
 
Before I go on, I want to thank the hon. Leader of the 
Opposition. He came to my office this morning to extend 
condolences on behalf of his team to me, for my team, for this 
team, for Roger’s team. That was appreciated. And we’re also 
wanting to say thank you to the Leader of the Opposition and 
the caucus opposite for their co-operation in allowing for this 
tribute. 
 
There are many titles represented in this venerable Chamber. 
Yours is quite a title, Mr. Speaker. The Leader of the 
Opposition, Premier, ministers of the Crown, whips, House 
leaders — all impressive as titles go, perhaps. But none as great 
and none as honourable as those few among us who can 
honestly and credibly be called constituency men or 
constituency women. 
 
Roger Parent was a constituency man. He worked hard to serve 
and to represent the people that sent him here. He never forgot 
the people that sent him here. Most discussions I had with 
Roger would involve him saying something like, you know 
what I’m hearing; or, my people are saying. And when Roger 
said that to you, you knew that that was exactly the case 
because he would have just been talking to them. He would 
have been door knocking. He would have seen them about the 
community. He would have been returning phone calls. And he 
would then be, in those conversations, giving voice to his 
constituents. And then he would advocate for them, sometimes 
for their individual plight or their individual case, and 
sometimes on broader policy matters that he believed might 

uplift the station of the people that he called his constituents. 
 
He was a constituency man who was very proud of the diversity 
of his constituency. Members on both sides of the House will 
know that that part of Saskatoon, like other parts of our major 
cities, there are so many newcomers that have moved there. 
And in his very first speech in this House — it was the 6th of 
December, 2011 — he talked about those newcomers. 
 
He talked about people on his campaign team that actually 
would help him to communicate. He told me that on many 
occasions he knew he was talking to potential voters but folks 
who couldn’t vote at that particular time. But he wanted to hear 
from them and he wanted to hear their concerns. 
 
You can judge a lot about an individual — you can judge a lot 
about a candidate — by the people that are attracted around that 
individual to help in some effort like a campaign, especially 
when they’re all volunteers, when dozens of them, in Roger’s 
case, wanted to give of the most precious thing they have, their 
time, to do not-so-fun things like door knocking or cold calling 
or organizing campaign events. 
 
But Roger had a force with him. They knew him best. Many of 
them knew every side of him, more sides than some of us knew. 
But they gave of their time. They wanted to volunteer. They 
wanted to send him to Regina. They believed he would be their 
voice, and he was. 
 
In that same maiden speech, Mr. Speaker, Roger names that 
corps of volunteers, named them all. I counted 91. Imagine that 
calculation. He’s giving his maiden speech in this House, and 
we all know — we’ve all done it — it’s a bit of a nervous 
moment. We don’t know if we’ll be too long or what we should 
put in or what we should leave out. And he decided that every 
person that was at the core of that campaign, had volunteered 
their time, owed the respect, his respect and his gratitude, to 
have their name read into the public record, into the Hansard. 
 
He was a constituency man who found all of the challenge and 
all of the honour that any of us might seek from our vocation in 
the job that he had earned. In my one-on-one meetings with 
Roger, we would canvas what his aspirations were, or I would 
ask him what else might he want to do in politics. And he said, 
“Well I’ll do whatever I’m asked,” but he said, “I’m happy 
being an MLA.” 
 
He said to me, and I remember he said, “It is an honour to be an 
MLA.” You know, that’s a rare thing in politics today. I was 
surprised to hear it the first time. He said it subsequently to me 
that, when we had other meetings, and I shouldn’t have been 
surprised that that was what he wanted to do because he worked 
so hard to do it. He ran four times, twice unsuccessfully. The 
last one very, very close, and some would have at that point 
been discouraged and probably decided to do something else, 
but he kept at it, battling in a contested nomination and then 
winning the seat, and then winning again. 
 
He was a constituency man. But he brought a provincial 
perspective as well. His priority was an economic one. He 
believed — I talked to him about this — he believed that we 
really did need to focus on the economy, that that was the best 



1532 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2016 

way to ensure long-term quality of life for not just his 
constituents but people around Saskatchewan. 
 
In that same maiden speech in December of 2011, he offered a 
series of touchstones to his vision. But the very first one he 
mentioned is that his objective, his goal, his vision would be 
that this province would be a province of 1.1 million people by 
2015, and I am glad he lived to see it. 
 
In recent years his focus, as has been the focus of other 
members including members opposite, has been on the issue of 
procurement. He believed in free trade. He believed in open 
procurement, but he also believed that it should be fair. And he 
had concerns that that wasn’t necessarily happening based on, 
maybe, treatment that other companies from outside the 
province would get from their home jurisdiction, but just 
generally about the procurement policy. And he would talk to 
us in the front row, in any row; he would talk to me about it. 
 
And today in government we actually have an office that the 
Attorney General is responsible for called Priority 
Saskatchewan, whose job it is to respond to those concerns not 
just from Roger, from others. But boy, we heard a lot from him 
on the matter. Their job is to work with government on 
procurement and also for businesses here so we can ensure a 
level playing field. And I promise you this, Mr. Speaker, 
Priority Saskatchewan would not exist in the province today, 
neither would even its objectives be as focused, I don’t believe, 
were it not for the work of Roger Parent. 
 
Roger had a good sense of humour. The Deputy Premier, as 
he’s wont to do, sometimes asks random questions. And he told 
me today that he asked Roger once, why don’t you just go by 
Roger Parent? And Roger said, well because then people would 
speak French to me, and I don’t know French. And furthermore, 
he said, I’ve no interest in being a federal judge. 
 
Before politics, Roger used his skills and his training as an 
economic development professional, and I was in the economic 
development profession at the time he was involved in the 
Saskatchewan Economic Developers Association. And I was 
too — not as involved as he. But his priority was Aboriginal 
economic development. He was proud of his Métis heritage, 
and he was determined to be a part of uplifting all people 
through opportunity. 
 
Roger was a constituency man, but he had his other passions, as 
we all do. He loved to hunt. He loved to golf. He was a 
left-hander like I am, but that’s where the similarities ended 
because Roger was good. He was also pretty good at swinging a 
hammer. He’s very good at home improvement. He shared 
projects with me, and this was a passion of his. 
 
But here lately, seeing him beam about his grandson Nash 
betrayed the fact that there was a new passion, a greater 
passion. Nash is the son of his daughter Shanaya and her 
husband, Kyle. And those of us who have worked alongside 
him and those who knew and loved him best I know will 
resolve this day, and all the days forward, that they’re going to 
ensure Nash knows the quality and character of his grandfather. 
 
In the Apostle Paul’s letter to the church in Philippi, he invokes 
the peace that passeth all understanding. And what he meant by 

that, clearly, is that there are for certain profound losses, certain 
sudden tragedies, where there ought to be no immediate peace 
for anyone that’s endured them — that we could understand, at 
least — and so then we might want to pray for the peace that 
passes understanding. So whatever our tradition today and 
whatever our faith, that is what we must do for Sheila and her 
family, whom he called . . . Sheila, he called in that same 
speech, his rock, and for all who mourn Roger. 
 
And still there is the assurance of the psalmist who said, sorrow 
lasteth the night, but joy cometh in the morning. We know it 
will take much more than one night, Mr. Speaker, but we pray 
today that the sorrow and the loss that Sheila and her family 
feels, that we all feel, will soften to longing and then to 
wistfulness and then to good memory and then even to smiles 
and, yes, to joy that we got to know Roger, that we were able to 
work alongside him, and that they had the chance to love him 
and be loved by him. 
 
So to the member for Saskatoon Meewasin, Roger Parent, thank 
you for your example. Thank you for being a constituency man. 
Thank you for your hard work, your humour, and your humility 
and your servant’s heart. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Eloquent, 
thoughtful words from the Premier here today, emotional and 
passionate words for definitely a good person within this 
Assembly and within our province. 
 
I think it’s important to say that we mourn together and we 
stand together. And this will be a different type of day here in 
this Assembly here today. We get engaged in battles often in 
this Assembly that are very important, some battles that aren’t 
that important. But today, to properly mourn this sitting MLA, 
this very good person, we lay down those battles and we 
remember him properly. 
 
It’s a sudden and devastating passing of a sitting MLA of this 
Assembly, of a very good person, of a very good family man. 
And I didn’t get the chance to know Roger to the level that the 
Premier and others opposite would have. I appreciate the stories 
that are shared here today. 
 
But in the experiences that I had with Roger — and in fact they 
were many, often quite brief exchanges — I found an affable, 
gentle, caring individual, something that I think is sometimes 
lost in the whole discussion of what happens in this Assembly 
and how we engage in the discussions that are relevant to our 
province, that many in this Assembly engage in as people and 
citizens. And while heated moments occur on this floor and 
through question period, as they should, there’s a humility and a 
humanity that many members bring to their work, and Roger’s 
certainly one of those individuals. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The brief exchanges, the many exchanges that we often had 
were centred on a mutual passion of ours. He was an avid 
outdoorsman, avid hunter, and I am too. And I’ve enjoyed, I’ve 
enjoyed those conversations. And it’s sometimes a bit 
grounding, when you step outside the heated exchanges of this 



November 30, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1533 

Assembly or the tough questions of the media looking down 
upon us here today, to be holed up in the corner of a hallway 
with someone like Roger to be talking about a passion such as 
hunting. And I know that, I understand that he had the chance, 
in this quick and hard fight that he took on, I understand that he 
had the time to, the opportunity to be out in the field this fall for 
his annual hunting trip. And you know, that sits well with me, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
More than a Member of the Legislative Assembly, Roger, as 
described so well by the Premier, was a beloved family man 
and someone that, if you simply look at their record of service 
not just in the Assembly but importantly prior to entering into 
this Assembly, is someone that’s been devoted to his 
constituency but to people in our community and our province 
for, it would appear, his entire life. 
 
It was mentioned by the Premier, but his work in advance of 
coming into this Assembly and working around economic 
development and the support in work around indigenous 
economic development and support for indigenous 
entrepreneurs, it’s something that can’t be underestimated. And 
that’s a powerful legacy that I suspect will live on in the lives of 
many people all across our province. 
 
If you look at the list of organizations that Roger lent himself 
to, it’s an impressive list: the Saskatoon Regional Economic 
Development Authority’s Aboriginal economic development 
committee; the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation; the Métis 
Nation — Saskatchewan; the Saskatchewan committee on 
procurement; the Saskatoon homelessness initiative partnership, 
all such meaningful organizations. And again this is in a place 
that that legacy of this person, this good person, where it will 
live on. 
 
On behalf of the official opposition and all Saskatchewan New 
Democrats, I extend my deepest condolences, our deepest 
condolences to Roger’s wife, Sheila, to the entire family for 
their tremendous loss. The Premier referenced the legacy and 
the memories that will live on and be so impactful for the 
grandchild that was mentioned. I’m certain that that will be the 
case. 
 
This will be a period of tremendous loss and hurt and mourning. 
But from a good person such as this, I’m certain that fond 
memories will live on in many ways and that his legacy will be 
lived out in the members of his family and those organizations 
and the people that he’s touched. 
 
It’s fair to say that cancer has touched all of us. And I 
understand that the final battle had complications and other 
matters and, I believe, a stroke as well. But I think, as we 
remember Roger, we also think of those all across our province 
that have taken on this battle with this terrible disease, all of 
those that are currently battling this terrible disease. And I think 
we each think of those within our own lives for whom have 
taken on this battle and for whom have been lost. 
 
At this time our thoughts and prayers are simply with the 
family. And, Mr. Speaker, finally I do want to offer our deep 
condolences to all members opposite in that entire caucus — a 
very difficult day and a very tragic loss. Our sympathies and 
our care rest with each and every one of, each and every one of 

you for losing this valuable member of this Assembly and a 
good colleague, I know.  
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’re thankful for the life of Roger Parent. 
 
The Speaker: — Would all members please rise for a moment 
of silence. 
 
[The Assembly observed a moment of silence.] 
 
The Speaker: — Please be seated. 
 
I’m advised that Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor is here 
for Royal Assent. All please rise. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
[At 13:53 Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following bills.] 
 
Her Honour: — Pray be seated. 
 
The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 
Assembly in its present session has passed several bills which 
in the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour and to 
the bills I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 
 
Clerk: — Your Honour, the bills are as follows: 
 
Bill No. 39 - The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 

2016 
Bill No. 42 - The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous 

Enforcement Measures) Amendment Act, 
2016 

Bill No. 2 - The Miscellaneous Statutes (Crown 
Corporations’ Fiscal Year End 
Standardization) Amendment Act, 2016 

Bill No. 37 - The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2016 
Bill No. 32 - The Automobile Accident Insurance 

(Benefits) Amendment Act, 2016 
Bill No. 12 - The Public Health (Miscellaneous) 

Amendment Act, 2016 
Bill No. 26 - The Patient Choice Medical Imaging Act 
Bill No. 13 - The Cancer Agency Amendment Act, 2016 
Bill No. 1 - The Crown Corporations Public Ownership 

Amendment Act, 2016 
Bill No. 16 - The Adoption Amendment Act, 2016/Loi 

modificative de 2016 sur l’adoption 
Bill No. 28 - The Extension of Compassionate Care Act, 

2016 
Bill No. 33 - The Child and Family Services Amendment 

Act, 2016 
Bill No. 34 - The Provincial Lands Act, 2016 
Bill No. 14 - The Horned Cattle Purchases Repeal Act, 

2016 
Bill No. 10 - The Forest Resources Management 

Amendment Act, 2016 
Bill No. 11 - The Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 

2016 
Bill No. 17 - The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 

2016 
 



1534 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2016 

Bill No. 29 - The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 
2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur les juges 
de paix 

Bill No. 4 - The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2016 
Loi modificative de 2016 sur la Cour du Banc 
de la Reine 

Bill No. 5 - The Electronic Information and Documents 
Amendment Act, 2016 

Bill No. 6 - The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2016 
Bill No. 7 - The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2016 

(No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2016 modifiant le droit 
législatif 

Bill No. 9 - The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments 
Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 
2016 sur l’exécution des jugements canadiens 

Bill No. 15 - The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2016 
Bill No. 19 - The Film and Video Classification Act, 2016 
Bill No. 35 - The Small Claims Act, 2016/Loi de 2016 sur 

les petites créances 
Bill No. 36 - The Small Claims Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2016 
Bill No. 8 - The Summary Offences Procedure 

Amendment Act, 2016 
 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these bills. 
 
The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 
Assembly has voted the supplies it requires to enable the 
government to defray the expenses of the public service. 
 
In the name of the Assembly, I present to Your Honour: 
 
Bill No. 45 - The Appropriation Act, 2016 
 
to which bill I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 
 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 
Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this bill. 
 
[Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 13:58.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
this Assembly do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that this Assembly do now 
adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Pursuant to the sessional order dated 
May 18th, 2016, this Assembly stands adjourned until Monday, 
March 6th, 2017. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 13:59.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

STATEMENT OF CONDOLENCE 
 Roger Parent 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1531 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1532 
ROYAL ASSENT ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1533 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


