






















































Hansard: November 17, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 44A  THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 17, 2016, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (Ind.) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10; Independent (Ind.) — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1387 
 November 17, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, Mr. Speaker, seated in your gallery, it’s my 
privilege to welcome a friend of mine — unlike the Minister of 
Health who doesn’t have that many friends apparently, and too 
bad — is the mayor of Prince Albert, His Worship Greg 
Dionne. Mayor Dionne was first elected as councillor in Prince 
Albert in 2003. In 2012 he was elected as mayor and in 
October, this past October, he was re-elected to that position 
with a substantial majority. 
 
The people of Prince Albert are fortunate to have a committed 
individual in Mayor Dionne who has worked tirelessly to put 
his city first. And he’s committed years of service to the 
community of Prince Albert. I look forward to working with 
him and his council in the next coming years to make Prince 
Albert the best that it can be. 
 
Additionally, Mr. Speaker, I’d be remiss if I did not mention the 
strong leadership that Mayor Dionne demonstrated this past 
summer overseeing the water crisis in Prince Albert. He and his 
team were outstanding. And I should mention that after all of 
that, the city of Prince Albert recently placed second in a 
Western Canada water taste challenge. So they’re back on track, 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to join me in 
welcoming Mayor Dionne to his legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — I ask for extended leave for an introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There’s two special 
guests I want to introduce in your gallery. That’s Mayor Greg 
Dionne and Mayor Marcel Roy. Mayor Dionne recently won a 
second term as mayor of Prince Albert, having first been elected 
mayor in 2012. He is Prince Albert’s 29th mayor. Before being 
elected mayor, he served as a councillor in ward 2 for nine 
years. As well, Greg spent 27 years in property management, 
most notably at the Gateway Mall in downtown Prince Albert. 
 
Mayor Dionne has served on many boards and committees. He 
is currently the vice-chair of the Board of Police 
Commissioners for the city of Prince Albert. Mayor Dionne has 
also been involved with numerous local organizations in many 

capacities such as Prince Albert Raiders hockey club, Victoria 
Hospital Foundation, and fundraising for the Marion Aquatics 
Pool. Nationally, Mayor Dionne has held several positions on 
the Canadian police board, including as treasurer, Vice-Chair, 
and chairman of the Canadian police board. 
 
And I agree with the member across that Mayor Dionne showed 
great leadership this summer when dealing with the water crisis 
in our situation. And I am sure that we will continue to see that 
type of decision and compassionate leadership over the next 
four years. And I look forward to working with you, also with 
Mayor Marcel Roy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mayor Roy is new to civic politics and was 
recently elected as mayor of Weyburn, and I believe he was just 
sworn in earlier this week. Mayor Roy is a resourceful and 
knowledgeable businessman and has operated an industrial 
safety training business since 1992. Mayor Roy has served the 
citizens of Weyburn as one of the first emergency medical 
technicians in the province for two years, and a police officer 
with the Weyburn Police Service for over 30 years and retired 
as sergeant. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am certain that Mayor Roy will be a great leader 
for Weyburn, and I look forward to working with him also in 
the future. And I ask that all members welcome both of these 
leaders in our province to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I too want to join in, in welcoming the new mayor of 
Weyburn, Marcel Roy, to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would note for people that followed the 
campaign in Weyburn, and if members didn’t, I would certainly 
encourage them to try to find a couple of introductory videos to 
our new mayor. One was voiced by Morgan Freeman and the 
other was voiced by Christopher Walken, and so I’m afraid that 
my introduction of the new mayor is going to be quite 
underwhelming compared to those. 
 
But I would just add, as the member opposite has said, Marcel 
Roy has been a long-standing member of the community of 
Weyburn and has been very active and involved in community 
issues, particularly as has been pointed out, one of the first 
EMTs [emergency medical technician] in Saskatchewan. A 
30-year veteran of the police service as well. For over 20 years 
now, has provided safety services, particularly in the oil patch 
where he does safety training for a number of individuals and a 
number of companies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he was sworn in earlier this week, and I would just 
like to say that I am looking forward to working with Mayor 
Roy as he assumes his role as the mayor of Weyburn. And I 
would ask all members to join with me in welcoming Marcel to 
his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 



1388 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2016 

Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would ask leave 
for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you. It’s my pleasure to introduce a 
group of students here from the University of Regina, in the 
west gallery. They hail from countries all over the world and 
have chosen Saskatchewan and specifically the University of 
Regina for their post-secondary education. 
 
And I’d like to welcome the following students, if you could 
give a wave: Daniel Soto-Lopez from Mexico, in Master of 
Science, industrial systems engineering; Sua Park from South 
Korea, doing a Bachelor of Education; Tingting Liu from 
China, in Bachelor of Business Administration; Umar Ahsan 
from Pakistan, in Master of Science, electronics systems 
engineering; Tolulade Otayemi — I hope I have that correct — 
from Nigeria, doing a Bachelor of Social Work; Dayo Stephen 
Ogunyale from Nigeria, in Master of Science, industrial 
systems engineering; Gurmeet Kaur from India, in Bachelor of 
Business Admin; Dr. Abdul Kader Siddique Meer from 
Bangladesh, doing his Bachelor of Science; Khansa Irfan from 
Pakistan, doing a Bachelor of Health Studies; and Meiling Hao 
from China. 
 
I would also like to welcome the associate director of 
international student services at the University of Regina, 
Haroon Chaudhry, as well as Cassandra Loustel, life skills 
advisor from U of R [University of Regina] International. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this week is International Education Week when 
we celebrate students who’ve chosen to study here from abroad 
and encourage our own students to take advantage of 
international study opportunities. And I would ask all members 
to join me in welcoming these U of R students in the legislature 
today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d just 
like to join with the minister in welcoming these impressive 
international students to their Legislative Assembly and 
certainly Mr. Chaudhry and the others from the services that are 
provided at the University of Regina in making sure that we’re 
working alongside international students to ensure that their 
experience and their educational gains are maximized, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But certainly having graduated as an undergrad from the 
University of Regina and then later on as a grad from the 
master’s in public administration program, there’s always been 
a vital component on the University of Regina campus that has 
been from around the world. But that international component 
certainly grows stronger and more vibrant and diverse all the 
time. And I guess, Mr. Speaker, in terms of ensuring that we 
benefit as a province from that contribution from people coming 
here, I’m hoping of course that they will be considering 
Saskatchewan and Canada in their future as they complete their 

education and look to put that knowledge and that skill to use. 
 
So again I join with the minister in welcoming these individuals 
to the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan and, Mr. Speaker, 
may it be their Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan that they 
come to again and again. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
seated in your gallery — and I’ll ask her to stand up briefly — 
is Chris Guérette who is the new Chair of the francophone 
school division in our province. I want to, on behalf of all 
MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly], wish her 
congratulations on becoming the Chair. We look forward to 
working with her in the future. I’m pleased that she came down 
for a short meeting earlier today and want to wish her and her 
board members all the best. And we look forward to working 
with them. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
join the minister in welcoming Christiane Guérette to her 
Legislative Assembly. Christiane is a good friend of mine, and 
very welcome, as all people are, in our legislature. Not only is 
she the new president of the francophone school board, Mr. 
Speaker, but she is also the CEO [chief executive officer] of the 
Saskatoon & Region Home Builders Association. Many of us 
would know her from her work with the realtors association. 
And my time when I got to know Christiane was when she was 
very involved with Equal Voice, and bringing a chapter of 
Equal Voice here in Saskatchewan. She is a huge proponent of 
increasing the number of women in politics, and I know she 
appreciates that our caucus is half women, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Christiane also has two amazing little boys, Jan-Sébastien and 
Louis-Pascal, who are wonderful friends of Ophelia. Ophelia 
actually thinks they’re two of the most marvellous little boys 
who’ve ever lived, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And with Christiane, I know Mr. Norris, Rob Norris, who 
everybody knows in this House, he is here as well today. And 
he’s also a constituent of mine; it was quite a surprise, door 
knocking in this last election, to find Mr. Norris living in 
Montgomery. So I would like to welcome these two fine guests 
to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all the other members of 
the Legislative Assembly, 24 grade 7 and 8 students from 
MacNeill School. 
 
This is my fourth school group that have come this fall. So 
that’s kind of . . . I think we’ve got the record this session of the 
number of school groups that have attended. 
 
And accompanying these 24 grade 7 and 8 students is their 
teacher, Ms. Joella Klein, and also their educational assistant, 



November 17, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1389 

Ms. Kari Deics. So please welcome them to their Legislative 
Assembly. And I will be meeting with them later on this 
morning. So welcome, and give us all a wave. Thank you very 
much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 
too want to join with the member opposite to welcome Rob 
Norris to his legislature today. Rob’s no stranger to this 
Chamber, Mr. Speaker. He’s been a good friend for many years 
and an ongoing confidant of mine and a number of people on 
this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. So I wanted to welcome 
Rob back in his legislature, and if everybody could help me and 
join in welcoming him here. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, I’d like to introduce a friend of mine sitting in the 
east gallery. No stranger to rural Saskatchewan, Sean Wilson 
from G.W. Construction is here. I just wanted to introduce him. 
He’s also the president of the Canora-Pelly constituency, and 
during the election campaign the Premier had the privilege of 
taking one of Sean’s vehicles for a little spin in Buchanan. And 
recently Sean just became elected the mayor of Buchanan. So I 
ask all members to welcome him to his Legislative Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again to present a petition to reverse the cuts to the Lighthouse 
program. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that in April 
2014, the minister of Social Services said that the Lighthouse in 
Saskatoon would “. . . take pressure off existing detox facilities, 
hospitals, and police cells while keeping people safe, especially 
in our brutally cold winters.” The petitioners also point out that 
very same day, Mr. Speaker, that the minister of Health said, 
“We want to ensure that individuals with mental health and 
addictions issues have a safe place to stay.” 
 
[10:15] 
 
The petitioners also point out that since that time, Mr. Speaker, 
in supporting the stabilization unit, that they’ve repeatedly 
indicated that the Lighthouse stabilization unit keeps 
individuals out of hospital emergency rooms and jail cells. And 
again, Mr. Speaker, we only need to look to the Saskatoon 
Health Region that has experienced record over capacity in 
recent weeks, Mr. Speaker. Clearly the Lighthouse isn’t the 
whole problem, Mr. Speaker, but making cuts to the Lighthouse 
certainly doesn’t help. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately reverse 
their recent cuts to funding that allows extremely 
vulnerable people to access the services of the Lighthouse 
stabilization unit in Saskatoon, and revisit their imposition 

of a strict and narrow definition of homelessness in 
November of 2015 which forced the Lighthouse to cut 
back its hours of essential services in February of 2016, 
and take immediate steps to ensure that homeless people in 
Saskatchewan have emergency shelter, clothing, and food 
available to them before more lives are lost. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens from 
North Battleford, Regina, and Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Humboldt-Watrous. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’m 
pleased to rise today to present a petition from citizens who are 
opposed to the federal government’s decision to impose a 
carbon tax on the province of Saskatchewan. And I’d like to 
read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatories of this petition are from Muenster, 
Humboldt, Pilger, and Burr. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition in support of Wakamow Valley 
Authority. And we know that as a result of the passage of The 
Wakamow Valley Authority Amendment Act, 2016 on June 30th, 
the Wakamow Valley Authority lost its statutory funding of 
$127,000 from the Saskatchewan government in addition to 
$30,000 in supplemental funding. This loss of annual funding 
negatively affected the ability of Wakamow to maintain its 
lands, repair its facilities, and provide services to Moose Jaw 
and the surrounding community. And we know that on June 
21st, 2016 the provincial government voted in favour of this 
bill, resulting in those cuts to Wakamow and subsequent job 
losses. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to immediately repeal The Wakamow Valley Authority 
Amendment Act, 2016 and reinstate statutory funding to 
Wakamow Valley Authority. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
the city of Moose Jaw. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 



1390 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2016 

Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present to you a petition for a second bridge for Prince Albert: 
 
That the Diefenbaker bridge in Prince Albert is the primary link 
that connects the southern part of the province to the North. 
With no other crossing, heavy truck traffic must be rerouted, 
adding a significant amount of cost for the businesses in and 
around Prince Albert in terms of losses or added expenses; 
 
That current residences, businesses, and tourists in Prince 
Albert and northern communities require safe and efficient 
transportation infrastructure that includes adequate bridges; 
 
That the Sask Party government refuses to stand up for Prince 
Albert and this critical infrastructure issue; 
 
That local municipal governments have limited resources and 
require a second bridge to be funded through federal and 
provincial government and not a P3 [public-private partnership] 
model; 
 
That the support of the people and municipal governments of 
Prince Albert and neighbouring communities for a second 
bridge is overwhelming and has been joined by support from 
industry groups, the Saskatchewan association of regional 
municipalities, and many others across the province.  
 
And that the need for a second bridge for Prince Albert has 
never been clearer than it is today. Prince Albert, communities 
north of Prince Albert, and businesses that send people and 
products through Prince Albert require a solution. I will read the 
prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan ask that the 
Sask Party government stop stalling, hiding behind 
rhetoric, and refusing to listen to the people calling for 
action, and begin immediately to plan and then quickly 
commence the construction of a second bridge for Prince 
Albert using federal and provincial dollars. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing these petitions, they live in 
Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition in 
support of sexual abuse prevention curriculum in 
Saskatchewan. Those signing this petition wish to draw our 
attention to the following: Saskatchewan has the second highest 
rate of sexual child abuse in Canada. Stats Canada data shows 
that 55 per cent of all sexual abuse offences, victims of sexual 
abuse offences, were children under the age of 18. 
 
Child abuse has lasting impacts, Mr. Speaker. These include 
mental health impacts, PTSD [post-traumatic stress disorder], 
depression, anxiety, panic attacks, low self-esteem, as well as 
decreased school attendance, and decreased productivity 
throughout the lifespan. 
 
Victims of childhood sexual abuse are four times more likely to 
commit suicide, and currently there is no comprehensive 

elementary or secondary curriculum regarding the prevention 
and reporting of sexual child abuse in Saskatchewan. I’ll read 
the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan take immediate and 
concrete action to develop and implement Erin’s Law. 
Such legislation would ensure that a comprehensive health 
education program be developed and implemented which 
would require age-appropriate sexual abuse, assault 
awareness, and prevention education in grades pre-K 
through grade 12, along with school training of staff on the 
prevention of sexual child abuse. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those citizens signing this petition today reside in 
Wood Mountain, Lloydminster, Warman, Qu’Appelle, and 
Regina. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition calling for a stop to the Sask Party sell-off of 
SaskTel. The petitioners point out that in the recent election 
campaign, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party promised that they 
would not privatize SaskTel. But the petitioners also point out 
that instead of looking at their own waste and scandal, the Sask 
Party is now talking about breaking their promise and looking 
to sell off SaskTel to make a quick dollar, in addition to up to 
49 per cent of other of the Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. 
And the petitioners point out that SaskTel is owned by all of us, 
and it was built with Saskatchewan hard work, innovation, and 
pride. Mr. Speaker: 
 

In the prayer that reads as follows, the petitioners 
respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan call on the Saskatchewan Party government 
to keep their promise, stop their plan to sell off SaskTel, 
and to keep our valued Crown corporation in the hands of 
the people of Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular batch of petitions is signed by 
citizens from Regina and Swift Current. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise yet again today 
to present a petition calling on the government to reverse the 
cuts to the Aboriginal court worker program. The Government 
of Saskatchewan cut the budget for the Aboriginal court worker 
program in the 2016-2017 budget. Those on this side of the 
House know that Aboriginal court workers play an important 
role helping Aboriginal people in criminal and child 
apprehension cases. Aboriginal peoples are disproportionally 
represented in Saskatchewan’s correctional centres and 
Aboriginal court workers successfully help to make our 
communities safer through reduced recidivism rates. I’d like to 
read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan reverse its 
short-sighted and counterproductive cuts to the Aboriginal 
court worker program. 



November 17, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1391 

Mr. Speaker, those signing the petition today come from 
Glenavon, Grenfell, Lumsden, Laird, Swift Current, Regina, 
and Martensville. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
to stop the redirection of funding of the Northern Teacher 
Education Program Council, Inc. A recent report shows that 94 
per cent of NORTEP [northern teacher education program] 
grads found employment in the North. NORTEP has improved 
teacher retention rates in the North. NORTEP has a positive 
economic impact in northern Saskatchewan. NORTEP provides 
a highly quality, face-to-face instruction and services to 
students. The province’s financial deficit will not be fixed by 
cutting indigenous education in the North and a program that 
has served the North for over 40 years. And the prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to immediately restore the 
five-year agreement to fund the Northern Teacher 
Education Program Council, Inc. and to continue funding 
NORTEP-NORPAC programs in La Ronge. 

 
It is signed by hundreds and hundreds of people in northern 
Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Pense Rancher Inducted Into Canadian 
Agricultural Hall of Fame 

 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to 
acknowledge a local rancher who was recently inducted into the 
Canadian Agricultural Hall of Fame. John Willmott moved to 
Pense from southern Ontario in the 1970s. This is where he and 
his wife, Marg, farmed and were respected Angus breeders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because of John’s hard work, the agriculture 
industry has benefited tremendously. John was a respected beef 
judge and Angus breeder and travelled all over the world 
promoting the show and our agricultural industry. John went on 
and continued his vision with Canada’s Farm Progress Show, 
making it a premier event. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a few more accomplishments I want to include. 
John served as president, director, and member of 19 different 
agricultural organizations throughout his career. He was also 
involved with the Farm Animal Council of Saskatchewan, the 
Farm Stress Line, and humane societies. He received the Chris 
Sutter builder award for contributions made to the development 
of the Canadian Western Agribition. John and his wife, Marg, 
were honoured with the Saskatchewan honour roll of the 
Saskatchewan Livestock Association, and John is already an 
inductee of both the Canadian western agriculture hall of fame 
and the Saskatchewan Agriculture Hall of Fame. 
 
Mr. Speaker, John is a leader in the agricultural industry, and I 
can’t think of a more fitting inductee into Canada’s agriculture 

hall of fame. I ask members to join me in congratulating John 
Willmott on this accomplishment. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Ukrainian Harvest Festival Held in Prince Albert 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, on Saturday November 12th, I 
had the pleasure of attending the Ukrainian harvest festival 
where more than 50 dancers ages 4 to 18, performed dances 
from various regions of the Ukraine. The building was at full 
capacity as 500 attendees came out to enjoy the dancing and the 
wonderful food. Mr. Speaker, this event sells out every year, 
and it is truly an enjoyable evening for everyone. 
 
The children of the Barveenok dance troupe have been 
practising and getting ready for this event since September. 
They performed dances and wore traditional Ukrainian apparel 
which corresponded with their region. As well, two professional 
dance troupes from Saskatoon came to the harvest festival to 
join in the festivities and to take part in the dancing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was a treat to see my former legislative intern 
Marnie Howlett perform with one of the Saskatoon groups. 
Having professional dancers in attendance inspires the younger 
dancers who are just starting out. They see that they can 
continue to dance even as adults and can do so professionally. 
 
It was an especially joyful event as this year Saskatchewan’s 
Ukrainian community is celebrating 125 years in our province. 
Prince Albert has a large number of people of Ukrainian descent 
who enjoy celebrating their heritage, and the harvest festival is 
a great example of this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members join with me in 
congratulating the organizers and dancers of the Ukrainian 
harvest festival on a successful and enjoyable event. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
University. 
 

Inaugural Ceremony for Science, Technology, 
Innovation and Collaboration Awards 

 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night I had the 
real privilege of attending the first annual Science, Technology, 
Innovation and Collaboration Awards which was initiated and 
hosted by the Saskatoon Regional Economic Development 
Authority. The STIC [Science, Technology, Innovation and 
Collaboration] Awards were created to celebrate the greatest 
minds in the Saskatoon region and honour the people, projects, 
and products that contribute to the Saskatoon region’s 
world-class science and technology sector. 
 
The STIC awards are comprised of four award categories. 
VIDO-InterVac was awarded the project award, which 
recognizes a project that has the potential to contribute 
significantly to its sector. Solido Design Automation took home 
the product award, which recognizes an innovative product or 
service that has significantly impacted its sector. Sask 
Polytechnic was awarded the team award, which recognizes a 
passionate, knowledgeable, and collaborative team that has 



1392 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2016 

made unique contributions to their sector. And Mr. Dale Lemke 
was awarded the ambassador award which recognizes an 
aspiring individual that has made extensive contributions to the 
Saskatoon region by promoting science, technology, and 
innovation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was lots of talented and bright minds at the 
event last night, and I am so proud to know that they all came 
from Saskatoon and surrounding regions. 
 
I ask that all members join me in thanking SREDA [Saskatoon 
Regional Economic Development Authority] for hosting such a 
wonderful event and in congratulating all the award winners 
who work so hard to make Saskatchewan an innovative 
province. Thank you. 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 

 
Girl Guides of Canada Youth Recognition Ceremony 

 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, on October 30th I was honoured 
to be invited to say a few words at the Girl Guides of Canada 
youth recognition ceremony at the Holy Family Cathedral in 
Saskatoon. Amazing young women from around the province 
were honoured in recognition of their achievements in the Girl 
Guide program as well as the Duke of Edinburgh Award 
program. 
 
Fourteen of these young women were awarded the Canada Cord 
Award, the highest achievement that a Girl Guide can receive in 
Canada. I know how much work this was as I was able to get 
my Canada Cord in 1976, and in fact I received it right here in 
this Chamber, Mr. Speaker. There were also 10 awards given 
for community service and seven of these young women were 
also recognized with the Chief Commissioner Awards. Finally 
three women were awarded the bronze Duke of Edinburgh 
Award. The Duke of Edinburgh International Award recognizes 
participants’ milestones at the bronze, silver, and gold levels 
during which they challenge themselves in the following areas: 
service, skill development, physical recreation, adventurous 
journey, and residential project. 
 
Throughout the ceremony there were selections of music played 
— very well, I might add — by Katie Turnbull, Simratia Hamre 
Wyka, and Sydney Morrison. 
 
The Girl Guides of Saskatchewan enables girls to be confident, 
resourceful, and courageous, and to make a difference in the 
world. We all know how important that is in these days, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, these young women are on a mission to 
better themselves and their communities. The Girl Guides of 
Saskatchewan are the organization of choice for girls and 
women looking to make a positive difference in their 
community. I was honoured to be part of this ceremony 
acknowledging their incredible achievements, and I ask all 
members to join with me in congratulating them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 
 

Outstanding Youth Philanthropist Awards 
Presented in Regina 

 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
bring your attention to a special event that I had the opportunity 
to attend. Every year in our community, thousands of people 
work to make a difference in the lives of everyone. No matter 
the cause they support or whether they make financial, 
volunteer, or in-kind donations, these self-sacrificing actions are 
worthy of recognition. 
 
Regina’s 2016 National Philanthropy Day Awards took place 
Tuesday at Conexus Arts Centre. On behalf of SaskEnergy I 
presented Outstanding Youth Philanthropist Awards. The 
Outstanding Youth Awards are presented to nominated children 
and youth who have shown exceptional volunteerism, 
leadership in their communities, and are meant to foster future 
generation of philanthropists. 
 
In 2016, Outstanding Youth Award recipients were Payton 
Sernick, Maggie DeCoste, Maia Smith, Michaela Markwart, 
Jared — better known as JD — Muir, the RAK Pack, which is 
Random Acts of Kindness Group from the Haig School in 
Weyburn. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask all members to join me in 
congratulating the winning recipients of the Outstanding Youth 
Awards for their volunteerism and their leadership in our 
community. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
North. 
 

Fysh’s Pharmasave Celebrates 100th Anniversary 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 
recognize a small business in Moose Jaw that recently 
celebrated its 100th anniversary. Fysh Pharmasave held a 
celebration on October 22nd at their store location on Main 
Street. The festivities included a number of special in-store 
pricings, a huge anniversary cake, and of course that friendly 
service that has always been a part of Fysh’s Pharmasave. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Fysh’s Pharmasave opened as Leonard Fysh 
Drugs in 1916, and for the last century has been a staple for 
Moose Jaw regular shopping and pharmaceutical services. 
Although its location has been at a number of different 
addresses throughout Moose Jaw’s downtown and has had 
several different owners, it is a small business that has been a 
huge part of building our community through both good times 
and times that have been a little bit tougher. 
 
Fysh’s Pharmasave is not only celebrating its century in 
business but has also been awarded the MJBEX [Moose Jaw 
Business Excellence Awards] Business of the Year Award, and 
throughout its history has had a number of Moose Jaw awards 
for its customer service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
Fysh’s Pharmasave, their owners, their staff, and their loyal 
customer base for 100 years of servicing the community of 
Moose Jaw. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 



November 17, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1393 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

International Education Week 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to rise today to announce that November 14th to 18th is 
International Education Week. This week is celebrated in more 
than 100 countries. 
 
Since 2012 the number of international students studying here 
has grown by 32.5 per cent. Mr. Speaker, we welcome 
international students. There are over 6,800 international 
students studying in Saskatchewan today. We also encourage 
our students to study abroad, and have more than 1,000 students 
from Saskatchewan studying abroad. 
 
Mr. Speaker, international education connects Saskatchewan 
and Canada to other parts of the world. It gives students the 
opportunity to develop new skills and learn new languages, 
cultures, and traditions. It brings diverse perspectives into our 
classrooms and our communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is developing a number of 
strategic initiatives to support the international education 
strategy. These include a familiarization tour of Saskatchewan 
for overseas education agents, a quality assurance framework 
for out-of-country programs delivered by Saskatchewan 
institutions, and engagement strategies for each of 
Saskatchewan’s priority international education markets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, international education is important to our 
province and to our country. We are pleased to celebrate it 
through this very special week. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Let’s hope for a very respectful question 
period today with well-thought-of questions and answers. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Auditor’s Report and Details of Land Transactions 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, day after day, the Sask 
Party fails to answer anything about the GTH [Global 
Transportation Hub] land scandal. Answer nothing. They put up 
that minister to bring forward tired and weak talking lines and 
attack, Mr. Speaker. But day after day, we’ll come back here; 
we’ll keep fighting to get to the bottom of this scandal, rest 
assured. 
 
So let’s keep it simple here today for the Premier, and hopefully 
we’ll finally get some basic answers. The first time we know 
that this was discussed in cabinet, the Attorney General 
recommended rejecting it because they didn’t know who owned 
the numbered company that owned the land. Now the concealed 
identity has now been revealed. We know that the Sask 
Party-supporting land baron from Alberta, who also rents land 
to the former minister of the GTH, was the person that owned 
that land. 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, my question is: when did the Premier find this 
out? When did he find out that the person that owned the 
numbered company rented land to his minister? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what hasn’t changed 
apparently in the House over the last number of days is the 
willingness of the Leader of the Opposition to engage in his 
personal smear campaign of the member for Kindersley. 
 
I just want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the questions raised around 
the issue, we took very seriously. The opposition, the Leader of 
the Opposition, said this is a very serious matter and it should 
be investigated by the Provincial Auditor. That’s what the NDP 
[New Democratic Party] said. We agreed. I asked that that 
investigation happen. 
 
Subsequent to the request for the investigation and the 
beginning of that investigation by the independent officer of 
this Legislative Assembly, the Provincial Auditor, we received 
a request that there be access to all cabinet documents and all 
cabinet minutes, including the scenario that is being referenced 
now by the Leader of the Opposition. And we agreed to the 
auditor having access to all of those internal cabinet documents. 
 
She did her report. She has since commented on her report to 
members opposite and members on this side of the House in the 
Public Accounts Committee of this legislature. And she has said 
clearly that there was full co-operation from government. And 
moreover, she has systematically debunked a lot of the 
conspiracies that have been raised by members, whether it’s a 
phone call or a leaked cabinet document that wasn’t a leaked 
cabinet document. 
 
And she also concluded in her press release, Mr. Speaker, and 
this is important — it goes right to the member’s question; this 
is the direct answer — she concluded in her press release that 
there was no conflict of interest, that there was no fraud, that 
there was no wrongdoing by the board of directors of GTH, and 
that includes the minister. That is the direct and clear answer. 
Will the member, will the Leader of the Opposition accept the 
work of the Provincial Auditor? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s getting more strange 
by the day in here. And the Premier can shout all he wants, or 
he could answer the very basic, the very basic question that was 
put to him, Mr. Speaker. So I’ll try again. We know that this 
deal went to cabinet in 2012, and one of the reasons that it 
wasn’t approved is that there was a concealed identity. This was 
noted by the Justice minister as a concern. 
 
Now others may have known that it was the Sask 
Party-supporting land baron from Alberta, who also rented land 
or rents land to the former minister of the GTH. This question is 
simple. To the Premier: we’ll demand an answer. Saskatchewan 
people deserve nothing less. Did he know? And if not, when did 
he find this out? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 



1394 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2016 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the most important part of the 
debate with respect to this particular item in 2012 would be 
whether or not an independent officer of the Legislative 
Assembly, upon reviewing this particular minute, this particular 
part of the decision and all of the land transaction in question, if 
that independent officer of the Legislative Assembly concluded 
that there was no conflict of interest. That’s the most important 
part of all of this. 
 
Moreover, members opposite have said, yes well the Provincial 
Auditor’s report’s not good enough — others, I think some 
pundits, have said the same thing — because it wasn’t a 
forensic audit. When the provincial . . . Well and they just said, 
that’s true; that’s what they agreed with. They wanted it to be a 
forensic audit. What they have ignored completely, Mr. 
Speaker, is this: that the Provincial Auditor has testified to a 
committee that they chair, of this Legislative Assembly, that 
there was an accountant with forensic auditing capacity that was 
a part of the investigation precisely so the auditor’s team could 
determine if indeed a forensic audit was necessary. She 
indicated it wasn’t. She indicated her work was broader than a 
forensic audit. 
 
And again I conclude, because this is the most important part of 
the question for the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, she concluded 
in her press release that there was no fraud, that there was no 
conflict of interest, that there was no wrongdoing on the part of 
the board which includes the minister, Mr. Speaker, which 
includes . . . involves the entire land transaction. Again I ask the 
members opposite: when will they stop ignoring the work of the 
Provincial Auditor? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — The Premier knows full well it wasn’t a 
forensic audit. He also knows the statement that he references 
does not include the Sask Party cabinet, that it exonerates no 
one, and that people deserve some basic answers. Now if the 
Premier has nothing to hide, why can’t he answer this very 
basic but important question that Saskatchewan people deserve 
an answer to? 
 
And the auditor did her job. It’s past time that this Premier did 
his, Mr. Speaker. And so very direct, very simple, very 
straightforward: when did the Premier learn who owned the 
numbered company that owned the land at the heart of this 
scandal? When did the Premier learn that the concealed identity, 
that the numbered company, that the land was owned by the 
landlord of the minister responsible? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — The Leader of the Opposition just said 
that he supported the work of the Provincial Auditor. Well why 
won’t he accept her conclusion, Mr. Speaker? She went through 
a very thorough audit. She had access to all of the documents to 
which she requested access, including cabinet documents She 
did, by her own testimony just last week, a very thorough job. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition also raised the issue of a forensic 
audit versus the audit that she conducted. Here’s what she said 
in committee, Mr. Speaker: 

. . . frankly, if we did a forensic audit, there would . . . 
[have been] a lot of matters that we included within our 
report that would . . . have been [not] provided to this 
committee. 

 
She did, by her own testimony, provided more information to 
the committee because of the path that she chose to go down, 
Mr. Speaker. These are the words of the auditor. Every day the 
Leader of the Opposition claims, he claims that he supports the 
work that the auditor did. But he dismissively, arrogantly and 
dismissively does not recognize the work that she did on this 
matter. And her conclusion, Mr. Speaker, after all of the work 
that she did on the matter, at the direction of this Assembly, 
through the Public Accounts Committee, was that there was no 
wrongdoing, there was no fraud, and there was no conflict of 
interest. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

State of Provincial Finances 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, this GTH scandal cost us $25 
million, and their excuse is that it’s just a terrible case of Sask 
Party mismanagement. Mr. Speaker, two well-connected Sask 
Party supporting businessmen were handed $11 million of 
Saskatchewan people’s money in profit. That’s more than 
mismanagement. 
 
But if you want to see Sask Party mismanagement, let’s look at 
their budget. They’ve added $7 billion of debt in seven years, 
and now another billion. And the Premier likes to say, deficits 
are a lot like potato chips; they’re not very good for your 
long-term health, but I’ll bet you can’t stop at just one. But, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s not a minute on the lips and a lifetime on the Sask 
Party’s hips. No. They’re making the people of Saskatchewan 
pay for Sask Party mismanagement. Instead of another week of 
leaking out which promises they’ll break, which taxes they’ll 
hike, or programs they’ll cut, will the minister release the full 
fiscal update in this House today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we will be bringing out a full midyear update before the end of 
November, as we are legislatively required to do, Mr. Speaker, 
and as we promised to do for the people of this province. I think 
we can agree in this House — I hope that the honourable critic, 
the Finance critic can agree — that we’ve had a precipitous 
drop in commodity prices and commodity revenues for the 
province over the last 18 months. As a matter of fact, I think the 
Finance critic was quoted here recently as saying, “It’s 
inevitable . . .” I quote, Mr. Speaker: “It’s inevitable that they’re 
going to have shortfalls when commodity prices are what they 
are.” 
 
[10:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of this province, the people in 
particular in southeastern Saskatchewan, the west side of the 
province, understand when oil drops from over $100 a barrel 
down to below $40 a barrel, it’s going to have an impact on 
your revenues, Mr. Speaker, to the tune of about $1.2 billion 



November 17, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1395 

over the course of the last 18 months — $1.2 billion, Mr. 
Speaker. At the same time, this government has committed to 
increase funding, increase funding more than what they 
campaigned on in their platform document on April, Mr. 
Speaker, on April 4th election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve spent more in health care. We’ve spent more in 
education. We’ve spent more in highways and infrastructure in 
building this province, Mr. Speaker, after 16 years of neglect in 
our highways and infrastructure, in our schools, in our health 
care facilities in this province, Mr. Speaker. We’ve turned that 
around. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, this minister needs to 
acknowledge that they’ve been in government for almost a 
decade. If he wants to look to history, he should think back to 
the last government that pushed this province to the brink of 
financial ruin, and it shouldn’t be too hard, because he worked 
for that one, too, Mr. Speaker. But here in present day, the 
comedy prices are no surprise to anyone paying attention. We 
created the rainy day fund, the rainy day fund, for times like 
these, but the Sask Party drained it during the good times. 
 
Over the last few days the Finance minister has been softening 
the ground and leaking details, but he can’t keep his story 
straight. Yesterday in the House he touted population numbers 
and the success of the graduate retention program, but prior to 
question period he told reporters that they may cut the program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister tell students, and every other Sask 
person who uses government programs and services every day, 
exactly which programs and services they’ll be cutting and how 
many promises they’ll be breaking? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s fair to say that 
on June 1st we announced a forecasted deficit of about $434 
million in this fiscal year, Mr. Speaker. We see that our 
revenues are going to be down about $400 million overall in the 
various taxes — corporate income tax, personal income tax, 
fuel tax, consumption tax — to bring us into a forecasted deficit 
in the $800 million range for this fiscal year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to provide some context and perspective here. I 
mean, the hon. member gets up every day and says, they 
borrowed billions of dollars here, billions of dollars here. Mr. 
Speaker, at the end of this fiscal year, this province, the 
province of Saskatchewan will have a debt to GDP [gross 
domestic product] ratio of about 19 per cent. It’s the second 
best in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I’ve cautioned the member from Athabasca to 
come to order. Next question. I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 

Auditor’s Report and Details of Land Transactions 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, we’ll give the minister a chance 
to catch his breath. He seems awfully excited to jump up and 

shake his finger and recite his attack lines. So since the broken 
promises, the tax hikes, the deep cuts the people of 
Saskatchewan will have to suffer through are the result of Sask 
Party mismanagement, waste, and scandal, Mr. Speaker, will 
the Minister of Finance tell this House, tell the people of 
Saskatchewan and the people of Regina Northeast what he 
thought of the GTH land scandal when it was brought to cabinet 
the first time? And why it was approved the second time? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — The fact of the matter, Mr. Speaker, on 
this is that the Provincial Auditor and her team of experts 
looked into this matter and did a very thorough investigation. 
Just last week she was in front of the Public Accounts 
Committee and answered questions from that member, that 
particular member, on all of these matters. They were put to her 
directly by the member opposite, and her conspiracy theories 
were debunked one by one by the Provincial Auditor. All of 
them systematically were debunked by the Provincial Auditor. 
She underlined and reiterated her conclusion after having gone 
through all of these matters, having done a very thorough audit. 
And her conclusion, Mr. Speaker? There was no wrongdoing, 
there was no fraud, and there was no conflict of interest. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve got a question for the Minister 
of Education, and hopefully we’ll get an answer on this one. He 
keeps saying that nothing, absolutely nothing is off the table 
with regard to the review and cuts to our kids’ schools. In fact 
the only thing that is clearly off the table is sufficient funding 
for education. While addressing school boards, the minister 
actually chastised them for not cutting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, school boards are dipping into their reserves. 
Reserves are sort of like a rainy day fund, and since the Sask 
Party didn’t fully fund the teachers’ contract, it’s fair to say it’s 
raining. But the minister says that reserves can’t be used to fund 
supports in our kids’ classrooms. He actually opposes this 
responsible management. It’s foreign to the Sask Party, so the 
minister wants school boards to cut. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since school boards were responsible enough to 
create a rainy day fund and smart enough not to blow it in times 
of record revenue, why is the minister punishing them and our 
kids for not mismanaging things as badly as the Sask Party? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we think it’s appropriate to 
have open and candid conversations with our school divisions. 
The members opposite asked for and supported summary 
financial accounting. We didn’t tell the school divisions they 
couldn’t use reserves. What we did tell them was that using 
reserves was the same as the government operating on a deficit, 
that their books are in fact our books, and they need to 
understand their revenues show on the one consolidated set of 
books for the entire province. 



1396 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2016 

The members opposite asked for and they supported summary 
financial accounting. We agreed with it on this side of the 
House. We now have summary financial accounting. Mr. 
Speaker, whether it be SaskPower, Workers’ Compensation, or 
the Auto Fund, it’s all one set of books. The school divisions 
need to understand that their use of the reserves amounts to the 
same thing as an expenditure by government. We will work 
with them. We will give them as much support as they need, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Auditor’s Report and Details of Land Transactions 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, all of this cutting is a direct result of 
the Sask Party’s mismanagement, scandal, and waste. And since 
the Minister of Education didn’t get a chance to answer the 
Leader of the Official Opposition’s questions all week but has 
since found his feet and voice to answer mine, I’ll give him an 
opportunity to answer the question that the Premier failed to 
answer now. 
 
When did the Deputy Premier learn who owns the numbered 
company who owned the land? Did a colleague tell him? Did he 
look into it himself? Maybe he read about it in an online news 
article. When did the deputy minister learn the truth? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — More throwing of mud, Mr. Speaker. 
Invective insinuation. The smearing of the reputation of hon. 
members of this Assembly. This is the new modus operandi of 
the members opposite. 
 
The Provincial Auditor was asked by members of this 
Assembly through the Public Accounts Committee to look into 
the matters being raised by the members opposite. She did so, 
Mr. Speaker. She did so again as recently as last week, directly 
responding to questions put to her by the members opposite. 
 
That work that she did is being arrogantly dismissed by the 
members opposite. Every day they stand up and arrogantly 
dismiss the work of the Provincial Auditor. They don’t 
recognize the great work that she did on this file. And what was 
her conclusion after looking into this matter on behalf of 
members of the Assembly? That there was no wrongdoing, 
there was no fraud, and that there was no conflict of interest. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Funding for Health Care 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, I would have liked to have 
heard a little bit more from the Minister of Education, 
particularly on his opinion on the Health minister’s 
consultations not being broad enough. 
 
But the Education minister may be heartened to know that the 
Health minister is following in his underfunding and bad-faith 
bargaining footsteps. That’s right. The Health minister is also 

refusing to cover the salaries his ministry bargained, 
specifically the joint job evaluations which ensure health care 
workers are paid for the skills they bring to the job. Mr. 
Speaker, hasn’t the Health minister been paying attention? This 
move will make health regions’ deficits worse. Already 
RQHR’s [Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region] second quarter 
report shows the missing targets in surgery and emergency 
rooms, and they are projecting a $13 million shortfall. 
 
Just like in Education, this minister wants more cuts. The 
regions have already cut staff, and they aren’t meeting ER 
[emergency room] and surgery targets. At what point does this 
minister acknowledge that this impacts patient care? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We take the 
report from the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region very 
seriously, Mr. Speaker, to the issues that came out in that report 
the member opposite raised, to wait times for surgery, and to 
ER wait times, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On the ER front, it’s important to remember that the CEO 
specifically mentioned — and again, we’re concerned about the 
wait times, Mr. Speaker — but he specifically mentioned that 
people needing immediate care are getting immediate care, Mr. 
Speaker. This issue is not new to Saskatchewan. It’s also not 
new across the country, Mr. Speaker. All provinces are 
struggling with that situation. 
 
The surgery times, Mr. Speaker, I’m kind of surprised frankly 
that the member opposite would raise this, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 
made surgical wait initiatives a very important part of our 
government’s platform going forward. Over $300 million were 
spent on the surgical initiatives, Mr. Speaker, to lower wait 
times. 
 
I see I’m running out of time, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to follow up 
with that on the next question. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Auditor’s Report and Details of Land Transactions 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. How about this 
government and this minister not following through on 
collective agreements bargained in good faith, Mr. Speaker? 
Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party’s cuts and broken promises are the 
result of their mismanagement, scandal, and waste. So since the 
minister is refusing to offer real answers to questions about cuts 
in the Ministry of Health, in our hospitals, and to the care our 
families need, will the minister answer a question on one of the 
causes of the cuts — Sask Party mismanagement, Mr. Speaker? 
 
He was around the cabinet table when the GTH was discussed 
. . . And they think this is quite funny, Mr. Speaker. They 
shouldn’t be laughing, Mr. Speaker. This is a serious matter for 
the people of Saskatchewan. No one else is laughing, Mr. 
Speaker. When did he learn who owned the numbered company 
who owned the land? Or, Mr. Speaker, does he have any 
thoughts on this scandal that he’d like to share with us or with 
his constituents, Mr. Speaker? 



November 17, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1397 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — The members opposite talk about 
getting to the bottom of the matter. Do you know who got to the 
bottom of the matter, Mr. Speaker? The Provincial Auditor got 
to the bottom of the matter. 
 
And they can joke, they can joke opposite and heckle and 
guffaw and all of the things that they’re doing about the 
Provincial Auditor’s work, but the fact of the matter is the 
Provincial Auditor fully looked into all of these matters. The 
Provincial Auditor had full access to all of the documents that 
she requested access to. All of the individuals to whom she 
wished to interview, she was granted access. She frankly 
commented about how co-operative the government was. 
 
And they can arrogantly dismiss all of that work opposite, and 
they’re doing so again right now from their seat. The Health 
critic is doing that right now from her seat, the member from 
Riversdale dismissing the work of the Provincial Auditor. 
 
But on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, we support the work 
of the auditor. We accept her recommendations . . . Which I 
find ironic, her being the Chair of the Public Accounts 
Committee, dismissing the work of the auditor. 
 
The auditor though made a number of recommendations. We 
have accepted those recommendations. We’re working on 
implementing them. And her conclusion doesn’t change. There 
was no wrongdoing, there was no fraud, and there was no 
conflict of interest. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

Donations to Political Parties 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, our 
election laws don’t have any restrictions on payments from 
political parties to politicians. And as I’m sure the members 
opposite know, in politics, perception is reality. Serious and 
genuine questions can be raised, and the perception of the 
administrative competency and the neutrality of a government 
can be called into question when the companies that lobby 
government are able, within the campaign finance laws, to 
donate unlimited amounts of money to a party. And that party 
can then, again within the laws and regulations, pay a party or a 
leader or a Premier a bonus. 
 
Let me be clear, Mr. Speaker. I’m not accusing anyone of 
breaking election finance laws. It’s the laws themselves that are 
broken, and it’s unacceptable. The legislation needs to be 
changed. So will the Attorney General work with us and help 
change our broken and horribly out-of-date election finance 
laws so we can get big money out of Saskatchewan politics? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the member knows that all such political donations 
need to be publicly accounted for and publicly reported, Mr. 

Speaker. But the premise of his question clearly underlines the 
fact, or clearly underlined they needed to have a lobbying 
legislation in this province, Mr. Speaker. And we worked with 
the opposition to make sure that the people of Saskatchewan 
knew who was lobbying their elected officials. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, he makes some allegations of a nexus between 
the two of them but, Mr. Speaker, the lobbying legislation is 
there precisely so that people in Saskatchewan know who are 
lobbying their elected officials. Now I’m happy of the fact that 
he says he’s not making any allegations in this House. But the 
fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, lobbying laws are there. They 
are fully reported so that people that make donations, or people 
that don’t make donations that lobby the government, have 
obligations to report and the public has a right to look at those 
reports, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

Auditor’s Report and Details of Land Transactions 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I’m a little disappointed in that 
answer. We all know the lobbying legislation doesn’t go far 
enough to get big money out of politics. But I’m glad at least 
that he got to his feet. 
 
Now the Attorney General was apparently the first member of 
the cabinet to raise a red flag about the GTH land scandal. He 
thought it was unwise to buy land from a company whose 
owner’s identity was hidden. He said, without knowing the 
seller, you couldn’t judge a possible conflict, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[11:00] 
 
When did the Attorney General learn who the true owner of the 
numbered company which owned the land was? Did a colleague 
tell him? Did he look into it himself? When did he learn the 
truth, Mr. Speaker? And why, a year later, was he okay with 
buying land from a known Sask Party supporter? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — More invective, more insinuation, 
more smearing of hon. members, more smearing of private 
citizens. That’s what the NDP are doing here, Mr. Speaker, 
from a party that was found in contempt of parliament just four 
months ago — perhaps not surprising from a Leader of the 
Opposition on the verge of being found in contempt of 
parliament only a couple of short years ago, dismissing the 
work of the Provincial Auditor, heckling from their seats in 
question after question. 
 
The Provincial Auditor did a very thorough job looking into this 
matter. By her own testimony, her own words, in fact taking 
longer than that to which the Public Accounts Committee asked 
her to report back, her conclusion at the end of all of that work 
— at the end of taking more time, at the end of doing a more 
thorough job than the members are asking for right now — that 
there was no fraud, there was no conflict of interest, and there 
was no wrongdoing. 
 



1398 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2016 

The Speaker: — Why is the Minister of Central Services on 
her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Request leave to introduce guests and a 
slightly extended introduction please. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave and the slightly longer introduction 
agreed to? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Central 
Services. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you and to all members of this Assembly, I 
would like to introduce some very special guests in the 
Legislative Assembly here today, sitting in the west gallery. 
Joining us are 26 students from Consul School and seven 
students from Val Marie School with the Chinook School 
Division in southwest Saskatchewan. Accompanying the 
students today are their teachers Tami Reynolds from Consul 
and principal Angela Clement from Val Marie, chaperones, and 
ministry officials from the Provincial Capital Commission. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the students are here today to participate in a very 
worthwhile program known as A Day in the Legislative 
Assembly. This program provides students with an opportunity 
to learn about how laws are made, the role of members in the 
House, and the overall democratic process in their province. 
They will be given a tour of our historic Legislative Building 
and a chance to observe their MLAs at work. That should be 
good. 
 
I want to thank you, Mr. Speaker, for agreeing to lead off a 
panel discussion with the students, followed by a 
question-and-answer session to be held right here in the 
Chamber this afternoon. I invite all members to join me in 
welcoming our guests to their Legislative Assembly. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answers to questions 186 and 187. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered responses 
to questions 186 and 187. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Financial State of SaskPower 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And as 
always, it is my honour to be able to rise in this Assembly and 

enter into debate. And this is one, I think, that we’re raising 
today is a very important debate, Mr. Speaker, and one that 
needs careful review by this House. Certainly the concern is the 
deep financial situation that SaskPower is finding itself in, and 
we’re concerned about this government’s intentions with 
respect to SaskPower. 
 
So we wanted to highlight some of that in the House today and 
encourage some of the backbenchers to acknowledge that 
indeed the position SaskPower is being put in is a critical 
financial situation that is largely due to mismanagement and 
scandal and waste that this government has engaged in in the 
almost decade that they’ve been in power, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I think one of the things we talked about in terms of the 
impact on this mismanagement, in terms of SaskPower’s ability 
to do its job, is of course the boondoggle of the one and a half 
billion dollars that they wasted on the CCS [carbon capture and 
storage] project, Mr. Speaker. And I say waste because 
Saskatchewan taxpayers do not own the technology. That 
technology is owned by a private company, and they are using 
it around the world to advance CCS in other formats, Mr. 
Speaker. But somehow this government saw that that was the 
most important thing that they could put the hard-earned dollars 
of taxpayers into, to the tune of one and a half billion dollars.  
 
And what it’s done is put Sask Party in a very precarious 
situation now because they’ve had only a certain amount of 
time to deal with the coal-fired emissions regulations that were 
imposed on the government and the people of Saskatchewan a 
few years ago. But we see that SaskPower hasn’t been given the 
nimbleness and the ability to address that because of the 
fixation on carbon capture, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so I believe that this company is in some fairly serious 
financial difficulties. And certainly I want to just highlight for 
the House a good reflection of that is the way the debt ratio has 
been going for SaskPower. And we took a look at that a few 
days ago, but I’ll raise it again here today. In 2007 . . . Now 
we’ve been told by economists and managers of large 
corporations that a good debt ratio for any corporation is 
between 65 per cent to 75 per cent. That’s considered to be an 
acceptable range to have your debt invested in your company. 
 
So where has the debt ratio been for SaskPower in the last few 
years? Well in 2007, the debt ratio was 59.7 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker. So we know that that was well below the sort of 
comfort range for debt ratios. SaskPower was in really good 
shape 10 years ago, Mr. Speaker, when their debt ratio was 59.7 
per cent. 
 
Now it started going up. In 2008 the debt ratio was 60.7 per 
cent. In 2009 the debt ratio went up to 61.4 per cent. Now in 
2010 it did go down a little bit, back to 59.7 per cent. But in 
2011, a huge jump to 63 per cent. So we’re now well into that 
safety range for the debt ratio for SaskPower. 
 
In 2012 what happened, Mr. Speaker? The debt ratio jumped up 
again to 4.4 per cent. A big jump, and one in the likes that we 
haven’t seen for quite some time now — 4.4 per cent. Now 
we’re looking at 67 per cent in 2016, and it’s because of the 
immense cost of the carbon capture and sequestration project. 
 



November 17, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1399 

And, Mr. Speaker, as you know, SaskPower ratepayers, which 
are pretty much the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
they have faced increases in the rates of SaskPower to the likes 
of, well 18 per cent in real numbers. But if you do it 
cumulatively, it’s a much higher number, Mr. Speaker. And 
that’s just in the last few years. 
 
So we know that SaskPower is having to turn this back on the 
taxpayers. And the expensive things like carbon capture, which 
really is a form of taxation in terms of rate payments, Mr. 
Speaker, we know that that cost is being foisted on the 
taxpayers over and above the one and a half billion dollars that 
were spent just on that one project, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We know also that in the rate review panel that it’s not just 
residential customers that are suffering, Mr. Speaker. It’s the 
industrial customers of SaskPower that are also suffering. We 
had concerns from the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce at 
the rate review panel. We’ve had concerns from the Canadian 
Association of Petroleum Producers at the rate review panel. 
We had concerns of the Meadow Lake pulp mill raising 
concerns about the increasing rates of power at the rate review 
panel, Mr. Speaker. And this is something that is hurting a lot of 
people. It’s not just hurting consumers in their residences, Mr. 
Speaker, but it’s affecting the bottom line of these important 
industrial consumers of power as well, Mr. Speaker. So that’s 
part of the problem for sure. 
 
I think the other part of the problem is the inability that 
SaskPower has found itself in to actually deal with the new 
regulatory climate that we found ourselves in. As you know, 
Mr. Speaker, in 2009 this government actually introduced the 
technology fund bill to manage and reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions. That was in 2009. And the plan at the time was to 
include high emitters, which would include SaskPower, that 
would be . . . They would set a cap on the amount of emissions 
that were deemed acceptable, and then anything over that, they 
would be required to pay into the technology fund. So it would 
be a levy or a carbon capture price or whatever you want to call 
it, Mr. Speaker. But that money, according to The Conference 
Board of Canada, according to The Conference Board of 
Canada if they had indeed gone through with that plan, there 
would be over 1 billion additional dollars in our economy, and 
as well it would have created 8,600 jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now when you look at being able to be nimble and move into a 
green economy, that’s exactly the opposite of what this 
government has done. So when oil prices drop, when there’s a 
glut of oil being produced in the world and we lose 10,000 jobs 
in Saskatchewan, can we turn to this government for new green 
jobs that should have been produced if the technology fund had 
been introduced? Eighty-five hundred jobs would have been 
produced to date. And we see, Mr. Speaker, nothing. We see 
nothing. We see people losing their jobs, and nothing in this 
government is making them . . . turning the ability to have 
good, green, mortgage-paying, post-combustion type of jobs, 
Mr. Speaker, or post-carbon jobs, Mr. Speaker. And so that’s a 
real problem when we see the way this government has simply 
stuck their head in the sand. 
 
And I know they’ve put a lot of people within the public service 
in considerable disarray because of their inability at the cabinet 
level to make the right decisions and the proper directions so 

that the Ministry of the Environment knows how they’re going 
to be able to deal with these coal emission regulations, so that 
SaskPower knows exactly what their plan will be when it comes 
to implementation of these coal-fired regs. 
 
Now the Minister of Environment, you know, I know he’s been 
involved in a convention going on with world leaders about 
that. And I’m hoping that some of the things learned there will 
be shared with individuals in his ministry, Mr. Speaker. But I 
know there are good people in the ministry and in SaskPower 
who have some very good ideas about how we can move 
forward with this new world we’re in when it comes to reducing 
emissions, Mr. Speaker. And we know that emissions reduction 
is important and that it’s an important thing for our power 
entities to be able to deal with. So that’s some of the big 
problems I think that SaskPower has been put into, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The other question, I guess in terms of financial 
mismanagement — and this is a very serious, important 
question, and I certainly want to be able to pursue this in 
committee with the Minister for SaskPower when it comes to 
the new bill — we see that SaskPower has to again increase its 
borrowing capacity. Its borrowing capacity sat at $5 billion for 
many, many, many years, Mr. Speaker. But unfortunately, and I 
think largely because of the carbon capture expenses, we see 
that they raised their borrowing authority to $8 billion back in 
2013. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, you know what happens with this 
government. They don’t get it right the first time. They have to 
come back with another bill. This is another example of it. Here 
we are in 2016, increasing yet again the borrowing capacity of 
SaskPower. And we know that it’s now going to be $10 billion, 
so basically doubled from what it was for decades, Mr. Speaker. 
And the question is, why are they being put in that situation? I 
don’t think we have to look very far, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If you go down Dewdney Avenue and you go all the way out 
past the new Westerra development, past the bright lights for 
the GTH development site, past the turnoff to the Loblaws and 
CN [Canadian National] intermodal facility, past the brand new 
SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority] 
warehouse, you will find yourself in what you would think is 
just open prairie, Mr. Speaker. But if you look at a map of the 
GTH, you will see that this is actually 140 acres that are 
purchased by SaskPower. Now you have to ask yourself, Mr. 
Speaker, why did SaskPower suddenly need to move its 
logistics centre out to the GTH in 2013? Very interesting 
question. 
 
This was, if you recall, Mr. Speaker, around the same time that 
the GTH minister was trying really hard to assemble a package 
that would encourage cabinet to purchase the other 204 acres 
which is now basically an interchange for Sask Highways. So 
what happened, Mr. Speaker, that all of a sudden in 2013 . . . 
You don’t see mention of it as a burning need prior in 
SaskPower annual reports, but all of a sudden in 2013 there was 
this burning need to acquire 140 acres of land that just had to be 
at a global transportation logistics centre, Global Transportation 
Hub. SaskPower’s logistics centre is one where . . . In fact, they 
haven’t said very much so we don’t exactly know. And we’re 
going to have a lot of questions for the minister about what 



1400 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2016 

exactly the plan is. 
 
[11:15] 
 
But if you look in the 2016 annual report, the most recent 
annual report from SaskPower, you will note that, oh my 
goodness, they’re not actually doing anything with that centre 
right now. They’re actually shelving it. And if you go out there, 
Mr. Speaker, and take a drive, you will see there is nothing but 
prairie right now where that 140 acres were. And what did 
SaskPower pay for that land back in 2013, Mr. Speaker: 
$170,000 an acre. They must have really done their business 
plan to pay that kind of price for prairie land. 
 
Now it’s been developed. There is power there, Mr. Speaker. 
You can see the power boxes as you drive by, so they actually 
have power. Sask Highways paid $11,000 an acre back in 2011, 
so somehow the GTH is given the responsibility for this land. 
But it was always in the name of Sask Ministry of Highways 
and Infrastructure. So it’s interesting how a lot of the blank 
pieces of land out at the GTH are still in the name of the 
Ministry of Highways and Infrastructure, and yet there wasn’t 
enough communication between that ministry and the GTH to 
make the deal on the land adjacent — for which we know we’ve 
seen an enormous waste of money, up to $25 million of 
taxpayers’ money — when Highways certainly could have 
purchased it at a much lower price. 
 
So why was SaskPower dragged into this, Mr. Speaker? And I 
think it’s clearly another example of the mismanagement, of the 
waste, and the misspending that this government is so intent on 
doing in things like the GTH scandal, Mr. Speaker. We have to 
really ask the hard questions, and you know it’s really hard to 
get answers sometimes, Mr. Speaker. We’ve put questions to 
pretty much all the cabinet ministers who were involved when 
the GTH land scandal assembly package was presented. Not 
one of them will share with this Assembly or the people of 
Saskatchewan what their thoughts were on that particular deal, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We know something changed. We know something changed, 
and they all kind of look embarrassed when the current Minister 
of the Economy gets up and gives his tired old speaking lines, 
Mr. Speaker. So why was SaskPower dragged into this? And 
why did it happen to be the same minister? The minister 
responsible for SaskPower was also the minister responsible for 
GTH. What sort of management decisions were imposed upon 
SaskPower at that time? And these are really important 
questions, Mr. Speaker, that have not been fully answered; in 
fact they haven’t been answered in the least by this government. 
 
So when we see SaskPower’s borrowing capacity being 
increased yet again after three years to another $2 billion, that’s 
a lot of zeroes, Mr. Speaker. That’s a lot of money for a Crown 
corporation who is now over its spending debt ratio, the 
recommended safe zone for its debt ratio, over 75 per cent. And 
we’re increasing its spending another 2 billion, and they keep 
coming back to the rate review panel for rate hikes. 
 
What kind of decisions are being foisted on this important 
Crown corporation by this government? When we look at the 
CCS imposition, we know that this was something that 
SaskPower wasn’t going forward with until this government 

came into being. What happened with the purchase price of . . . 
I think it was around $23 million for land at the GTH for 
SaskPower back in 2013, when there was no indication from the 
management at the time that this was a necessary and desirable 
acquisition. And now we have confirmation in their most recent 
annual report that they have no intentions of using that land, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So again, what was the Minister Responsible for SaskPower 
telling the Minister Responsible for GTH? Well it was a private 
conversation, Mr. Speaker, because it’s one and the same 
person. And until that minister starts telling the people of 
Saskatchewan what was going on and sharing what information 
he had, then we will always have these perpetual questions and 
we will have a very important Crown in trouble. So I’d like to 
move the following motion, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to move: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the government for its 
record of mismanagement at SaskPower for which 
Saskatchewan people are being forced to pay the price. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana has put 
forward the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly condones the government for its record 
of mismanagement at SaskPower for which Saskatchewan 
people are being forced to pay the price. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
from Saskatoon Westview. 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
want to start by saying that and make it very clear that I will not 
be supporting the motion forwarded by the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. Mr. Speaker, I also want to take some time 
to respond to the motion that the NDP have made in regards to 
their opinion that Saskatchewan people are paying a price for 
the mismanagement of SaskPower. 
 
Mr. Speaker, like every day in this House, we have to correct 
those members, those members’ statements that they make 
which contains little factual information and even less research. 
SaskPower is a very well-run company which Saskatchewan 
residents take great pride in, that provides very reliable service 
at very competitive rates. 
 
Maybe a more accurate motion than the one proposed by the 
member from Saskatoon Nutana would be a motion 
condemning members opposite for their record of 
mismanagement while they were in government. And look at 
the unsustainable dividends when they should have been 
investing in infrastructure and planning, with a plan for the 
growth of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the NDP’s time in government, they took 
dividends from every year from 1992 to 2007 when people had 
finally had enough of them. During some of those years they 
took over 100 per cent in dividends. Really? Is that even 
possible, Mr. Speaker? People are paying a price today for 
infrastructure, the work that could not be done because of that 
government’s drain on SaskPower’s financial resources. 



November 17, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1401 

Over 40 per cent of your bill, of a customer’s power bill today 
goes towards renewing SaskPower’s aging infrastructure. Mr. 
Speaker, I can’t imagine the frustration at SaskPower when that 
government was in power, knowing that there would be no 
money for current infrastructure or future infrastructure or their 
ability to invest in new technology. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government, these hon. members on this side 
of the House have seen SaskPower invest 6 billion on capital 
investments and power purchase agreements in the last five 
years. SaskPower plans to spend about 1 billion per year for the 
long term to ensure customers have the power they need for 
today and future generations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that NDP government, when they were in power, 
left no room for growth or for repairing aging infrastructure by 
taking unsustainable dividends and by starving the Crowns 
while trying to fulfill their campaign promise of the lowest 
utilities in Canada. Today, Mr. Speaker, people are paying a 
price for that NDP government’s mismanagement while they 
were in power. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government had the vision, the confidence, to 
invest in important new technology in power generation by 
investing 1.5 billion in the BD3 [Boundary dam 3] project in 
Estevan, technology that could be exported around the world to 
truly make an impact on climate change. This carbon capture 
technology is the largest capital investment in Canada to date 
and has the ability to take the equivalent of 250,000 cars off the 
road. You know, the NDP talk about protecting the 
environment, but talk is just more hot air that we now need to 
capture. Our world needs real solutions and real investments. 
 
When that government over there was in power, we seen 
greenhouse gas emissions rise by 70 per cent. The NDP hired a 
climate change secretariat but never hired staff, and they 
purchased an air monitoring vehicle but never drove it 
anywhere. Mr. Speaker, our government has made Canada’s 
largest single investment towards addressing the global 
challenge of climate in the BD3 carbon capture project. 
 
Members opposite like to come into this House and complain 
that we are not willing to simply fall in line and heap a 
job-killing, made-in-Ottawa carbon tax on the people of this 
province that will damage the competitiveness of our economy 
while doing nothing to reduce global emissions. On this side of 
the House, we’re committed to working with the hard-working 
people at SaskPower to develop world-leading technologies that 
actually reduce emissions while keeping our economy 
competitive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here is a list of future growth and compliance 
projects that this government is planning: the Pasqua to Swift 
Current transmission line, an investment of 260 million, to be 
complete in 2019; the Kennedy to Tantallon transmission line, 
an investment of 113 million, to be complete in 2017; the 
Regina to Pasqua transmission line, an investment of 100 
million; distribution customer connects, a $509 million 
investment over the next five years; the proposed Tazi Twé 
hydroelectric station to be complete by 2020. Future 
sustainment projects include the transmission wood pole 
remediation, an investment of $372 million over the next five 
years; the distribution wood pole remediation, $126 million 

investment over the next five years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while we’re on the topic of wood pole 
remediation, I would like to share what that government over 
there did while they were in power — or worse yet, what they 
didn’t do while they were in power. Mr. Speaker, while that 
government was in power, they hired a consultant from Alberta 
— that’s right, Alberta — to drive across this province marking 
the power poles that needed replacing. Today, almost all of 
those markings are gone, either because this government 
replaced them or they faded away, just like that NDP 
government of the day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, other future sustainment projects include a circuit 
breaker and relay replacements of 60 million over five years; 
rural rebuild and improvement program of 96 million over five 
years; the E.B. Campbell hydroelectric station life extension, 
245 million, complete in 2025. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to investing in 
Saskatchewan now and in the future, as this province continues 
to grow. Mr. Speaker, I realize it’s easy to make promises. So 
let’s look at the track record while this government on this side 
of the House has had the privilege of being in government. In 
2007, an investment of 280 million in capital expenditures; 
2008, 422 million; 2009, 640 million; 2010, 538 million; 2011, 
625 million; 2012, 981 million; 2013, 1.318 billion; 2014, 1.279 
billion; 2015, 990 million. Forecasted spending in 2016 of 899 
million, and 952 million in 2017-2018. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is plain for all to see is that the NDP had no 
plan to see Saskatchewan grow and become a have province. 
That NDP government, when they were in power, made no 
plans to renew existing infrastructure or invest in the future. 
They had no plans for growth for our province at all. When our 
government talked about growing this province by 100,000, 
their former NDP MLA Harry Van Mulligen said on March 24, 
2003, and I quote, “Well it is so over the top, it is so farcical, 
Mr. Speaker, that it flies in the face of reality.” Well, Speaker, it 
is not that surprising that they had the worst growth rate in 
Canada when you have people in your government thinking like 
that. 
 
Former Premier Lorne Calvert said, looking back . . . He said, 
from the Leader-Post on May 1st, 2013, and I quote, “I wish 
more could have been done to encourage more business . . .” 
Mr. Speaker, they could have done more. They could have 
invested in infrastructure. They could have not raised taxes 22 
times. They could have not closed 176 schools. They could 
have not closed 52 hospitals. And they could have not taken the 
unsustainable dividends from the Crowns of 181 per cent in 
2001 and 114 per cent in 2002. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know more work needs to be done, and this 
government continues to plan for growth in the future. 
SaskPower’s preliminary 2017-18 business plan has taken into 
consideration the new target of up to 50 per cent renewable 
capacity by 2030. An annual rate increase of 5 per cent or less is 
required to fund that investment. 
 
[11:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government plans for growth help to fund the 



1402 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2016 

future, the future investments that will be necessary in social 
programs, education, health care, highways, and many other 
programs Saskatchewan residents have come to expect. Mr. 
Speaker, thank you for your time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to join 
in today with regards to this debate and support the motion 
brought forward by the member of Nutana. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was a previous SaskPower employee. When I 
was a young single mom, I was working three part-time jobs, 
and I got the opportunity to apply for a meter reader position 
there. And I didn’t even own a winter coat. I’m not much of an 
outdoorsy person. But it was a good, reliable job, and I was able 
to quit all three of my part-time jobs and just work one full-time 
position and support my family and have benefits. 
 
And I have a lot of respect for the people who work at 
SaskPower and for the organization itself. They treated me very 
well while I was there. You were like a family member there, 
and I still keep in touch with a lot of the employees that work 
there, or previous employees because quite a few have retired at 
this point. But when I started work at SaskPower, it was hard to 
get a position there because it was a really solid employer that 
people were proud to work there. You were proud to say you 
were a SaskPower employee. And so the turnover wasn’t very 
often. 
 
And so the reason why I went in there was because I have a 
business background and I was hoping to get into the office. 
And I love working with numbers and I like doing 
mathematical equations, which is kind of rare for a social 
worker. But I was hoping to get into the line where you can 
work with bills or work with the linemen. And with being a 
meter reader, I did work closely with linemen. 
 
And actually my father-in-law was a lineman for SaskPower, 
and he was very proud of the work that he did also. And he 
would oftentimes talk to us about the power lines that he helped 
construct, and usually it’s the crew, which is a bunch of men 
who go out and do that. And then so he had to, due to 
disabilities, he had to resign from his job. But he stayed in 
touch with his co-workers there. Like I said, it’s like a family. 
 
But I left because I heard that meter reading was going to be, 
now — it wasn’t going to be in the future — that there was 
going to be these new meters that were going to be read like 
through the Internet and that they would no longer need meter 
readers. So I decided to go to university and to pursue a 
different career, and that’s why I left SaskPower. But to this day 
they still have meter readers working because of the issues that 
we now know that happened with the smart meters. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, part of this debate is talking about the 
mismanagement of SaskPower. And when I talk to a lot of my 
previous co-workers that either still work there or retired, they 
say that it sure definitely changed the atmosphere in the agency 
after so many years. A lot of the work has been contracted out. 
So linemen, when they have to go and repair those lines, it can 
be kind of difficult if their own crews weren’t the ones that put 

up those lines. And they felt that the type of work that they did 
was kind of minimized. 
 
But going back to the smart meters, Mr. Speaker, the smart 
meters came about and it seems like there really was not much 
research done prior to implementation. The research that you 
read about, the timeline of how the smart meters came about, it 
indicates that there were a lot of red flags but that they were 
ignored by the government and that . . . which doesn’t come to 
surprise because as we know, like with the Ministry of Social 
Services, they’re implementing programs without doing lit 
reviews. Usually people will do a review and find out if that 
program is going to be effective before they implement it. But 
no, instead they’re going to go ahead with it and then they’ll 
review it after a while to see if it worked or not. Most agencies 
or good, well-run businesses don’t really work that way. 
Usually they do their research prior to implementing a program 
so that they know that it will work. 
 
And so with the smart meters, that was kind of the case. There 
wasn’t much discussion about what could be some possible 
issues with regards to them. And then we know that a lot of 
people, they had some . . . that there were fires from the smart 
meters to their houses and they had damage to their houses. 
And we lost millions of dollars due to the fact that the research 
wasn’t done. Millions of dollars are going now towards the 
taxpayers who are having to pay that. And so this government 
didn’t make safety a priority when they talked about this. 
 
And our Premier even defended the minister at the time, saying 
that blaming him for not doing that research would send the 
wrong message. No, I think it proves accountability. And if you 
were working in any other government agency and you made a 
big mistake like this without doing your research, you would’ve 
faced those consequences. And I think members in this House 
too should face the same consequences that they expect their 
workers in the workplaces face. 
 
So smart meters are just one of the reasons why, some of the 
issues with regards to SaskPower and what happened with the 
people, the taxpayers having to pay millions and millions of 
dollars because of the mismanagement. 
 
But the other one is the carbon capture. Carbon capture, the 
Boundary dam carbon capture costs $1.5 billion. And when you 
look at this financial analysis that was completed by the federal 
parliamentary budget office, it confirmed that the carbon 
capture at Boundary dam doubles the price of electricity. It 
doubles it, Mr. Speaker. And so why would SaskPower proceed 
with a project when it knew, or should have known, that it 
would needlessly add 1 billion of cost to the bills of electricity 
consumers province wide? 
 
And so despite all of the evidence and perhaps because the sole 
beneficiary of the project is an Alberta-based oil company 
which has the largest donor to the Sask Party in 2013 and 2014, 
SaskPower has refused to provide any form of financial 
accounting to justify that program. So, Mr. Speaker, it seems a 
little fishy, like if the money is going towards someone who is 
giving big money to the Sask Party. And another reason why 
we need to get money out of politics. 
 
And so this was information from James Glennie, the president 



November 17, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1403 

of SaskWind, when they were talking about the poorly managed 
program with regards to carbon capture and making the 
taxpayers pay millions and millions of dollars. And the other 
issue with regards to the carbon capture project is that . . . I 
don’t know if it’s the fact of how the project was built or what 
the issues were, but the Sask Party’s Boundary dam carbon 
capture sequestration project has been repaired at least 6,862 
times since May of 2013. That averages out to about six work 
orders being created each day for the support and maintenance 
of the facility, according to the documents obtained through the 
freedom of information request. Why are there so many work 
orders being presented? Why wasn’t it . . . Maybe possibly it 
was a building error or construction issues. And so again, 
millions and millions of Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money being 
misspent. 
 
Rates for SaskPower have been going up continuously since 
2007. For urban residential users, it’s 32 per cent. This 
government is so proud that they haven’t raised taxes but when 
you raise these utility rates, that’s taxation, Mr. Speaker. And so 
32 per cent increase for urban residential for SaskPower, 42 per 
cent for the energy rate. Like so we’ve got to look at, how much 
are the taxpayers paying for this mismanagement? 
 
And like I said before, Mr. Speaker, this is no way an effect of 
the workers at SaskPower. They work hard and they try to do 
their best to provide good services, and I’ve seen that first hand. 
But it’s the mismanagement of this government that has taken a 
lot of Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money and misused it. And we 
could have invested that money, that millions of dollars that 
were spent on the GTH land deal. It’s just an open, empty field 
sitting there, millions of taxpayers’ dollars sitting right there. 
And we could be investing that in renewable power because 
we’re really one of the . . . We are one of the last renewable 
power resource province in this country. We need to invest in 
that. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 
 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to start off 
by saying I will not be supporting the motion that has been 
brought forward by the official opposition. The motion reads, 
and I quote: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the government for its 
record of mismanagement at SaskPower for which 
Saskatchewan people are being forced to pay the price. 

 
Such strong wording — they condemn. When I looked this 
word up just to see what the official definition is, it says, “to 
express an unfavourable or adverse judgment on; [or] indicate 
strong disapproval of.” Well I guess in the context of the 
motion, this may be an accurate assessment. But it would seem 
that we have very different opinions when it comes to the topic 
of SaskPower and how it is being managed. 
 
They also say our “. . . record of mismanagement at SaskPower 
for which . . . [the] people are being forced to pay the price.” I 
guess this would lead me to ask what price they are paying for. 
The price of great, skilled employees? The price of good 
service? The price of renewable energy? The price of 
leading-edge innovation and technology? I guess all of these 
things do cost money, and I’m not sure who else is going to pay 

for these things other than the people of Saskatchewan. After 
all, all of the things I’ve listed are things that are being 
consumed by us, the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
SaskPower employs 3,310 permanent, full-time employees. A 
good portion of these jobs are unionized positions and are 
good-paying jobs. Of these jobs, SaskPower employs a very 
diverse group of people: 7 per cent are Aboriginal, just about 3 
per cent have disabilities, and there are 7 per cent visible 
minorities. These people who live, work, and raise their 
families in Saskatchewan, these are people who pay taxes in the 
province of Saskatchewan. Because of good employees like 
SaskPower, people are staying in the province and we have 
people who have come back to Saskatchewan and people who 
are moving to Saskatchewan for the first time, unlike the years 
when the NDP was governing and people were flocking from 
the province in the thousands. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleagues across the way may believe that 
our government is mismanaging SaskPower by employing these 
3,100 people and that we are forcing the province of 
Saskatchewan to pay for it, but do you truly believe that power 
generation is going to just happen all on its own? It takes a 
workforce that is skilled and talented to make this happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SaskPower has 520,315 customers. This breaks 
down into 380,000 residential customers, 61,000 commercial, 
121 industrial, just about 60,000 farms, and 19,000 oil field 
customers. Of all of the things that I listed above, 8,300 of those 
were new customers to SaskPower in 2015. This can be 
attributed to the growth that Saskatchewan has been feeling 
over the past few years, in part because we are open for 
business. 
 
As you can imagine, running a company comes with a service 
side. In 2015 SaskPower received 742,000 calls from 
customers. These range from simple billing inquiries and 
questions to actual service calls. Now that sounds like a rather 
large number, and I guess it is, but that number also represents 
an 11 per cent decrease in service customer calls from the 
previous year, so we’re doing good work. This reduction in 
calls is represented by the good work that is being done by 
those employees who work hard every day to ensure we all 
have power, employees who are skilled and working hard to 
also do preventative maintenance which helps reduce the 
number of service calls. 
 
To these employees I say thank you, and want you to know that 
I don’t feel like this government is wasting their money by 
employing you, and I really don’t know how anyone can 
criticize the government of mismanagement when we are 
investing in our people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am so proud that this government is investing in 
renewables. We have committed to a target of 50 per cent 
renewables by 2030. Currently we are close to 30 per cent of 
our energy production actually comes from renewables. So this 
government will be investing in infrastructure projects like 
wind, solar, and other interesting options to help us reach our 
goal of 50 per cent renewables by 2030. I’m not sure about any 
of you, but I’m really excited about this. 
 
[11:45] 



1404 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2016 

Mr. Speaker, earlier I talked about the service calls that are 
made, and it is interesting to note that over the past five years 
34 per cent of all unplanned outages were caused by aging 
infrastructure. So when our opposition criticizes this 
government of mismanagement and spending money on 
SaskPower, it amazes me that they cannot understand that that 
is a part of what a business needs to do to continue to be 
successful. That is what a business needs to do to ensure your 
customers have a reliable power supply. And one of the reasons 
this government has needed to spend so much money on 
infrastructure is because of the neglect of the previous 
government. 
 
We have also been investing in many different types of 
infrastructure projects to help ensure that Saskatchewan has the 
necessary baseload power that is needed for a growing 
province, and I think it is important to note that these projects 
cost a lot of money. In fact this year, 42 per cent of your 
monthly power bill will be going towards infrastructure 
expense, investing in the future of Saskatchewan. So while our 
opposition is busy asking the question, where did all the money 
go, I can tell them that we have spent record amounts of money 
on capital investment to not only fix failing infrastructure but to 
ensure we have new infrastructure for the future. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what would a speech about SaskPower be 
without talking about Boundary dam 3 and carbon capture and 
sequestration technology? Yes, Mr. Speaker, more money spent 
on infrastructure. But this is not just infrastructure spent; it’s 
leading-edge technology that has been developed right here in 
our province. Technology that is being looked at by people 
from all over the world. Technology that can help with 
emissions in other parts of the world. A solution, a technology 
that’s actually needed. 
 
The NDP like to criticize and belittle the fantastic progress that 
has been made with this technology. Well I have a fact that 
should help change their attitude. As of the end of October, this 
project has taken 1 226 300 tonnes of carbon out of the air. This 
is an absolutely amazing feat. Now some of you may be asking, 
what does that actually mean? And I know our opposition is 
asking because they don’t seem to understand the project. Well 
what it means is we have taken 300,000 cars off of the road. 
 
So Boundary dam 3 is a passion of mine. Obviously it’s in my 
constituency. We not only are meeting expectations and 
guidelines with this; we are exceeding them. On a daily basis, 
an average coal-fired power plant section will put 1100 tonnes 
of carbon into the air. With this technology, we are actually 
sequestering over 90 per cent of what would’ve gone into the 
air, and we are only allowing 140 tonnes of carbon to go out. 
 
And just to put that in perspective, the federal regulations 
actually tells us that we can let 440 tonnes of carbon out of that 
unit. So we are exceeding expectations of the federal 
government and meeting the needs of this province by helping 
to ensure that there will be jobs going forward not only for 
SaskPower and electricity but also for the coal industry that is a 
very important industry in this province.  
 
[Applause] 
 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you. So, Mr. Speaker, let me make it quite 

clear. I am very proud of the services that are provided by 
SaskPower to the people of Saskatchewan at reasonable rates. 
I’m very proud of the wages that are provided to 3,310 
employees of SaskPower and to the 520,315 fantastic 
customers. I’m also very proud of the innovation that is being 
created in partnership with many different companies that are 
making Saskatchewan and SaskPower stand out as a leader all 
around the world. 
 
And last but not least, I’m proud of the initiative that is being 
taken to bring our province to 50 per cent renewable by 2030, a 
goal which I believe we will achieve. So, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
let you know that I will most definitely not be supporting the 
motion that has been brought forward by the NDP. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is my 
pleasure to rise today and enter into debate on the motion as put 
forward by my colleague from Nutana: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the government for its 
record of mismanagement at SaskPower for which 
Saskatchewan people are forced to pay the price [Mr. 
Speaker]. 

 
And I’ve been listening intently to both the comments by my 
colleagues and also the members opposite, and I have some 
comments on that. First of all, Mr. Speaker, we’ve recently 
debated Bill 17 in this Assembly. And Bill 17, for those who 
may not know, was a bill proposed by this government that 
would see an increase of the borrowing capacity of SaskPower 
increase again by about $2 billion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 2 
billion up, up to 10 billion from 8 billion. And this is the second 
time that we’ve seen that in a mere three years. So we’ve seen a 
doubling of that borrowing limit from 5 billion back in 2013 up 
to $10 billion which is what is currently being debated, Mr. 
Speaker. And I think that’s important that we question the 
manageability, how that is going to impact future operations 
and viability of our treasured, one of our treasured Crown 
corporations in SaskPower. 
 
We also see not only that threat to SaskPower, but we see threat 
by way of Bill 40 which has also been proposed by this 
government. Bill 40, many will know, is the bill that would 
propose to allow up to . . . changing the definition in The 
Interpretation Act of “privatization” which is sort of backdoor 
privatization, Mr. Speaker, that would allow up to 40 per cent 
of the Crown corporations to be privatized without triggering 
the definition of “privatization.” 
 
It’s interesting that one of the concerns that my colleague from 
Nutana brought up regarding that was about whether or not that 
would trigger section 149 of the federal taxation Act. And I 
think we wondered if maybe the government hadn’t done their 
homework on that and didn’t realize that if you privatize more 
than 10 per cent of a Crown corporation, it triggers federal 
taxation stipulations, a 15 per cent tax rate. 
 
But it’s funny. I was just looking at an article. And this is a 
question that I have going back to 2014 when the Premier stated 
that, Wall says that Ottawa might not be able to impose a 



November 17, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1405 

carbon tax on SaskPower . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . It’s in 
a quote. “Wall says he might be able to make the case that 
Ottawa can’t impose a carbon tax on SaskPower because it’s a 
Crown corporation.” So apparently they knew about some of 
that legislation then but perhaps had forgotten or conveniently 
forgotten that, Mr. Speaker. But I think that remains another 
threat that we have with regard to our Crown corporation, 
SaskPower.  
 
But it’s certainly not the only threat that we see. And the matter 
that we’re debating today is the threat by way of 
mismanagement, increasing debt, and really some concerning 
situations, particularly with SaskPower, in this province. 
There’s a fairly lengthy list of concerns. One of them would be 
$47 million spent on the power smart meter fiasco, I think is the 
only way to describe that, Mr. Speaker, where we saw the smart 
meters brought in perhaps without due diligence on the part of 
the then minister and then some really shocking rate increases 
for a number of people in the province. And then that was fazed 
out. And the net result of that, besides all of the concern and the 
burden that it put on homeowners, it was a $47 million loss, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s not insignificant. 
 
Certainly the questions around why the $25 million purchase by 
SaskPower of GTH lands. I know the member from Nutana has 
been out and has confirmed that there is nothing on the build. I 
don’t know if there was an update on that from the member 
from Nutana but last we heard there is absolutely nothing being 
built on that land. But yet SaskPower has paid $25 million for 
that land, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s also the issue of the Boundary dam 3 has been brought 
up a number of times here. Certainly you know if there’s 
technology that pulls carbon out of the air and it works and we 
can meaningfully reduce emissions, that’s something to look at. 
But we all know that that project was plagued by a number of 
cost overruns. There were lawsuits. 
 
There were also some serious concerns about the ability to 
deliver on their contracts, to deliver that CO2 to Cenovus. And I 
think the total came out to 20 million that was paid in penalties, 
Mr. Speaker. But the potential there was actually much higher. 
In fact I believe it was around $90 million that potentially 
SaskPower could have had to have paid by way of contractual 
penalties because of a failure to deliver on the CO2 that they had 
promised to Cenovus, Mr. Speaker. So that is another piece of 
the list and the mismanagement that we have seen on the part of 
the government and the former minister with regard to 
SaskPower. 
 
And SaskPower is very important. Like all of our Crowns, it has 
not only a mandate to provide the service, but there’s a social 
context in it, in that service that it provides. It’s a way to 
provide high quality power at a reasonable price to people 
across the province. 
 
I know SaskPower has one of the largest grids in the country, 
yet we have one of the most dispersed populations, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And having a Crown corporation that’s being 
well-managed allows us to take investments and ensure that 
we’re getting power lines to the North, to rural areas. And 
certainly that was the reason for being of SaskPower to bring 
electrification to rural and remote areas in the province. 

You know, larger companies were willing to come in and set up 
in larger urban centres where there are economies of scale, but 
it’s more difficult to get people to come in and bring that power 
out to rural areas. And certainly that was something . . . They 
had the support of farmers who allowed lines on their land and 
was encouraged and embraced by the people of Saskatchewan. 
And I still think that we do value and embrace the role that 
SaskPower plays in our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Just noting how quickly time flies. 
 
So the price that’s being made to pay, Mr. Speaker, by the 
mismanagement here is not insignificant, and it’s quite varied. 
There have been a number of rate increases in Saskatchewan 
over the last . . . Since 2007, urban residential rates have 
increased 32 per cent in the basic charge and 42 per cent in the 
energy rate; for rural residents 36 per cent increase in basic 
charge, 37 in the energy rate; for farmers, 34 per cent increase 
to the basic charge, 40 per cent increase to the energy rate. And 
then there’s another 12 per cent for those who use over 1600 
kilowatts per month. So, Mr. Speaker, those are really 
significant impacts. Oilfield, 26 per cent increase on the basic 
charges and 37 per cent.  
 
So the members opposite would have us believe that this is 
something that we cooked up over on this side, but this is 
having impacts for people across the province.  
 
From friends like the Canadian Association of Petroleum 
Producers, their submission to the most recent SaskPower rate 
review indicated that they had some significant concerns. The 
Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
has some serious concerns about the rate increases. And I’ll 
speak on the impact on, for example, schools. This government 
is not forwarding enough money to make the basic . . . well not 
to fund the teacher salary increase, the contracted increase. And 
when we have rate increases after rate increases without any 
ability of school boards to cover those, those rate increases 
come right out of our classrooms, Mr. Speaker. And we’re not 
seeing any innovation as we’re seeing elsewhere where perhaps 
we invest in putting solar panels on roofs of schools. No, we’re 
not doing that. 
 
We have a plan to get to 50 per cent renewables by 2030, but 
we have no real plan, Mr. Speaker. So those are my comments 
around some of the concerns and the impacts that what is going 
on with SaskPower is having. And I’ll conclude my remarks. 
 
[12:00] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I had 
a chance to read the motion from the member opposite. I’m 
actually kind of surprised. They talked about the . . . She used 
the word “mismanagement.” I’m interested because that’s 
usually a term that’s provided based on somebody that’s 
managing so maybe it’s a criticism of the existing managers of 
SaskPower as opposed to government. But I’m not exactly sure, 
Mr. Speaker. But it is fascinating in terms of this word as 
opposed to supervisors, leaders, or those responsible. Maybe 
this is in regard to carbon capture. 



1406 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2016 

I used to work at a coal mine, Mr. Speaker. I used to work at the 
coal mine, at the Poplar River mine, Mr. Speaker, and enjoyed 
my work there. It was great, gratifying work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also had a chance to look at Bruce Johnstone’s 
article. And, Mr. Speaker, in a perfect world we could leave 
coal — the dirtiest, most carbon-intensive, most abundant fossil 
fuel on earth — in the ground. Instead, we would rely on 
renewables, like wind, solar, hydro to power our cities, Mr. 
Speaker, our factories, our homes, and our businesses.  
 
But we don’t live in a perfect world, Mr. Speaker. We live in a 
world where roughly 40 per cent of our electricity comes from 
coal-fired generation. That percentage is unlikely to decline 
significantly in the next 30 or 40 years. So we have a choice, 
Mr. Speaker. Leave it in the ground and hope for some silver 
bullet solution like cold fusion to save us, or we can clean it up 
best we can until something better, more reliable, and cleaner 
comes along, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, the Saskatchewan NDP, they took a stance on 
SaskPower’s CCS, the carbon capture sequestration project, a 
costly boondoggle, Mr. Speaker, which could be shelved ASAP 
[as soon as possible]. They’ve used terms like botched, bogus, 
fiasco. The NDP has relentlessly attacked the CCS project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Washington Post article pointed out — and 
this is actually what was referenced by the Leader of the 
Opposition who took a swipe at the project, pointing out that 
the suspended funding, setting cost overruns, and etc. — but, 
Mr. Speaker, the Washington Post article points out some 
experts like MIT’s [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] 
Howard Herzog believe that renewables alone can’t help us 
achieve our climate change goals, and that as long as we 
continue to use fossil fuels, carbon capture is a necessary step. 
 
Herzog said, expansion of CCS in the US is being held back by 
a lack of policy support, namely greenhouse gas emission 
regulations, Mr. Speaker. This is not to say that BD3, the CCS 
project, is without its challenges and may face many more 
months and years ahead, Mr. Speaker. But it is working and 
doing what it is designed to do at a cost not significantly higher 
than conventional combined-cycle natural gas generation. So it 
would be a huge mistake, Mr. Speaker, not to mention a huge 
waste of taxpayers’ money, to give up carbon capture now, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite like to talk about best 
practice. They like to talk about evidence based. In terms of 
BD3, Mr. Speaker, what if you’re the first to do something? 
What if we were to sit and wait for everybody else to actually 
do something, Mr. Speaker? Actually they would sit there: 
“Invent something.” We’d sit there idly by and not do anything.  
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re actually doing something in regards to 
carbon capture, Mr. Speaker. That’s why we have the Boundary 
dam 3, Mr. Speaker. I mean it’s important that we capture the 
carbon and develop renewables, Mr. Speaker. It seems a rather, 
you know, a rather potent transition here, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
important that we do this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, apparently the members opposite don’t want us to 
try anything new. No they just sit and stumble along, like with 

the ploughshares and the oxen. Wow, can you imagine? Here is 
wanting to look forward here and trying to do the best we 
possibly can, Mr. Speaker, utilize things like growth. And now 
there’s a dirty word, Mr. Speaker. Again, growth and the 
economy — two dirty words that the members opposite like to 
say. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it reminds me of an SNL [Saturday Night Live] 
skit in relation to “Lothar of the Hill People.” Mr. Speaker, 
Lothar was sitting there with his son, and they were discussing 
the fact that his son had found a disc, a stone disc, Mr. Speaker, 
and it had a hole in the middle. Mr. Speaker, Lothar’s son put a 
stick through it and said, “Look, Father, look. I’ve got a stone 
and it rolls. It’s like a disc, and we can take our basket and 
attach our basket to the top, [Mr. Speaker]. We can attach our 
basket to the top of this disc, and it’ll help with our work. And 
we can push it. It’ll make things easier for us.” 
 
Now Lothar looks at his son and says, “Son, that’s a good idea. 
It might even be a great idea. But it’s a new idea and because 
it’s a new idea, we must fear and reject it.” . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’m sure the 
members opposite are going to start to chirp away as they 
normally do. And they point out members here by name, and 
they say, oh the member from so-and-so. They’re making stuff 
up all the time, Mr. Speaker. It goes on and on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that all the members opposite in 
elementary school, I believe they were all hall monitors. Every 
single one of them were hall monitors, and they ran around and 
go, “Teacher, teacher, look at Johnny and Mary. Johnny and 
Mary, they don’t have hall passes,” Mr. Speaker. “They don’t 
have hall passes, teacher. Teacher, please kick them out. Oh my 
God! They’re wearing their outside shoes inside, teacher. 
Teacher, help them.” 
 
Yes, that’s exactly, Mr. Speaker, over and over have absolutely 
nothing to bring forward in terms of the debate, Mr. Speaker, 
really. I mean here we go, really. Hello from Seth and Amy 
from Saturday Night Live, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So our Premier writes a letter to the feds. It’s about . . . 
[inaudible] . . . the damaging offsets of carbon tax, and also 
looks to the Leader of the Opposition to help co-sign the letter 
to the Prime Minister. Mr. Speaker, did the Leader of the 
Opposition sign the letter with the Premier of this province? No, 
they didn’t. Really? Really, Mr. Speaker? Really? They won’t 
sign the letter with him? Well that’s rather surprising.  
 
Maybe, maybe, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition 
penned his own letter, wrote his own letter to the feds, but I 
pretty strongly doubt that that actually happened. Really? You 
couldn’t even pen your own letter? You can’t even pen your 
own letter, Mr. Speaker? No, they didn’t. No, they didn’t write 
and apparently the NDP have no position on the carbon tax, Mr. 
Speaker. They have absolutely no position on the carbon tax. I 
mean that’s, that’s absolutely amazing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ve got a letter here from the IBEW [International Brotherhood 
of Electrical Workers], Neil Collins who is the business 
manager, financial secretary IBEW Local 2067. He says: 
 

I am very concerned about recent comments you made 



November 17, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1407 

regarding the Boundary Dam Carbon Capture and 
Sequestration project. Our union members work very hard 
on this project and fully support this important initiative. 
 
While I recognize it is the role of the opposition to ask 
questions about government actions, your comments and 
that of your critic . . . [the member from Nutana] calls into 
question your position on this matter. 
 
Do you support the CCS project as a means to reduce 
carbon emissions at our coal-fired plants or do you intend 
to eliminate coal-fired electrical facilities in Saskatchewan, 
thereby eliminating hundreds of union jobs? 
 
The CCS project is . . . 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, I absolutely don’t believe that they . . . They 
have absolutely no interest in actually ensuring that members 
are working. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they thought quickly about Crown ownership, Mr. 
Speaker, 51/49. They have a problem with the number 49 per 
cent, Mr. Speaker. That 49 per cent, I wonder if we changed it 
to 75/25, would they agree? Well I see some placid little nods 
here. Maybe they’d agree if it was 99 and 1 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker. I’ve no idea. They actually agree with the premise; 
they just don’t agree with the numbers. I guess that’s it: they 
don’t want to have that 49 per cent. That’s exactly where 
they’re running into. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to be supporting this motion. And, 
Mr. Speaker, in the immortal words of Ricky Bobby in 
Talladega Nights, if you’re not first, you’re last. You know 
what I’m talking about. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Time for debate has expired. 
Questions. I recognize the member from Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Mr. Nerlien: — Mr. Speaker, it’s always difficult to follow the 
member from Regina Coronation Park with his succinct 
remarks. SaskPower is focused on a reinvestment program, 
building Saskatchewan’s capacity for growth under our 
government. In fact to quote from the 2014 annual report: “As 
the world focuses on climate change, our company is in the 
midst of a critical transformation to cleaner sources of . . . 
[energy].”  
 
In every single year between 1992 and 2007 the NDP took 
dividends totalling more than $1 billion away from SaskPower. 
In fact in some years the NDP took more than 100 per cent of 
SaskPower’s annual net income. 
 
My question is for the member from Prince Albert Northcote: 
how can you say that our government has mismanaged 
SaskPower when your party was happy to play politics with the 
company by gutting its coffers on a yearly basis to bail out your 
cash-strapped governments, all while, year after year, increasing 
power rates? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — I find it very ironic, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that they talk about being cash-strapped when it was their 
government, the Devine government, that made us do that. But 
if you guys are really concerned about the environment, you 
had record revenues, why didn’t you invest more in renewable 
energy? The province has less than most of the provinces in this 
country. If you had that as a priority, you would’ve invested it. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the rate review, 
the recent rate review, the messages from businesses was clear: 
stop dumping money in carbon capture and stop hiking the 
rates. To the member from Saskatoon Westview: when will the 
Saskatchewan Party commit to stopping any plans to expand 
their job-killing carbon capture tax? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Westview. 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you 
for the question. And you know, maybe if the member opposite 
would have listened to my speech, she would have heard some 
of the answers already. But you know, it’s really important that 
we make investments into the future. This government is 
committed. 
 
That government over there didn’t spend any time investing 
while they were in power. They had no plan for growth for this 
province. They had no thought for our children and our futures. 
And so now we’re left to raise rates so that we can pay for the 
mismanagement that that government over there had. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The NDP 
ran on an election platform that promised, and I quote, to 
deliver the most affordable utility bundle in Canada. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, what they didn’t campaign on was the fact that that 
promise was not costed in their budget, an additional cost of 
$595 million.  
 
So my question will be to the financial guru from Nutana: how 
would your party have paid for this utility bundle? Would you 
have sunk the province into more debt, or would you have done 
what you really wanted to do, and hold true to your firm Leap 
Manifesto beliefs and raise taxes on the people of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, what we have to talk about here 
is the mismanagement. This motion is about the 
mismanagement of this government. There’s $6 billion in debt 
after six years. Every year they rack up another $1 billion of 
debt. They’re imposing it on SaskPower. SaskPower’s now 
borrowing an unprecedented . . . Their limit is $10 billion. For 
these guys, Mr. Speaker, all you do is add on another zero and 
everything’s fine. That’s not the way it’s going to work, and the 
ratepayers and the taxpayers are the ones who are suffering. If 
they would stop imposing things like their $1.5 billion, 



1408 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2016 

job-killing carbon capture tax, then we wouldn’t be in this 
situation. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — SaskPower’s debt ratio is over 76 per cent. 
Can the member from Regina Coronation Park let us know if 
the Sask Party has any plans to deal with this? Or are they 
happy to continue with more mismanagement? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
infrastructure continues to be upgraded. It requires upgrading, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s why we are continuing to invest, and the 
Sask Party is going to continue to invest, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Why do we require rate increases, Mr. Speaker? Rate increases 
are important, right? Demand has grown 16 per cent over the 
last five years, Mr. Speaker. By 2030 we need to increase our 
power capacity by 63 per cent, Mr. Speaker. The last two 
annual reports show an increase of 11,000 new customers, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s a five-year average of 9,500 customers per 
year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[12:15] 
 
Our infrastructure, again, it needs to be upgraded. It’s nearing 
the end of its life cycle; 42 per cent of your bill in 2016 went 
toward infrastructure upgrades and repairs, Mr. Speaker. 
SaskPower’s 10-year capital plan includes approximately 1.1 
billion of annual capital spending, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this because the members opposite invested absolutely nothing 
into SaskPower. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood. 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there 
are more than 2,400 new coal-fired power plants planned or 
under construction around the world, according to a report 
released last December at the Paris climate change summit. 
Those plants alone will emit 6.5 billion tonnes of carbon 
dioxide a year, nearly nine times Canada’s annual greenhouse 
gas emissions. Carbon capture and storage could dramatically 
reduce the emissions from those new plants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is simple. To the member of Prince 
Albert Northcote: does the NDP support the federal 
government’s imposed carbon tax that would cost ratepayers 
and our Crown utilities billions of dollars? Or do they support 
carbon capture and storage that would actually make a 
significant reduction in GHGs [greenhouse gas]? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Well what this government needs to do is 
come up with a good plan on how we’re going to deal with the 
environmental crisis. We need to invest again, like what I said, 
in renewable power, renewable energy. What about investing in 

those kind of options so that we can have the best services in 
Saskatchewan, the best across Canada? I want this government 
to be focused on that. 
 
They say they have a target for 50 per cent in 15 years. I don’t 
know why it’s going to take that long. But what’s the plan? 
What’s the goal? I haven’t seen anything. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, the Meadow Lake Mechanical Pulp 
mill employs 716 people, and their electrical bill represents 20 
per cent of their input costs. They told the rate review panel, 
Meadow Lake is not driving the need for increased costs due to 
expansion or infrastructure upgrades. But it is paying for it. Can 
the member from Coronation Park find out how the SaskPower 
minister justified to the member from Meadow Lake that his 
$1.5 billion job-killing carbon capture tax could cost his jobs in 
his riding? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
think the member opposite is actually pointing to the fact that 
the infrastructure requires investment, Mr. Speaker, and we’re 
going to continue to invest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why do we need rate increases? Mr. Speaker, the 
demand has increased 16 per cent, Mr. Speaker, over the last 
five years. In 2030 . . . Mr. Speaker, this is a combination of 
renewables and non-renewables. Mr. Speaker, we’re going to 
continue to make those investments. Non-renewable resources 
require renewable options, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have other options, Mr. Speaker. There’s going to be solar. 
There’s going to be wind. There’s going to be some hydro. 
There’s going to be geothermal energy, Mr. Speaker. We are 
going to invest in renewable energy possibilities, Mr. Speaker, 
and options, and that’s 50 per cent as we promised by 2030. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s truly puzzling to 
me why the NDP would even debate the subject, especially 
when their campaign platform earlier this year called for cutting 
of hundreds of millions of dollars out of the budget of our 
Crown utilities, SaskPower, through its misnamed lowest cost 
utility bundle without accounting for a single dollar of the half 
billion dollar cost. Mr. Speaker, my question is to the member 
of Saskatoon Nutana and the opposition Finance critic: do they 
still stand by the party’s election plan to burden our Crowns 
with the ill-conceived, underbudgeted programs? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Waste. Mismanagement. Scandal. That is the 
record of this government. 
 



November 17, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1409 

The Deputy Speaker: — Time for the 75-minute debate has 
expired. Order. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 1 — Provision of Medical Imaging Services 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Mr. Olauson.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It is my duty pursuant to rule 27 . . . 
No. Oh, I will recognize the member from Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our government has 
increased spending and capacity when it comes to diagnostic 
imaging, but there’s still people on the waiting list waiting far 
too long. Estimated regional health authority expenditures on 
medical imaging in 2015-16 were approximately $143 million. 
That represents a 70 per cent increase in expenditures from 
2007-08, whose expenditures were 84 million. Our innovative 
legislation is a way to add additional capacity to the public 
system at no extra cost. 
 
The MRI facility licence Act was brought into force on 
February 29th, 2016. A unique feature of the Act requires 
licensed facilities to provide a free scan from someone from the 
public wait-list for every paid scan. Since the launch of the 
private-pay MRI [magnetic resonance imaging] service in 
February, over 1,800 patients are benefiting from a private MRI 
scan at no cost to the public health system. Mr. Speaker, this is 
equivalent to adding another MRI machine to the system, 
operating five hours a day, seven days a week, once again at no 
cost to the public system. 
 
On June 6th, The Patient Choice Medical Imaging Act was 
introduced in the Legislative Assembly, following through on 
our election commitment. 
 
The fact is, Mr. Speaker, the system that we are now using was 
implemented by the NDP. It was set up in secret. The public 
didn’t know about it. It was used by the workmen’s 
compensation board and our Saskatchewan Roughriders. It was 
set up in the same manner as the Saskatchewan Party has now 
set it up, only now it is also for the general public. And now all 
of a sudden it’s wrong. Mr. Speaker, the NDP set up this 
system. They designed it. They built it. They enacted it, and 
they operated it. Now they say it’s wrong. 
 
The system worked for, and still works for workmen’s 
compensation board and our beloved Riders, but why can’t it 
work for the general public? Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that 
it has nothing to do with MRI or CT [computerized 
tomography] scans and has everything to do with the political 
agenda. 
 
The NDP are opposing this system, not because it is wrong. 
They are opposing it because the Sask Party is doing it. They 
are not looking at what is good for the people of Saskatchewan. 
They are just looking at their political agenda. 

Mr. Speaker, how else do we ever shorten wait-lists? How else 
do we serve the ever-growing population of Saskatchewan? 
“Ever growing” is a word the opposition wasn’t used to. The 
NDP have offered no, no alternative solution. All they offer is 
criticism of a program they started. 
 
The NDP oppose anything that has the word “private” in the 
name. Mr. Speaker, do we not have private X-ray units, private 
ultrasound, private dentists, private chiropractors? They all 
work and work well, so what’s the problem with private MRI or 
CTs? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP are like the fairy tales I read to my 
grandchildren. Like Chicken Little, they keep on yelling, “the 
sky is falling, the sky is falling.” And, Mr. Speaker, just like the 
fairy tale, it’s getting to the point where nobody believes. 
 
The time has come to take these bold steps. We have to find 
ways to make health care more efficient and more affordable. 
This plan has no cost to the people of Saskatchewan. I think it is 
a step worth taking, and it is obvious that the people of 
Saskatchewan agree. 
 
We’re not the only province taking this step. With us are the 
provinces of British Columbia, Alberta, Nova Scotia, and 
Quebec. Mr. Speaker, the main concern of all of us should be 
patient care. We desperately need more MRIs and CT scans. 
How do we get these is the question. The Sask Party is going 
the route started by the NDP. The NDP have offered no 
alternatives, no options. All they offer is a negative political 
stance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would now like to take a look at where Canada 
stands among the rest of the world. MRI units per 1 million 
people, Canada comes in 21st at 9.48 units per million people. 
We are beaten by countries Estonia, Latvia, Spain, Iceland, 
Greece, Italy, and Korea. First place is Japan at 51.67 units per 
million people. 
 
CT units, we come in 25th at 15.1 units per million people. 
Ahead of us, Luxembourg, Estonia, Italy, Greece, Korea, 
Iceland. Once again the leader is Japan at 107 units per million 
people. 
 
As you can see, we have a long way to go. The only reasonable 
route is the one the Saskatchewan Party is taking. I would like 
now to quote Murray Mandryk of the Leader-Post. And I quote, 
“In other words, the government’s case for private MRIs, and 
now CT scans, is more compelling and it is better than anything 
we are hearing in the form of rebuttal.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, too often ideology and politics get in the way of 
good policy that benefit Saskatchewan people. I want to amend 
this motion so there is absolutely no reason that every member 
of this Assembly cannot support it. 
 
We know private MRIs have already benefited hundreds of 
people in our province in the short term they have been 
available and have reduced public wait-lists. It is now the 
equivalent of another entire MRI machine added to the system 
operating 5 hours a day, 7 days a week at no cost to the general 
public. 
 



1410 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2016 

The Leader of the Opposition said in this Assembly following 
the last election that they would not just oppose but also 
propose and support — support — good ideas in this Chamber. 
This chance can benefit people across the province, Mr. 
Speaker, and we want the ND [New Democrat] to support . . . 
We want their support for this initiative. Mr. Speaker, we do 
want their support for this initiative. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I 
move the following motion: 
 

That the motion be amended by omitting the following 
words after “Assembly”: 
 
“condemns the NDP for their ideologically based attacks 
against”; 
 
and inserting in its place the word “supports.” 

 
I so submit. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Batoche has 
moved the following motion: 
 

That the motion be amended by omitting the following 
words after “Assembly”: 
 
“condemns the NDP for their ideologically based attacks 
against”; 
 
and by inserting in its place “supports.” 

 
Before I call the question, I must advise the Assembly that 
pursuant to rule 27, that this item of business has been 
previously adjourned three times and cannot be further 
adjourned. At the conclusion of the debate or normal time of 
adjournment, whichever is reached first, every question 
necessary to dispose of this motion shall be put. 
 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — All those in favour of the motion 
please . . . Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
amendment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — All those in favour of the amendment 
say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — All those opposed say no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I believe the ayes have it. Call in the 
members. 
 
[The division bells rang from 12:30 until 12:33.] 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — All those in favour of the amendment 
please rise. 
 

[Yeas — 43] 
 
Wall 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I would ask the members to come to 
order while the vote is being taken. 
 
Stewart Reiter Morgan 
Harpauer Doherty Duncan 
Beaudry-Mellor Hargrave D’Autremont 
Heppner Boyd Cheveldayoff 
Marit Tell Eyre 
Merriman Harrison Ottenbreit 
Ross Weekes Brkich 
Kirsch Bradshaw Steinley 
Makowsky Phillips Lawrence 
Wilson Campeau Docherty 
Michelson Cox Olauson 
Steele Young Fiaz 
Dennis Carr Nerlien 
Lambert Buckingham Kaeding 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — All members who are opposed to the 
motion please rise. 
 

[Nays — 9] 
 
Wotherspoon Chartier Belanger 
Sproule Forbes Rancourt 
Beck McCall Sarauer 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 
43; those opposed, 9. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The motion is carried. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question on the main motion as 
amended? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — All those in favour of the motion 
please say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Those opposed say no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I believe the ayes have it. Call in the 
members. 
 
[The division bells rang from 12:37 until 12:38.] 



November 17, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1411 

The Deputy Speaker: — All those in favour of the motion 
please rise. 
 

[Yeas — 44] 
 
Wall Stewart Wyant 
Reiter Morgan Harpauer 
Doherty Duncan Beaudry-Mellor 
Hargrave D’Autremont Heppner 
Boyd Cheveldayoff Marit 
Tell Eyre Merriman 
Harrison Ottenbreit Ross 
Weekes Brkich Kirsch 
Bradshaw Steinley Makowsky 
Phillips Lawrence Wilson 
Campeau Docherty Michelson 
Cox Olauson Steele 
Young Fiaz Dennis 
Carr Nerlien Lambert 
Buckingham Kaeding  
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Those members opposed to the 
motion please rise. 
 

[Nays — 9] 
 
Wotherspoon Chartier Belanger 
Sproule Forbes Rancourt 
Beck McCall Sarauer 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, those in favour of the 
motion, 44; those opposed, 9. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The motion as amended is carried. I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
move that this House be now adjourned. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that this House does now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 
until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:42.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1387 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1387 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1387 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1388 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1388 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1388 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1388 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1388 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1389 
  Marit ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1389 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1398 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1389 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1389 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1389 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1390 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1390 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1390 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1390 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1391 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Pense Rancher Inducted Into Canadian Agricultural Hall of Fame 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1391 
 Ukrainian Harvest Festival Held in Prince Albert 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1391 
 Inaugural Ceremony for Science, Technology, Innovation and Collaboration Awards 
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1391 
 Girl Guides of Canada Youth Recognition Ceremony 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1392 
 Outstanding Youth Philanthropist Awards Presented in Regina 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1392 
 Fysh’s Pharmasave Celebrates 100th Anniversary 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1392 
 International Education Week 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1393 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Auditor’s Report and Details of Land Transactions 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1393 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1393 
  Harrison ..................................................................................................................................................... 1394, 1395, 1396, 1397 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1395 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1396 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1396 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1397 
 State of Provincial Finances 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1394 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1394 
 Funding for Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1395 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1395 
 Funding for Health Care 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1396 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1396 
 Donations to Political Parties 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1397 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1397 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1398 
 
 



 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Financial State of SaskPower 
  Sproule ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1398, 1407 
  Buckingham .................................................................................................................................................................. 1400, 1407 
  Rancourt ........................................................................................................................................................................ 1402, 1407 
  Carr .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1403 
  Beck ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1404, 1408 
  Docherty ........................................................................................................................................................................ 1405, 1408 
  Nerlien ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1407 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1407 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1408 
  Dennis ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1408 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 1 — Provision of Medical Imaging Services 
  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1409 
 Recorded Division (amendment) ............................................................................................................................................... 1410 
 Recorded Division (main motion as amended)......................................................................................................................... 1411 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


