






















































Hansard: June 27, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 23A  MONDAY, JUNE 27, 2016, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Hon. Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Hon. Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Merriman, Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 51; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Maurice Riou http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 657 
 June 27, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m seeking leave for an 
extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to begin by welcoming all the guests that are in the gallery. But 
in particular, we’re joined by three gentlemen who are involved 
in a transformational organization and centre in Calgary and are 
here for meetings. They met earlier with the mayor of Regina, 
and they’ve been meeting with the University of Regina. Later 
this day they’ll meet with the Minister of Justice and officials 
from government. Mr. Speaker, we’re always, it seems, joined 
by special guests, but on some occasions we’re joined by bona 
fide heroes. And it’s my pleasure to introduce to you and all 
members of the Assembly today, Sheldon Kennedy, who’s 
seated in your gallery. Sheldon is joined by Wayne McNeil and 
Brad Blaisdell. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Sheldon now for some years has been on the 
vanguard, a courageous vanguard of leadership in terms of 
speaking out on the issue of sexual abuse and abuse of 
especially young people right across this country. Mr. Speaker, 
he has pioneered the Respect Group programming that I 
referenced just a bit earlier and is meeting with NGOs 
[non-governmental organization] and government organizations 
from across the country to see if what’s been working very well 
in Alberta and Calgary can be replicated elsewhere across the 
country. 
 
I can share with members of the House that one element of the 
program, called safe places, is currently being used in the city 
of Swift Current in terms of ensuring that anyone that is 
working with young people in capacities involving that 
community go through very specific training and are certified 
with respect to something called Respect in Sport. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the late ’80s and the early ’90s, horrific things 
happened in my hometown of Swift Current to a number of 
young men. The villain was Graham James. And I would say 
this, Mr. Speaker, that I’m sure people in our community at that 
time, people from across this province and this country — and 
even more importantly, the victims — would have probably 
been hard pressed to identify anything good that could possibly 
have come from those horrific acts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am very happy to report to the House today that 
in principle, not exclusively but in principle, because of 

Sheldon’s courage, good things are coming from those horrific 
acts today. And I would ask all members to welcome him to this 
Legislative Assembly, and in so doing, saluting him for his 
courage that has now been on display across this country and 
internationally. Who knows how many young people have been 
helped and protected because he had the courage to speak up 
and because he is continuing with the courage to act? 
 
So we want to join with him, not just in welcoming him to the 
legislature, but we also want to assure him that in 
Saskatchewan, communities and the government proper are 
going to work with him to make sure that, indeed young people 
are safe in the province of Saskatchewan. I welcome him and I 
ask you, Mr. Speaker, and all members to welcome Sheldon 
Kennedy to the Legislative Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour 
to join with the Premier to welcome Mr. Sheldon Kennedy to 
the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly. The words of the 
Premier couldn’t be more true. Often in sports, we toss around 
the term champion in a rather loose way. Sheldon Kennedy is 
the epitome of a champion within not just sport but within life, 
and a courage that he carries himself with, to speak up, to stand 
up, and to bring forward change that we all respect and 
something that’s important to so many. 
 
You know, you think of a young player on a WHL [Western 
Hockey League] team, the Swift Current Broncos, with lots of 
scrutiny and people observing players in action and having their 
opinions on the team. There’s a lot of stress just as it stands for 
any young player on any one of these teams as communities 
scrutinize their play. If only the rest of the community and all of 
us would have known the terrible actions, the horrifying abuse, 
the victimization that was occurring to Mr. Kennedy and to 
others at that period of time, and to others across our province 
as well. It just helps put into perspective what a champion and 
what strength and what grit and what perseverance Mr. 
Kennedy has. 
 
So it’s my honour to welcome Mr. Kennedy to his Assembly. It 
was my honour to meet with him a short while ago, a few 
months ago as he was providing leadership within our province 
at that point in time as well. I wish him well with all of his 
leadership. I welcome and encourage partnerships that can be 
meaningful to assist those that of course have been victimized, 
but importantly as well to provide protection to all young 
people and all people across our province.  
 
So it’s my pleasure to welcome this true champion to the 
Saskatchewan legislature along with Brad and Wayne, part of 
the delegation here today. Also join with the Premier in 
recognizing the actions, the apology in Swift Current, and the 
actions to protect young people. This is something that every 
single member of this Assembly is committed to addressing. 
Thank you so much, Mr. Kennedy. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 



658 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2016 

leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Well thanks, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, it is my pleasure to introduce some special guests 
to the Legislative Assembly today. Seated in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker — and give us a wave when I say your name — Bruce 
McKay a.k.a. Mr. Amédée Forget, the first lieutenant governor 
of Saskatchewan; Angel Genereux a.k.a. Sarah Ramsland, the 
first female Saskatchewan MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly], Kaleb Schwarz a.k.a. Walter Scott, the first premier 
of Saskatchewan; our fourth actor, Jaron Francis, was unable to 
be here today. They are this year’s actors for the History Alive! 
vignettes taking place at both Government House and the 
Saskatchewan Legislative Building this summer. 
 
They’re joined by Mark Claxton, artistic director; and Melanie 
Vovchuk, stage manager for the vignettes. Also with them are 
the partners that have developed this unique project: Ingrid 
Cazakoff, Olivia Shumski, Michelle Brownridge, Jan Morier 
from Heritage Saskatchewan, Carrie Ross and Amanda Girardin 
from Government House, Lorraine deMontigny from the 
Legislative Assembly visitor’s branch, Nancy Cherney from the 
Provincial Capital Commission.  
 
These innovative, educational, and engaging performances give 
visitors a look into the past in our province. It is great to be able 
to share the history of how our province was formed with those 
who are new to our province as well as those who have been 
here for some time. The vignettes will take place July 3rd to 
September 7th at Government House and the Legislative 
Building. Please join me in welcoming these guests to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, seated again in your 
gallery are participants of the Saskatchewan Parks learn to 
camp program. With us today, and perhaps you can give a little 
wave when I introduce you, are Jaclyn Cheng; her husband, 
C.K. Tan, and their son, Justin; Jean Chen; Anastassia 
Manuilova and her son, Dmitry Omorogbe; Juny Fan and her 
daughter, Aliya Liu; Roland Luo and his son, Hao Luo; Janette 
Hamilton, manager of visitor experiences. 
 
Last year Saskatchewan Parks launched learn to camp. The goal 
of the program is to introduce people who are new to nature and 
to provincial parks and give them some instruction on how to 
get started camping. Saskatchewan Parks provides all the 
camping gear including tents, camp stoves, lanterns, etc. All 
participants need to bring is food, clothes, and bedding. Park 
staff teach the participants how to set up a campsite, how to 
start a fire, how to cook outside, and much more, including 
camping and fire safety. 
 
It is an opportunity to welcome and encourage those who have 
never had a chance to go summer camping to experience a great 
provincial park system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in welcoming our 

guests to their Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d just 
like to join with the minister in welcoming these special guests 
to our legislature. Certainly the folks from History Alive! if all 
the world is indeed a stage, it’s a tremendous act that they’re 
putting on. And it would also be interesting to get any sort of 
feedback that they have for the act that we’re putting on here 
Monday to Thursday, Mr. Speaker, if they have any tips or 
insights on how that might get punched up. 
 
But certainly to Mark and Melanie and Heritage Saskatchewan, 
and all the folks at the Capital Commission, the Government 
House, and certainly here at the Legislative Assembly, thank 
you very much for indeed making our very rich history come 
alive in such a powerful way. So break a leg. 
 
And then secondly, Mr. Speaker, to the folks with the learn to 
camp program, certainly I’ve got some familiarity with the kind 
of work that Jean Chen can bring to bear. I’m sure it’s going to 
be the accelerated course in terms of the kind of work that they 
take to learn about camping. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, as I 
was preparing . . . As I was doing some work on my canoe this 
weekend, we’ve got such a wonderful great outdoors here in the 
province, and again, that you can connect like that is such a gift. 
And that we’ve got people that are so committed to the 
proposition that they’re taking the course to do it is also pretty 
commendable. 
 
And I guess I’d ask of them after, if they can figure out how to 
make the s’mores on the campfire and then not get them all 
over themself after, if they could figure that out for me, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d certainly welcome that. But again to join with the 
Minister in welcoming these important guests to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
University. 
 
Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Very 
quickly I’d like to introduce you to two very special people to 
me who are seated up in the west gallery, my kids Kayman and 
Montana who have skipped school today so they could come. 
They did. They skipped a school excursion because they would 
rather come to QP [question period] and have lunch with their 
mom than go on a field trip. So this is kind of a field trip some 
days. But I’m really happy to have them here, and please help 
me, join me in welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you and to all members of this Assembly, I’d like to introduce 
two individuals seated in your gallery, Joe and Karen Leier. 
They are the parents of one of our illustrious Pages, Sabra 
Leier. Feel free to give a wave. They are originally from 
Regina, Mr. Speaker, but they moved to Guatemala about 14 
years ago to do some missionary work. And they’re in town 
today and for a little while here to visit Sabra. You should be 
very proud of her. She’s been doing some amazing work here 



June 27, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 659 

so far. I’m excited to see where her career will take her in the 
future. I’m very pleased to have you here. I’m sure Sabra is 
even more pleased to have you here. I ask that all members join 
me in welcoming them to this Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To all 
members of the Assembly, it’s my pleasure to introduce a great 
group of grade 8 students from St. Mary’s School in the west 
gallery. With them is their teachers, Mr. Lucien Bissonnette and 
Mrs. Michelle Kennedy. I ask all members to welcome them to 
their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave for an extended 
introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
great pleasure today to welcome Debbie Ross, seated in your 
gallery. Debbie is the executive director of the Regina region of 
the early childhood intervention program. And I had the chance, 
I think a couple years ago, to get to know Debbie a little bit 
when we were enrolled in a leadership course at the United 
Way together. She’s here on behalf of the 14 regional offices of 
ECIP [early childhood intervention program] across the 
province. 
 
And the Saskatchewan early childhood intervention program, 
they’ve been operating as CBOs [community-based 
organization] in this province since the early 1980s. And they 
provide some very important programs to young people and 
their families across the province. They provide specialized and 
collaborative home- and community-based services for families 
and pre-school aged children, aged zero to six, experiencing or 
at risk of experiencing delays. Each program has a designated 
region to provide service so that the referring agencies and 
parents are able to identify which program would provide 
service to their family 
 
I know over the course of my work with families that they do 
some very important work, and I’d like to welcome her today 
on behalf of ECIP and commend them for the great work that 
they do for families and children in this province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you. I’d like to join with the 
member opposite and welcome these people to the Chamber 
today. The ECIP program is something that’s been established 
and provides great services to families and to children in our 
province, and the work that’s done is something that’s 
immeasurable. The need for that type of programming was 

there. We addressed the problem with the programs, and we’re 
exceptionally pleased with the results that are coming. And I 
want to thank everybody that works in these programs across 
the province, Mr. Speaker. So thank you very much. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
While I’m up, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet I’d like to 
join with the member from Regina Rosemont and the Premier 
and welcome Sheldon Kennedy to the Assembly. 
 
I had grown up in Rush Lake. He was a hero of mine on the ice, 
and it was amazing watching him with the Broncos. And I 
admire him even more now for the work that he’s doing right 
now. So welcome to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to welcome my constituency 
assistant, Heather Howell-Shiplack. She’s been with me for 
four years now, so we’re able to have lunch and get a four-year 
award which many people think it probably felt like eight than 
four, but she does an amazing job keeping me organized. 
 
And one thing I really appreciate about Heather is she always 
makes sure that I have time for my family and . . . [inaudible] 
. . . bigger family, she made sure . . . she’s like, all right, 
Warren, you’re going to be home tonight. And I appreciate her 
keeping me on task with a lot of things, and her organizational 
skills are second to none. I just want to say thank you very 
much for all the work you do, Heather. I really appreciate it. 
You do an amazing job. And after QP, get back to work. Thank 
you. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition to improve PTSD 
[post-traumatic stress disorder] coverage for Saskatchewan 
workers. This petition supports the private member’s bill I 
brought forward last week. The petitioners point out that 
post-traumatic stress disorder can severely impact the lives of 
workers, and that delaying both diagnosis and treatment of 
PTSD can be detrimental to recovery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners simply want the minister to 
recognize that if you’re exposed to traumatic events on the job 
and then get a diagnosis of PTSD, that the PTSD should be 
presumed to be caused by the traumatic events, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Saskatchewan government to 
make the necessary changes to ensure that if Saskatchewan 
workers are exposed to traumatic events on the job and are 
then diagnosed with PTSD, it is presumed to be caused by 
the worker’s employment and the worker will subsequently 



660 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2016 

be covered under workers’ compensation and receive the 
same benefits as others with work-related injuries. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens from 
Regina, Rosthern, White City, and Pilot Butte. Mr. Speaker, I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition regarding wetlands. The people who signed the petition 
wish to bring our attention to the following. Wetlands serve a 
very vital function in our ecosystem. They take the form of 
marshes and bogs, fens, swamps, and open water. They’re home 
to wildlife including waterfowl, and they clean the water off of 
agricultural fields, protect us from flooding and drought, and 
they are a playground where families can explore and play. 
 
In the worst cases, such as some areas on the prairies, as much 
as 90 per cent of our wetlands have disappeared. As they 
continue to disappear, so too do the many benefits they provide. 
Here is the request: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the Government of Saskatchewan to: 
 
Increase funding to do the proper inventory work, putting 
Saskatchewan in a better position to manage the water 
resource. 
 
Speed up the evaluation of high-risk watersheds where 
there is significant damage annually from flooding. This 
evaluation must include a recognition of drainage works 
that could be closed or restored that will alleviate some of 
the issues downstream with respect to flooding and nutrient 
loading. 
 
Create a sound and transparent litigation process that 
adequately addresses sustainable development. 
 
The sequence should first focus on avoiding environmental 
harm whenever possible, before a secondary focus on 
minimizing the harm, with compensation being sought 
only when the development is deemed essential and the 
first two stages cannot be met. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from Regina 
and Yorkton. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition in support of funding for heritage languages here in 
Saskatchewan. And we know that after 25 years, the 
Government of Saskatchewan is discontinuing all support for 
heritage language learning in Saskatchewan. 
 
Since 1991, heritage language schools have depended on this 
modest funding from the Ministry of Education to help sustain 
their programs. But as a result of the announcement by the 
Ministry of Education, many of these non-profit heritage 

language schools will be faced with a difficult decision of 
whether or not they can continue to operate. 
 
In addition to providing language and cultural classes, these 
schools offer a welcoming environment and crucial support for 
newcomers who are searching for a way to feel at home in their 
new surroundings. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to reconsider this decision and restore funding for heritage 
language education in Saskatchewan heritage language 
schools. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition today are from 
Martensville and Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Regina Transition House Observes 40th Anniversary 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On June 23rd I was able 
to attend the 40th AGM [annual general meeting] of the Regina 
Transition House, along with the member from Regina 
University. This remarkable organization works incredibly hard 
to support women and children who are faced with domestic 
violence. 
 
We all know that Saskatchewan has the highest rates of 
domestic violence of all the provinces in this country, and 
there’s much to be done in order to address this issue and to 
address the growing crisis. Here in Regina, the local Regina 
Transition House has helped to provide safety and security for 
more than 14,000 women over the last 40 years. 
 
The key speaker at this year’s AGM was the well-known Dr. 
Jackson Katz who is based in Los Angeles, California, a 
world-renowned expert on domestic violence. His key message 
was that violence against women isn’t just a women’s issue. It’s 
also a men’s issue, and we need men to step up and do their part 
to address this issue. We need to make sure that everyone 
knows that rape jokes, victim blaming, and violence are not 
okay, and that being silent and being a bystander only enables 
more violence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking everyone 
who works in our province’s network of transition houses for 
the important work that they do to provide shelter, care, and 
security for some of the most vulnerable women and children in 
our province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Westview. 
 



June 27, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 661 

Saskatoon Steak Night Raises Funds for Fort McMurray 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I had the 
privilege of attending a steak night fundraiser in Saskatoon, 
raising funds to assist with the rebuilding effort for Fort 
McMurray as they grapple with the damage from wildfires that 
devastated their community last month. 
 
The fundraiser was put on jointly by the Filipino-Canadian 
Association of Saskatoon and the SEIU-West [Service 
Employees International Union-West] executive of the Royal 
University Hospital. The event was well attended, with about 
250 people enjoying good company and fantastic food. I had the 
privilege to bring greetings to the diverse group of people from 
Saskatoon, a crowd that truly represented our strength as a 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the theme for the evening was “People Helping 
People,” where the focus was on making sure we all help our 
neighbours through hard times. As the people of Fort 
McMurray rebuild, they can be assured their neighbours stand 
with them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of this Assembly to join 
me in thanking the Saskatoon Filipino association and the 
members of SEIU for putting on this fundraiser, and to wish the 
people of Fort McMurray the best as they start the process of 
rebuilding. We do stand by you. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Tributes Paid to Prince Albert Regional  
Intersectoral Committee 

 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Wednesday, 
June 22nd, a sad event took place in Prince Albert as a direct 
result of the Sask Party budget cuts. A farewell tea was held at 
the Saskatchewan Rivers Education Centre as the Prince Albert 
regional intersectoral committee closed its office. Those in 
attendance also paid tribute to the RIC [regional intersectoral 
committee] coordinator, Prudence McKenzie, who found out on 
budget day that she no longer has a job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, RIC in Prince Albert and indeed RICs across the 
province provided a valuable collaborative service to their 
communities. The Prince Albert regional intersectoral 
committee worked collectively to foster and support an 
integrated approach to the planning and delivery of human 
services across sectors in response to the needs of children, 
youth, families, and individuals within the region, and built 
networking relationships between different levels of 
government, community partners, and volunteer sectors. 
 
The Prince Albert RIC was an innovative structure for 
collaboration that did not otherwise exist and which of course 
will no longer exist, leaving a huge void in the community. I 
would ask that all members join with me in commending the 
Prince Albert regional intersectoral committee for its great work 
and to thank the original coordinator, Faye Stupnikoff, and the 
present coordinator, Prudence McKenzie, for their service to the 
people of Prince Albert. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
University. 
 

Regina Pride Festival 
 
Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This month 
is Pride Month, and last week the cities of Regina, Prince 
Albert, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, and Swift Current celebrated 
their respective Pride festivals. Regina’s festival featured a 
series of events organized by Queen City Pride and other 
community organizations, and the event highlighted LGBTQ 
[lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer and/or questioning] 
culture, history, achievement, and struggles. The aim was to 
educate, entertain, and enlighten participants on sexual and 
gender diversity within our communities. 
 
After 40 events throughout Pride Week, Pride festival 
concluded with the Queen City Pride Parade presented by RBC 
[Royal Bank of Canada] on Saturday, which I attended along 
with the Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport and a really 
terrific group of young women and men in our party who took 
the opportunity to demonstrate leadership as allies, especially in 
light of the tragedy in Orlando. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this was the biggest Pride parade that I can 
remember, and included a remarkable number of both 
businesses and faith-based groups. Of course events like this 
cannot be successful without the incredible commitment from 
sponsors, organizers, and volunteers. I would like to thank 
Queen City Pride for all of their work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating all 
those who strive to promote inclusivity in our communities. 
Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 

Hafford to Host Can-Am Football Game 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, on July 5th the community of Hafford will host the 
20th annual Can-Am Football Game. The six-man game 
features all-stars from both the United States as well as from 
Canada. Mr. Speaker, this year Saskatchewan players are 
selected from teams and communities from across the province, 
and they’ll square off against students from various US [United 
States] states. 
 
The Hafford Vikings, Mr. Speaker, have a long and proud 
football history of over 50 years, and the team has won several 
titles including a provincial championship in 1993. And I’m 
told that some years ago there was an intense rivalry between 
the Hafford Vikings and the Blaine Lake Comets, who were at 
that point in time led by the current Government House Leader 
in Blaine Lake. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today the Vikings include players from both of 
those communities of Hafford and Blaine Lake, and the 
Canadian team will be coached by Hafford Vikings coach, 
Ryan Barnstable, along with Clay Kirby as well as Viking 
alumni Mitchell Wintonyk and Shaun Dubyk. Kickoff is at 8 
p.m. and the game will be live streamed at canam2016.com 



662 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2016 

with numerous events held in the community throughout the 
day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the touchdown sponsor for the game is local 
agricultural business AgriTeam Services, with many Viking 
alumni sponsors also providing support to the event. I look 
forward to attending this exciting day of football in the great 
community of Hafford. And, Mr. Speaker, I want all members 
to join me in wishing the very best of luck to the Canadian team 
and thank all of the community members from both Hafford 
and Blaine Lake for their efforts in organizing this great event. 
Go Vikings, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize our Provincial Secretary. 
 

2016 Marks Milestones in Women’s Leadership 
 

Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On June 9th I 
was honoured to bring greetings on behalf of the Government 
of Saskatchewan at the National Council of Women’s 123rd 
annual general meeting. 
 
This national council has a long and proud tradition of working 
to improve lives. Working with women across the country, 
Canadian women and Canadian society have benefited greatly 
from this council. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 2016 marks many milestones that are worthy of 
celebration and congratulations. This year the Saskatchewan 
Council of Women celebrates 100 years, the Saskatchewan 
Women’s Hall of Fame is celebrating its 20th anniversary, and 
this year marks the 100th anniversary of women in this 
province being granted the right to vote. 
 
For years, women faced many adversities in their movement to 
enfranchise Canadian women. Today at all levels, women bring 
their unique perspectives to decision making and dialogue. 
More and more, young women are becoming leaders in their 
communities. We are seeing strong girls become strong women 
who help build brighter, stronger communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, like those who came before them, women have 
helped Saskatchewan become a place that values and respects 
the views of all people. Together we have and continue to keep 
Saskatchewan strong and moving forward. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 
 

Saskatchewan Goaltender Wins Vezina Trophy 
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan has 
brought the world some of the best hockey players. Almost 500 
people have suited up and played in the NHL [National Hockey 
League]. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a young man from Marshall, 
Saskatchewan who was given a special honour last week at the 
NHL Awards in Las Vegas. That young man is Braden Holtby, 
the 2016 winner of the Vezina Trophy. Mr. Speaker, for those 
who are not aware, the Vezina Trophy is awarded to the best 
goaltender in the NHL as chosen by the league’s general 
managers. Braden, only 26 years old, has become only the 

seventh goaltender in the National Hockey League to record 
two consecutive 40-win seasons and finished fifth in 
goals-against average, sixth in saves, and eighth in save 
percentage. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, this young man has accomplished a lot in his 
hockey career, from playing minor hockey in western 
Saskatchewan to playing for the Saskatoon Blades in the WHL. 
He was then drafted to the Washington Capitals in 2008, where 
he still plays. Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of this 
Assembly to join me in congratulating Braden for his 
outstanding season and his winning of the Vezina Trophy. 
Thank you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Government’s Fiscal Management 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s becoming clear to 
many that the costs of Sask Party mismanagement are piling up 
and it’s Saskatchewan people that are left to pay the price. You 
know, the fact is this government has piled on $7 billion of new 
debt in just seven years. They drained the rainy day fund and 
they didn’t save a dime during the best years, Mr. Speaker, 
leaving Saskatchewan vulnerable. And every step of the way, 
that government and this Premier has dismissed the impact of 
this on Saskatchewan people, time and time again. 
 
Today Standard & Poor’s downgraded our credit rating, 
something we’ve raised as a concern but of course has been 
dismissed by that Premier and that government. Standard & 
Poor’s identifies the following factors: the deficit; poor 
projections; the lack of cash on hand, which I guess is the 
non-existent, drained rainy day fund of this government. My 
question to the Premier: why did he dismiss the reality and why 
is he making Saskatchewan people pay for his mismanagement? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I thank 
the member for his question. And once again I would disagree 
with some of the premise. Mr. Speaker, you know, during the 
last election we had a debate between the Saskatchewan Party 
and the NDP [New Democratic Party] about what has happened 
over the last eight years from a fiscal perspective. The NDP 
were saying in the run-up to the election that all of the money 
that was generated from a growing and strong economy was 
somehow gone. Mr. Speaker, that was the case they put 
forward. 
 
On our side we put forward a different case. We said, when you 
cut taxes for Saskatchewan families, farmers, and businesses by 
$6 billion over eight years, that that’s not a waste. We also said 
when you invest in infrastructure to the tune of $8 billion for 
the future of this province after inheriting an infrastructure 
deficit from members opposite, that’s not a waste. We put 
forward $2.7 billion in reduction in the operating debt of this 
province, that credit card with no real schedule of payments to 
retire it ever, $2.7 billion of that debt retired. We said, that is 



June 27, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 663 

not a waste, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then it was up to Saskatchewan people to choose then if 
they believed the NDP depiction of that story as to whether or 
not that’s a waste, or whether or not they believed the 
government side that put forward the fact that this is an 
investment in the future, that less operating debt, that more 
infrastructure and dollars in the tax pockets of Saskatchewan 
families and businesses is the right way to go for this province. 
I could share with the member opposite that according to this 
rating agency, Saskatchewan has the second-best rating in all of 
the country, and I’ll know we’ll debate more about their credit 
rating, wherein they highlight the good management of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Seven billion dollars of new debt in just 
seven years. That’s in your budget book, Mr. Premier. It’s about 
time that the rich rhetoric of this Premier matches the reality, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Last week — shifting gears — when we asked about the 
growing number of Saskatchewan people who have lost their 
jobs, the Premier dismissed this reality and highlighted then the 
well completion program that he attempted to heave off on the 
federal government. Yes, the Sask Party, the government has 
begun to address orphaned wells. But they certainly haven’t 
done enough, and they’re not ensuring Saskatchewan people 
benefit from that work. In North Dakota they ship out twice as 
much oil as we do, but they have no orphaned wells. Simple 
regulations and firm enforcement — that’s it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I understand that a full third of the 
companies that have been contracted to handle Saskatchewan’s 
orphaned wells are from out of province. Saskatchewan 
companies are being rejected here and having to go south of the 
border to get work. Energy and energy service companies from 
Saskatchewan who work in Saskatchewan, who have invested 
their time and money in Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan 
workers should benefit from that work, especially when times 
are tough in the sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just like on so many other projects, why isn’t the 
Premier doing more to ensure that these jobs actually benefit 
the people and businesses of Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I am grateful for the 
member’s question, because he’s going to have an opportunity 
to back up his words with action today in support of 
Saskatchewan companies in the industry and the energy sector. 
 
I’ll also share with members that Standard & Poor’s had this to 
say in their credit rating report last week: “We believe that the 
province’s credit profile . . .” Well they don’t want to hear the 
answer to the question. “. . . that the province’s credit . . .” So 
I’ll talk louder: “. . . that the province’s credit profile is 
bolstered by its strong financial management,” Mr. Speaker. 
That wasn’t in the preamble of the question. 
 
With respect to the orphaned well program, I can report to 

members of the House that we have made great progress over 
the last eight years in dealing with orphaned wells. We inherited 
a very ineffective approach to orphaned wells from the 
members opposite. Since 2010, 12 companies have been 
contracted to do the work. Eight of 12 are companies that are 
either based here or have a strong presence in Saskatchewan. 
But it’s tendered work. It’s tendered work. Mr. Speaker, that’s 
part of the process. 
 
Now I’ve got a motion today if now he’s interested in putting 
Saskatchewan people to work and supporting the energy sector. 
They opposed our well completion idea before. I’ve got a 
motion today. If he will, if his members will grant leave, we’ll 
debate this motion so we can have a unanimous call from 
members in this Legislative Assembly to the federal 
government to support a well completion program, to support 
the energy sector in the province of Saskatchewan. Is he 
prepared to grant just simple leave so we can have that debate, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve been clear. Federal 
dollars should be going to high-value infrastructure projects that 
put Saskatchewan people back to work, Mr. Speaker. And that 
Premier should start holding responsible the people he should 
be holding responsible on this front, Mr. Speaker. We should be 
building infrastructure like schools and like hospitals and like 
wastewater projects that create economic opportunity. Instead 
we see a Premier who ships out all the jobs and so many cases, 
so many opportunities to foreign corporations. 
 
You know, it’s not an either/or. We can and must walk and 
chew gum at the same time. Polluters should pay for the 
pollution they cause, and the Saskatchewan government should 
stand up for Saskatchewan. On this file, the Premier has 
simultaneously been throwing up his hands in the air and 
pointing fingers. When one Saskatchewan company asked the 
scandal-plagued minister why his company was passed up for 
an out-of-province contractor, that minister said it wasn’t his 
problem. Basically, that’s how it is. Why? Why is he asking for 
precious federal dollars to allow the high-paying jobs to go out 
of province to foreign corporations? Why is he not doing more 
to keep tax dollars and mortgage-paying jobs right here in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the program that the member 
is referring to, the well completion program, the orphaned well 
program, was initiated by this side of the House, improved by 
this side of the House because of the situation we inherited. 
 
It’s a tendered program though, Mr. Speaker. We’re part of the 
New West Partnership; that’s a trade deal that has benefited all 
of the member provinces, notwithstanding the fact that the NDP 
would have kept us out of the New West Partnership with BC 
[British Columbia] and Alberta, Mr. Speaker. Even despite the 
fact that it’s open tendered, we have 8 out of the 12 companies 
that are doing the well completion are significantly in the 
province or headquartered in the province of Saskatchewan. 
There might be others from other provinces doing work but 
guess what? There are Saskatchewan companies doing work in 



664 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2016 

those other provinces as well. That’s the essence of free trade. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the member wants to talk about records with 
respect to employment. I’m happy to do that. Today in the 
province of Saskatchewan there are 67,000 more people 
working than there were when the NDP were in power, Mr. 
Speaker, 58,000 enrolments in the graduate retention program, 
Mr. Speaker. The population is over 110,000 larger than it was. 
The facts speak for themselves, and I think that’s in part why, 
Mr. Speaker, at least in part why people made the decision they 
did on the 4th of April. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — You know, lines like that just don’t 
mask the failure of that Premier in defending Saskatchewan’s 
resource sector, taxpayers’ dollars, public dollars. And glossing 
over the real and hard job loss — thousands of jobs for 
Saskatchewan people — is below the office of the Premier, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Let’s take another look at the costly carbon capture debacle of 
that government. They say that it’s running better than we 
think. They say the province will profit from the technology, 
and they even said that “guaranteed 10-year contract with 
Cenovus to take 100 per cent of the CO2.” Well, Mr. Speaker, it 
has rarely run as well as they said it would. People are backing 
away from the technology around the world, and even if other 
jurisdictions advance projects, we don’t own the technology so 
Saskatchewan won’t profit from it. And we now know that 
Cenovus was never committed to taking 100 per cent, despite 
claims by that government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s office is now trying to suggest that 
when they said it was guaranteed they meant aspirational. I 
guess they had their fingers crossed, Mr. Speaker. Can the 
Premier tell us which thesaurus he is using or will he now come 
clean with the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — There is just so much wrong with that 
member’s preamble to his question, especially how dismissive 
he is about the technology that’s been pioneered at Boundary 
dam 3. The federal Liberal government doesn’t share his 
attitude. The International Energy Agency does not share his 
attitude. And here is what Cenovus issued as a statement today: 
“It’s absolutely accurate to say that when our agreement with 
SaskPower was negotiated in 2012, Cenovus’s intention was to 
take the full amount of CO2 supply available at the start-up of 
Boundary dam 3.” That’s what the company is saying today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the end of question period today . . . The 
member is concerned about the well completion jobs possible. 
At the end of question period today I’m going to move a motion 
that we would unanimously call on the federal government to 
support our idea originated by a company in Weyburn for a well 
completion program, Mr. Speaker. Now we know the Alberta 
NDP support this program. We know our Saskatchewan 
companies support the program. We know the service 
companies support the program. Will they at least grant leave to 
have a quick debate and send a unanimous message to Ottawa, 
Mr. Speaker? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Carbon Capture and Storage Agreement 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party’s tangled web of 
justifications for the business case for the CCS [carbon capture 
and storage] project is coming undone, but it’s not getting any 
more clear. In 2008 the then minister of Crown Corporations 
promised that the project would capture 1 million tonnes per 
year. He guaranteed it. But in the hazy Sask Party world of 
carbon capture, we’re now supposed to believe that guaranteed 
actually means aspirational. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it hasn’t hit the goal of capturing 1 million tonnes 
yet. After 20 months of operations, they still haven’t reached 
840 000 tonnes. And nobody would have bought it all anyways. 
So they’ve backpedalled on the million tonnes out of the 
atmosphere, and the ironclad business case promised in 2012 
seems to have vanished in a puff of smoke. 
 
In 2012 when the deal was signed with Cenovus, at no time did 
the minister ever take time to correct the record. So let me try 
him now. When in 2013 the then president of SaskPower said, 
guaranteed 100 per cent, why did the minister not correct the 
record? And why hasn’t he taken the opportunity to do so 
since? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I would say this, that the 
former president of SaskPower should have made it much more 
clear to the people of Saskatchewan. Briefing materials supplied 
by the president at that time to myself and to members of 
cabinet indicated that that was indeed what the agreement was, 
and I think that was made public last year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This was reinforced in December of 2012 when a joint news 
release approved by both SaskPower and Cenovus was released 
after the contract was signed, Mr. Speaker. Under that previous 
contract, SaskPower was required to supply a minimum volume 
of CO2 to Cenovus, and Cenovus having the option to buy 100 
per cent of production, and Cenovus has the first right of 
refusal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So no matter how you slice it, clearly Cenovus is a significant 
offtaker of this resource, Mr. Speaker, of CO2. In 2015 they’ve 
purchased net revenue to the province of Saskatchewan, 
through SaskPower, about $2 million of CO2, Mr. Speaker. And 
in this year, it’s expected to be about $16 million. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, no matter how you slice it, that 
minister stood there silently while Sask Party MLA after MLA 
proudly boasted in their newsletters and in this House that the 
project was removing the equivalent of 250,000 cars off the 
road every year. As late as September 2015, SaskPower was 
still running ads to that effect and this minister was silent. 
 
[14:15] 
 



June 27, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 665 

Mr. Speaker, the litany of less-than-accurate lines has been 
sloughed off in the past by that minister as semantical. He keeps 
using that word, but I don’t think it means what he thinks it 
means. Another from the former president in 2013 was that they 
had “. . . significant interests from other parties for more CO2.” 
Mr. Speaker, that’s a line that is still being repeated, yet we 
have no sign of any proof of that. 
 
Now I’d hate to think that the minister is losing sleep at night 
crossing his fingers and hoping that the Leader-Post doesn’t get 
a phone call from someone else contradicting lines he’s 
repeated for years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will that secretive and scandal-plagued minister 
ever be open and transparent about this project or will he 
continue to weave his already tangled web of inaccuracies and 
exaggerations? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, under the contract Cenovus is 
the only company currently purchasing CO2 from BD3 
[Boundary dam 3]. However there’s flexibility within that 
current contract to pursue other offtakers, Mr. Speaker, and 
SaskPower is currently negotiating with other offtakers for that 
very thing, Mr. Speaker. Obviously due to the confidentiality, 
we can’t disclose potential buyers. However I suspect the 
members opposite could take a pretty educated guess looking at 
who has oil reserves down in the southeast of our province and 
make a pretty good guess and assumption as to who those 
people might be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Cenovus continues to purchase CO2. We’re on track to capture 
about 800 000 tonnes this year, Mr. Speaker. There’s no 
question in the commissioning year there was some problems 
with respect to it, Mr. Speaker. That’s been readily admitted by 
myself, by the Premier, by SaskPower officials in this 
legislature on numerous occasions. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Government Management of Food Services  
in Correctional Facilities 

 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, the conflicting statements from 
the ministers are getting pretty hard to keep up with. I’d like to 
give the Minister for Corrections another chance to clarify 
things. 
 
Last week I asked her two questions about the manager the 
government hired to manage the contract the government seems 
so interested in mismanaging, in her first answer she said, 
“There is no other manager . . . ” But less than two minutes 
later, in her second answer she said, “We have one manager in 
the ministry that is responsible to ensure that they follow the 
contract.” They either hired a manager or they didn’t. 
 
Will the minister just give a clear answer to the question: did 
the minister hire another manager to manage the food service 
contract or did they not? And if they did hire a manager, what 
measure is the minister putting in place to ensure that, in the 
future, companies they are contracted are actually able to do 

what the Sask Party claims they can without additional 
supervision? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
person who is responsible in the ministry — let me speak slow 
— in the ministry is, it’s a person that’s existing. It’s in an 
existing position that was given the responsibility to manage the 
contract of Compass. Is that simple enough for them? I’m 
hoping that it is, Mr. Speaker, and that’s all I have to say. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Funding for Early Childhood Programs 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, the Education minister has 
acknowledged the value and effectiveness of early childhood 
intervention programs across Saskatchewan. He did that today. 
ECIP helps children with disabilities, both visible and invisible, 
get ready to start school. But these children, the ones with the 
most need, are getting less than their share of funding. This 
disparity results in challenges of sustainability in maintaining a 
strong workforce to help these kids. 
 
Mr. Speaker, ECIPs exist across this province and serve 
families, with an annual budget of about $4 million. For 
comparison, KidsFirst serves 1,700 families, with an annual 
budget of $10 million more. Mr. Speaker, KidsFirst is an 
important program. So is ECIP. But the disparity means that 
some kids get the support they need and others don’t. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we visited today with families that rely on ECIP, 
and ECIP directors. They are asking for a modest increase to 
their budget just to keep their program alive. Will the minister 
take action and make sure these kids get the support they 
deserve? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will agree 
with the member opposite on the great benefit that ECIPs 
provides to children and to families in our province. I’ve gone 
to a number of the centres and I have a great amount of respect 
for the people that work in the ECIP centres. 
 
I can advise the House and I can advise the members that our 
budget provides $76.8 million for early learning. Within that 
envelope is three point million dollars for early childhood 
intervention programs. I can also advise the House that we are 
working with the federal government because a lot of the ECIP 
programs are done at or adjacent to reserve areas and a lot of 
the children that are being served are from on-reserve. 
 
We want to make sure that the funding is handled appropriately, 
but in no circumstances, Mr. Speaker, have we done anything 
that would limit or reduce the funding The funding has been 
maintained at the same level since last year and, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ll continue to maintain the supports for children across the 
province. 
 



666 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2016 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Standing in this House, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure 
it’s easy for the minister to ignore the real needs and defend 
their cuts. But, Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about organizations 
that provide crucial services to families in need. And the Sask 
Party is cutting them. 
 
One of the 14 ECIP regions is Children North. Their main 
needs, one of their main needs is more support to improve 
access to specialists for northern youth. They have a modest ask 
for an important program. They’re asking for just $45,000 so 
they can continue to operate northern clinics with youth with 
disabilities. That is all it costs for three clinics per year. 
 
Without this funding, the organization simply cannot operate 
these clinics and 63 children will miss out on important 
supports. Will the ministers who cover this file get together and 
ensure that the funding is there to provide this essential service? 
Or is this yet one of the other Sask Party cuts to the North? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we had communications 
with that particular ECIP office last week. We asked one of the 
ADMs [assistant deputy minister] to meet with the staff of that 
office. I understand that that meeting took place. They are 
looking at options to reallocate or redeploy funds, to see 
whether there’s any options that are available, or whether 
there’s other things that they can do that will share or save 
money within that program, Mr. Speaker. I understand that 
meeting took place late last week and I will be meeting with 
officials from the ministry later on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the members opposite I would say this: since 
forming government, we’ve increased, and these are the 
increases that we’ve had: child care spaces by nearly 5,000, an 
increase of 53 per cent; pre-kindergarten programs by 161 for 
104 per cent; ECIP programs, since we have formed 
government, an increase of 40 per cent, Mr. Speaker. That’s the 
legacy that we’re leaving. Those are valuable programs, Mr. 
Speaker. We value them and we respect them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Despite mounting 
evidence, the Minister of Education continues to be in denial 
about the cuts made to our schools and the increasing 
challenges that school divisions are facing because of the Sask 
Party budget. 
 
The Sask Rivers School Division was facing a budget shortfall 
of over $2.6 million, Mr. Speaker. On top of the underfunding, 
the division had to cover the government’s commitment to pay 
teachers after the minister walked away from what he had 
committed to. Because of the Sask Party’s bad faith bargaining, 
the division had to take money out of their rainy day fund to 
make up the difference. Yes, the Sask Party drained the rainy 
day fund in good times, but that doesn’t make it right, and it’s 

not good that they’re now pushing that bad practice onto 
schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know the minister and this government have a 
hard time with this, but rainy day funds are meant for 
emergencies. Our children’s education should not rest upon 
forcing those who run our schools to give up their plans for the 
future. After all that we’ve seen, is the minister still not at all 
concerned that he is forcing school divisions to use emergency 
funds to pay their teachers because he broke his promise and 
bargained in bad faith? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, there’s no doubt that this 
budget has posed challenges for our province. We have worked 
with the various divisions and will continue to do this. The 
member opposite raised the issue of Sask Rivers. I have a quote 
from Robert Bratvold, the director of education: 
 

“The board has done some really careful planning in order 
to manage our expenditures in a way that supports 
classrooms primarily . . . Our enrolment has gone up, so 
we’ve had to add some teachers during this year’s budget 
cycle,” he said. “We’re going to meet those obligations 
without trying to affect staff in terms of numbers.” 

 
That was quoted in the P.A. [Prince Albert] Daily Herald, June 
23, 2016. Mr. Speaker, I have more quotes from different 
directors of education and board Chairs from across the 
province. Mr. Speaker, we value and we respect the good work 
that’s done by the directors of education in our province and 
will continue to see that they get funded. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, draining rainy day funds to pay for 
teachers is simply not sustainable practice. The truth is our 
schools are facing financial troubles across the province — 
layoffs and cuts in Prairie Spirit and Prairie South, budget 
shortfalls in Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even pre-kindergarten programs haven’t been 
spared the Sask Party’s axe. Not only are they failing students, 
but they’re failing future students as well. The Northeast School 
Division had to debate keeping their pre-K [pre-kindergarten] 
home intervention program after this government suddenly 
decided to stop funding it. The program helps children and their 
families make connections with their future classrooms and 
gives children a head start. An innovation program, Mr. 
Speaker, axed by this government. 
 
The school division managed to find extra money to keep the 
program going for one more year, but now it’s going through a 
review and it won’t see any more money from this government. 
When did the minister decide that pre-K program funding 
wasn’t important? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the pre-K program, for the 
members opposite, was closing 176 schools and moving the 



June 27, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 667 

children to Alberta. That was the plan that the members 
opposite had. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this budget we increased overall education 
funding by 7.8 per cent to $2.2 billion. School division 
operating has been an increase of $16 million. It includes $288 
million for supports for learning; $5.4 million for Syrian 
refugees; $391 million for capital, including $310 million for 
joint schools; $41.9 million for ongoing capital projects in St. 
Brieux, Langenburg, Gravelbourg, and Martensville, as well as 
École Connaught, Sacred Heart, and a new Mâmawêyatitân 
Centre replacing Scott Collegiate in Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s also been $33.4 million for PMR 
[preventative maintenance and renewal], which is a 24 per cent 
increase. Mr. Speaker, under the NDP, they got zero for PMR. 
We’re not going down their road. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I do have to table a 
report from the office of the Saskatchewan Information and 
Privacy Commission. It’s the 2015-2016 annual report, and I 
will table it now. 
 
Why is the Premier on his feet? 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 61 
 

Accelerated Well Cleanup Program 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to request for leave 
to move the following motion under rule 61: 
 

That this Assembly support the accelerated well cleanup 
program proposed to the federal government; and 
 
That this Assembly recognize that the accelerated well 
cleanup program will provide support for growing 
employment in the province by assisting individuals, 
families, and communities struggling to deal with 
economic impacts of sustainable oil prices; and further, 
 
That this Assembly call on the federal government to 
provide the funding to implement the program at the 
earliest available opportunity. 

 
The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave, without 
notice, a motion of urgent and pressing necessity under rule no. 
61. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has not been granted. Next item of 
business. I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order 
to facilitate . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order 
to facilitate the work of committees later this day, I move that 
this Assembly do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned until 
tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:31.] 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 657 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 657 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 658 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 658 
  Beaudry-Mellor ......................................................................................................................................................................... 658 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 658 
  Ottenbreit .................................................................................................................................................................................. 659 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 659 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 659 
  Steinley ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 659 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 659 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 660 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 660 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Regina Transition House Observes 40th Anniversary 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 660 
 Saskatoon Steak Night Raises Funds for Fort McMurray 
  Buckingham .............................................................................................................................................................................. 661 
 Tributes Paid to Prince Albert Regional Intersectoral Committee 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 661 
 Regina Pride Festival 
  Beaudry-Mellor ......................................................................................................................................................................... 661 
 Hafford to Host Can-Am Football Game 
  Moe ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 661 
 2016 Marks Milestones in Women’s Leadership 
  Wilson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 662 
 Saskatchewan Goaltender Wins Vezina Trophy 
  Young ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 662 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Government’s Fiscal Management 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 662 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 662 
 Carbon Capture and Storage Agreement 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 664 
  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 664 
 Government Management of Food Services in Correctional Facilities 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 665 
  Tell ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 665 
 Funding for Early Childhood Programs 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 665 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 665 
 Funding for Education 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 666 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 666 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 667 
MOTION UNDER RULE 61 
 Accelerated Well Cleanup Program 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 667 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


