






















































Hansard: November 16, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 43A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 16, 2016, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (Ind.) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10; Independent (Ind.) — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1353 
 November 16, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A 
pleasure to introduce a fine-looking group in the eastern gallery 
of the legislature here today that come to us from the Regina 
Open Door Society immediately, and Deana Pageot’s class. 
Deana, of course, you know, a faithful subscriber to the affairs 
of the legislature, no stranger. But these individuals come to 
that class from Syria, China, Iran, Afghanistan, Burundi, and 
Somalia. 
 
And indeed, Mr. Speaker, some of these individuals that are 
here today were with us not days ago when the Syrian 
delegation was welcomed and shown just how much we 
appreciate them coming to Saskatchewan to help us to realize 
the promise of the motto of the province of Saskatchewan, 
which is of course “from many peoples, strength.” And these 
are people that are bringing strength to us here in Saskatchewan 
and we’re grateful for it. And we had a great visit earlier and I 
hope to cross paths with them many times down the trail. So, 
Mr. Speaker, if you could join me in welcoming these very 
important individuals to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join 
with my friend the Opposition House Leader in welcoming the 
group of newcomers from the Regina Open Door Society, a 
great partner of the Ministry of the Economy, who we very 
much appreciate working with and welcome very sincerely, as 
Minister of Immigration, the newcomers. 
 
We have truly seen the face of this province change over the 
course of the last decade or so, a rate of immigration from 
outside of Canada the likes of which we haven’t seen since the 
1920s and ’30s in this province. And it’s something that we 
think is a very positive thing, bringing great strength to our 
province both economically, culturally as well. So I just want to 
join with the members opposite in welcoming this group of 
newcomers to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would ask leave 
for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

introduce in your gallery, Dr. Peter Stoicheff, president and 
vice-chancellor of the University of Saskatchewan. With him 
are — if you could each give a wave — Michael Atkinson, 
interim provost and vice-president, academic; Greg Fowler, 
vice-president, finance and resources; Debra Pozega Osburn, 
vice-president, university relations; and Jamie Miley, senior 
strategist, government and public relations. 
 
I recall, Mr. Speaker, when I worked on The Sheaf student 
paper back in the early ’90s, fellow writers coming in after 
class, very engagedly talking about the new American lit prof, 
Stoicheff the William Faulkner expert. He had a bit of a cachet. 
He was regarded as rather cool. Dr. Stoicheff, of course, would 
go on to become dean of arts and science, and last year, 
president of the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
The University of Saskatchewan is a provincial treasure, Mr. 
Speaker, the people’s university, and the beating heart, one of 
two, when it comes to research and innovation in this province. 
We are pleased to have Dr. Stoicheff and his team here today. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 
like to join with the member opposite in also welcoming these 
fine individuals from the University of Saskatchewan to their 
Legislative Assembly. It’s my great honour to have three 
degrees from the University of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, so I 
go way back at the institution. And I too remember the member 
opposite’s writing at The Sheaf back in the early ’90s, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Above all, I think we’ve seen the leadership from President 
Stoicheff that this province needs to be inspired by, particularly 
in relation to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission and the 
important work that Mr. Stoicheff is bringing to the university 
and the leadership that he’s showing in that area. So for that I 
am very grateful, and on behalf of the official opposition would 
like to welcome President Stoicheff and all the officials to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
would like to join members on both sides of the House in 
welcoming President Stoicheff to his Assembly, and the 
delegation from the university. I’ve come to consider the 
president a good friend, and so I’m glad to see him here today. 
I’d also like to welcome Greg Fowler, who I’ve come to know 
over the last little while. So welcome, Greg. 
 
And I especially want to welcome my good friend Jamie Miley, 
who’s here today, Mr. Speaker. We went to high school 
together, and I actually was his lawyer for a number of years. 
We won’t tell any more stories about that on the floor of the 
House, but we’ve had a long relationship, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
very, very good to see him here as well, with the rest of the 
delegation. So I too would like to welcome them to their 
Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 



1354 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2016 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you two special guests in the east gallery, Diane 
Rogers and her partner. Seeing we’re disclosing student 
activism activities, Diane and I go back to . . . She was the 
editor of The Sheaf and I was working in The Carillon. It wasn’t 
in the ’90s, and it wasn’t in the ’80s. It was a little earlier than 
that. But she went on to work at The Western Producer and 
other journalistic activities. She is active in Fairview and I want 
to thank her and her partner for being so strong in their quest for 
social justice in Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 
like to introduce through you today a group of 24 public service 
employees seated in the Speaker’s gallery. The participants are 
employees from the following ministries: Agriculture, 
Environment, Health, Justice, the Public Service Commission, 
Social Services, as well as employees from the Provincial 
Auditor. 
 
The program includes an in-depth history and tour of the 
Legislative Building. They are taking part in the parliamentary 
program for the public service. Today they will get briefings on 
the Legislative Library, the Legislative Assembly committees 
branch, Executive Council. Also an opportunity to sit in the 
public galleries and observe closely question period and other 
House business. 
 
As well, they will be meeting with members of both sides of the 
House. I look forward to meeting with them later today. So, Mr. 
Speaker, through you, I would like to ask all my colleagues to 
thank these members for what they do in the public service on a 
daily basis and welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As Public 
Service Commission critic for the official opposition, I want to 
join with the minister in welcoming these very important 
individuals to their Legislative Assembly. It’s often said that, 
you know, we’ve had talk about the people’s university. Well 
we’re certainly here today in the people’s House, and all of us 
on this floor are entrusted with the work of the people. But the 
people that make that happen, Mr. Speaker, are of course our 
public service. And the work that they do is critical to how well 
things go or not in this province. And we’re thankful for their 
efforts each and every day. 
 
I look forward to meeting with them a little bit later, Mr. 
Speaker, and, you know, perhaps they can better equip me with 
an understanding of things like what transformational change 
really means, how the finances of the province really are going. 
I look forward to any advice they might be able to share with 
me in those regards, Mr. Speaker. And of course it’s always 
great to have the encouragement from members opposite when 
we’re making an introduction such as this. 
 
But again, Mr. Speaker, if all members could join me in 

welcoming these very important individuals to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I would like to take this opportunity to 
introduce some guests in our Assembly. Joining us today in the 
Speaker’s gallery are guests from the Legislative Assembly of 
Manitoba. They are Clerk Patricia Chaychuk and Deputy Clerk 
Rick Yarish. Please join me in welcoming them to our 
Legislative Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 
 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from the citizens who are opposed to 
the federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by members from the city of 
Estevan, town of Carlyle, Midale, city of Weyburn, Bienfait, 
Torquay, Lampman, and Frobisher. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
in this House again today to present a petition to reverse the 
cuts to the Lighthouse program, Mr. Speaker. The petitioners 
point out that in April 2014, the minister of Social Services said 
that the Lighthouse in Saskatoon would “. . . take pressure off 
existing detox facilities, hospitals, and police cells while 
keeping people safe, especially in our brutally cold winters.” 
The petitioners also point out, Mr. Speaker, that on that very 
same day, the minister of Health said, “We want to ensure that 
individuals with mental health and addictions issues have a safe 
place to stay.” 
 
The petitioners point out that since that time, Mr. Speaker, this 
government has repeatedly indicated that the Lighthouse 
stabilization unit keeps individuals out of hospital emergency 
rooms and jail cells. And we need only look to the Saskatoon 
Health Region right now, Mr. Speaker, where they’ve 
experienced record over capacity in their hospitals as of late. 
And certainly the Lighthouse isn’t the whole part of the 
problem, Mr. Speaker, but making these cuts certainly does not 
help. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately reverse 
their recent cuts to funding that allows extremely 
vulnerable people to access the services of the Lighthouse 
stabilization unit in Saskatoon, and revisit their imposition 
of a strict and narrow definition of homelessness in 
November of 2015 which forced the Lighthouse to cut 
back its hours of essential services in February 2016, and 



November 16, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1355 

take immediate steps to ensure that homeless people in 
Saskatchewan have emergency shelter, clothing, and food 
available to them before more lives are lost. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens of 
Saskatoon and North Battleford. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition regarding wetlands. Wetlands serve a very vital 
function in our ecosystem. They take the form of marshes, bogs, 
fens, swamps, and open water. Wetlands are home to wildlife, 
including waterfowl. They clean the water running off of 
agricultural fields. They protect us from flooding and drought, 
and they are a playground where families can explore and play 
and go hunting. 
 
In the worst cases, such as some areas on the prairies, as much 
as 90 per cent of our wetlands have disappeared. As they 
continue to disappear, so too do the many benefits they provide. 
Sound wetland policy will allow Saskatchewan to provide 
sustainable development for all sectors of business in the 
province. And so I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the Government of Saskatchewan to: 
 
Increase funding to do the proper inventory work, putting 
Saskatchewan in a better position to manage the water 
resource; 
 
Speed up the evaluation of high-risk watersheds where 
there is significant damage annually from flooding. This 
evaluation must include a recognition of drainage works 
that could be closed or restored that will alleviate some of 
the issues downstream with respect to flooding and nutrient 
loading; and finally, 
 
Create a sound and transparent mitigation process that 
adequately addresses sustainable development. This 
sequence should first focus on avoiding the environmental 
harm whenever possible before a secondary focus on 
minimizing the harm, with compensation being sought 
only when the development is deemed essential and the 
first two stages cannot be met. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing this petition today are from 
the city of Regina. I so submit. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition in support of Wakamow Valley Authority. We know 
that as a result of the passage of The Wakamow Valley Authority 
Amendment Act, 2016 on June 30th, the Wakamow Valley 
Authority lost its statutory funding of $127,000 from the 
Saskatchewan government in addition to its $30,000 in 
supplemental funding. This loss of annual funding negatively 

affected the ability of Wakamow to maintain its lands and 
repair its facilities and provide services to Moose Jaw and 
surrounding areas. So on June 21st, 2016, the provincial 
government voted in favour of this bill, resulting in the cuts to 
Wakamow and subsequent job losses. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to immediately repeal The Wakamow Valley Authority 
Amendment Act, 2016 and reinstate statutory funding to the 
Wakamow Valley Authority. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from the city 
of Moose Jaw. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition regarding child care centres in 
Saskatchewan. Those who signed this petition wish to draw our 
attention to the following: many of our licensed non-profit child 
care centres pay commercial property taxes, and this is not done 
in Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario, BC [British Columbia], and New 
Brunswick. 
 
Child care is essential to our economy, yet most centres struggle 
to balance their budget. This issue threatens both the number of 
child care spaces and the quality of care. Mr. Speaker, quality 
child care has an enormous positive impact on a child’s future 
incomes and yields high rates of economic return. This is an 
issue that is important to women and families across our 
province. Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan recognize 
that licensed non-profit child care centres provide 
programs that are foundational to a healthy society by 
including them in The Education Act and exempt all 
licensed non-profit child care centres in Saskatchewan 
from property tax through changes to the appropriate 
legislation. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the citizens signing this petition today reside in 
Lanigan, Ponteix, and Swift Current. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition calling for a stop to the Sask Party sell-off of 
SaskTel. The petitioners point out that in the recent election 
campaign, the Sask Party promised that they would not 
privatize SaskTel. And now, Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point 
out that instead of looking at their own waste and scandal, the 
Sask Party is talking about breaking that promise and looking to 
sell off SaskTel to make a quick dollar. And they point out that 



1356 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2016 

once SaskTel is gone, there’s no getting it back and no telling 
what else the Sask Party will sell. Mr. Speaker, in the petition: 
 

In the prayer that reads as follows, the petitioners 
respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan call on the Saskatchewan Party government 
to keep their promise, stop their plan to sell off SaskTel, 
and keep our valued Crown corporation in the hands of the 
people of Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular set of petitions is signed by 
individuals from Moose Jaw, Regina, Wadena, and Tisdale. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise yet again today 
to present a petition calling on the government to reverse the 
cuts to the Aboriginal court worker program. The Government 
of Saskatchewan cut the budget for the Aboriginal court worker 
program in the 2016-2017 provincial budget. Those on this side 
of the House know that Aboriginal court workers play an 
important role helping Aboriginal people in criminal and child 
apprehension cases. Aboriginal peoples are disproportionately 
represented in Saskatchewan’s correctional centres, and 
Aboriginal court workers successfully help to make our 
communities safer through reduced recidivism rates. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan reverse its 
short-sighted and counterproductive cuts to the Aboriginal 
court worker program. 

 
And those individuals signing the pages of the petition today 
are from Saskatoon, White City, Canwood, and Moose Jaw. Mr. 
Speaker, I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
to stop the redirection of funding of the Northern Teacher 
Education Program Council, Inc. A recent report shows that 94 
per cent of NORTEP [northern teacher education program] 
grads found employment in the North. NORTEP has improved 
teacher retention rates in the North. NORTEP has a positive 
economic impact in northern Saskatchewan. NORTEP provides 
high-quality, face-to-face instruction and services to students. 
 
The province’s financial deficit cannot be fixed by cutting 
indigenous education in the North and a program that has 
worked for over 40 years. And the prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to immediately restore the 
five-year agreement to fund the Northern Teacher 
Education Program Council, Inc. and to continue to fund 
NORTEP-NORPAC programs in La Ronge. 

 
It is signed by hundreds and hundreds of people of northern 

Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

Remembering Janet Wright 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today in this Chamber to 
recognize the passing of Janet Wright. Janet and her sister, 
Susan, were co-founders of Saskatoon’s Persephone Theatre in 
1974. Janet was born in England. Her family relocated to 
Canada and eventually settled in Saskatoon. 
 
“While Janet eventually moved away from Saskatoon to pursue 
other acting roles, she never forgot her theatre roots,” said Del 
Surjik, Persephone Theatre’s current artistic director. In 2014 
she returned to direct its season opener, Hedda Gabler. 
 
Janet Wright endured two horrific personal tragedies that gave 
her strong resolve through her career. Her sister, along with her 
parents, Jack and Ruth, died in a house fire in 1991 in Stratford, 
Ontario. And then 13 years later in 2004, Janet’s daughter, 
Rachel Davis, 23 at the time, was tragically killed in 
Vancouver’s Gastown area. 
 
Del Surjik is quoted as saying, and I quote: 
 

I know the nation is going to have a lot of reasons to see 
this as a loss but, you know, it’s especially acute for the 
Persephone family. If not for her contribution and her 
imagination and her desire to have a professional theatre in 
Saskatoon, we would not be here. 

 
Mr. Speaker, A Christmas Carol, Persephone’s Christmas play, 
will be dedicated to Janet Wright. Mr. Speaker, I ask all 
members to join me in recognizing the passing of Janet Wright 
and thank her for her special gift in helping us appreciate our 
world, our lives, a little more. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Bullying Awareness Week 
 
Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. November 13th to 
19th, 2016 has been proclaimed Bullying Awareness Week in 
Saskatchewan. Bullying Awareness Week has been recognized 
annually across Canada since 2003 in order to promote 
awareness and encourage youth to speak out against bullying. 
This year’s theme is Stand Up! (to bullying). 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no place for bullying in our schools or our 
communities, and that is why our government is committed to 
ensuring that schools are safe and inclusive environments where 
everyone should feel included, protected, and respected. In 
2013 we released Saskatchewan’s Action Plan to Address 
Bullying and Cyberbullying after consulting with more than 
1,000 students, teachers, parents, and community members. The 
action plan helped us put in place an anonymous, 
smartphone-friendly online reporting tool teaching safe and 
appropriate online behaviour; a policy for GSAs [gay-straight 



November 16, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1357 

alliance]; and a partnership with SaskTel to offer grants for 
youth-led initiatives to address bullying or cyberbullying. 
 
Our message is that you are not alone. Talk to a trusted adult; 
report anonymously online at iamstronger.ca, or call the Kids 
Help Phone. Mr. Speaker, together we can stand up to bullying 
and let everyone know that bullying is not okay, and for anyone 
who needs it, help is available. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 

La Ronge Resident Named Indigenous Female 
Entrepreneur of the Year 

 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, today I would like to 
congratulate an outstanding constituent of mine, Anne 
Calladine. This year Anne beat out nine other finalists from 
across Canada and was selected as the National Aboriginal 
Capital Corporations Association inaugural Indigenous Female 
Entrepreneur of the Year. She accepted the award in Halifax, 
Nova Scotia on June 22, 2016. 
 
Anne, along with her husband, Jason, has owned and operated 
La Ronge-based company Northwinds Bus Line since 2008. 
Since then they have doubled the staff and equipment and 
recently built a new building. Half of the employees are of 
Aboriginal ancestry. 
 
Anne is motivated by her two daughters, husband, and extended 
family. Growing up, her mother and grandparents’ proud 
history in the North inspired her to be all she could be. Prior to 
purchasing Northwinds, Anne was a graduate of NORTEP and 
was a bookkeeper and assistant manager in the company. Anne 
says that now, of all the hats that she wears in her operation, bus 
driver is her favourite. She states, “I love to drive the bus and 
interact with the school students. They are such great kids and 
never fail to make me smile, even when it’s minus 40 outside.” 
 
Anne and her husband are also marathon runners, and their 
vision for the future includes developing a running trail in the 
North for active runners. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
Anne Calladine for being named Indigenous Female 
Entrepreneur of the Year, and to join me in acknowledging her 
remarkable accomplishments as an entrepreneur and community 
leader in the North. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 

Habitat for Humanity Key Ceremony in Moose Jaw 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday 
morning I attended a Habitat for Humanity home dedication in 
Moose Jaw where Mandy, her son, and her nephew became 
first-time homeowners. This is the most inspiring part of the 
Habitat experience. When you see a smiling family receive the 
keys to their new home, it’s an unforgettable moment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all know that home ownership opportunities do 
not just happen. Many hands are involved in each Habitat build, 
and many hours of hard work and planning. Volunteers, 
community partners are at the heart of Habitat’s work, and I’m 

proud that our government has provided significant financial 
support for Habitat’s goals since 2009. 
 
We believe that home ownership opportunities can exist for 
hard-working families striving to reach their goal. Mr. Speaker, 
this is why we provided $65,000 to the Habitat for the 
construction of this home. In fact since 2009 we have dedicated 
close to $9 million in funding to Habitat affiliates and chapters 
across the province. Of those dollars, we’ve provided $330,000 
to build six Habitat homes for low- to moderate-income Moose 
Jaw families working towards their dream of home ownership. 
Most importantly, Mr. Speaker, it’s about helping families to 
stay rooted in their communities and have a safe haven to come 
home and to enjoy. 
 
I ask all members to join me in thanking the Habitat for 
Humanity for their leadership and to congratulate Mandy and 
her boys for their new home. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 

Marjorie Hartman Celebrates 102nd Birthday 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today a constituent 
in Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood is celebrating her 102nd 
birthday. Mr. Speaker, Marjorie Hartman, or Marge as her 
friends and family call her, was born on this day in 1914 on a 
family homestead near Revenue, Saskatchewan. Her parents, 
Kasper and Anna Mary Laturnus, were immigrants originally 
from Germany. German was the first language Marjorie learned 
to speak at home, and she remains fluently bilingual. 
 
Marjorie’s parents were drawn to Saskatchewan by the promise 
of a free quarter section of land. Their free quarter remains in 
the family today, being farmed by a fourth-generation family 
member. Growing up, Marjorie lived with her parents, four 
siblings, and a grandmother in a two-bedroom house with no 
running water or electricity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Marjorie married Valentine Hartman on 
November 5th, 1935. They were happily married for 67 years 
until Val passed away in 2005. Marjorie enjoys the love of four 
children, four grandchildren, and three great-grandchildren. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Marjorie has lived all of her 102 years in our 
province and, while she has had many travels, she maintains 
that Saskatchewan is the best place in the world to live. I 
couldn’t agree more. 
 
I ask all members to join me in wishing Marjorie Hartman a 
happy 102nd birthday and many more to come. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 

Ninth Annual Louis Riel Vigil 
 
Mr. Parent: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand in this 
Assembly today to acknowledge a sombre anniversary. It was 
this day in 1885 that Louis Riel was hanged for treason. People 
across our country acknowledge the historical importance of 



1358 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2016 

Louis Riel and the Métis people in our nation’s history. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this evening, my colleague from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow will be joining community members for the Regina 
Riel Métis Council’s ninth annual Louis Riel vigil, held on the 
day of his execution each year. This event is meant to honour 
the life, legacy, and the significant contributions that he made to 
the Métis community. I am pleased that our government has 
provided funding to the main sponsor of the event, Gabriel 
Housing Inc. Mr. Speaker, this event is part of remembering 
that story and I would ask all members to join in acknowledging 
the important knowledge of our history. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to close by reading some of Louis 
Riel’s words into the record: 
 

We must cherish our inheritance. We must preserve our 
nationality for the youth of our future. The story should be 
written down to pass on. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moosomin. 
 

Manufacturing Sector Growing in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Bonk: — Mr. Speaker, today Statistics Canada released 
more encouraging numbers about our increasingly diversified 
economy. Over the past year, Saskatchewan manufacturing 
sales have increased by 8.2 per cent to an impressive $1.24 
billion in September alone. That increase is the largest in the 
nation year over year. 
 
Sectors that saw significant growth in the past year include food 
manufacturing, up 34.3 per cent; machinery manufacturing, up 
16.8 per cent; and wood products, up 31 per cent. Over the past 
decade, manufacturing sales from our province have increased 
an incredible 46 per cent. Manufacturing now represents 7 per 
cent of our province’s GDP [gross domestic product], 
employing over 26,000 Saskatchewan people. 
 
Our talents for productivity and innovation, combined with our 
low-cost, effective, export-focused operating environment, have 
made the Saskatchewan brand well known around the world. 
The manufacturing sector, thanks in part to our government’s 
efforts to grow new export markets and support trade 
agreements, has grown. 
 
Our government supports trade agreements such as CETA 
[Canada-European Union Comprehensive Economic and Trade 
Agreement] and TPP [Trans-Pacific Partnership] in order to 
further grow our export markets and develop export markets for 
our manufacturers. These are agreements that the NDP [New 
Democratic Party] does not support, putting our economy at 
risk. 
 
When will the NDP stand up for our manufacturing sector and 
support those agreements that will grow our export markets? 
When will the NDP support the nearly 20 per cent of all jobs in 
this province that rely on international exports? Only time will 
tell, Mr. Speaker. 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Auditor’s Report and Details of Land Transactions 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, each day with the GTH 
[Global Transportation Hub] scandal of that government they 
keep having their minister stand up, not answer — in place of 
the Premier who also won’t answer — and say they have 
nothing to hide. But they keep doing nothing but hide, Mr. 
Speaker. They won’t answer questions in this place. They won’t 
answer questions from journalists or the nuns. And they’ve now 
even been chastised by the Privacy Commissioner for their 
refusal to release documents under freedom of information law. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if they have nothing to hide, why are they hiding? 
Let’s get back to an easy, straightforward question about the 
concealed identity: when did the Deputy Premier learn that the 
numbered company that first owned the land when the ministers 
brought this first to cabinet was owned by the Sask 
Party-supporting Alberta land baron who also rents land to the 
minister for the GTH, who of course was also plagued by 
scandal? When did he first learn that information? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Day after day they come in. They throw mud. They smear hon. 
members. They impugn reputations of both members of this 
Assembly, hon. members of this Assembly, and people in the 
private sector, Mr. Speaker, every single day. 
 
These questions were answered. These questions were 
addressed by none less than the Provincial Auditor, who had 
full access to all of the documents that she wished access to, 
including cabinet documents, had access to all of the 
individuals involved in the transaction being referenced by the 
Leader of the Opposition. She answered all of these questions, 
Mr. Speaker, again as recently as last week in front of the 
Public Accounts Committee, directly addressing these questions 
that are being put on the floor of the Assembly now. Her 
conclusion after all of that work, Mr. Speaker, a very thorough 
report — no wrongdoing, no fraud, no conflict of interest. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that question was to the 
Deputy Premier. There was no answer in that question. The 
question was straightforward; it merits a very straightforward 
answer. It’s that kind of arrogance, Mr. Speaker, that 
Saskatchewan people are getting sick of when hard-earned 
dollars of theirs, millions of dollars have been wasted, and it 
sort of speaks to the mismanagement we see under this 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ll try again. The deal, of course, went to cabinet. It was 
discussed. The Minister of Justice told his colleagues that he 
had concern. One of the reasons was that they didn’t know who 
owned the land, that there was a concealed identity. Now we 
know that it was the Sask Party-supporting land baron from 
Alberta who also rents land from the former minister for the 



November 16, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1359 

GTH, who of course was plagued by scandals.  
 
My question to the Deputy Premier is a straightforward one. 
When did he find out the truth about who owned this land? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Fear and smear, throwing of mud, 
impugning reputations of hon. members in this Assembly, of 
private citizens indiscriminately, of which they have a record, 
Mr. Speaker. This is a party that as recently as a few months 
ago was found in contempt of parliament, of this Assembly, 
was found in contempt. This was one of the first occasions of 
this ever happening in this Assembly in over 100 years. That 
member opposite, the Leader of the Opposition, himself 
personally was on the verge of being found in contempt of the 
legislature as well only a couple of years ago. 
 
What we’re seeing, Mr. Speaker, is a pattern of behaviour from 
the members opposite indiscriminately impugning members of 
this Assembly, members of the public, hiding behind the 
privilege of this Chamber, Mr. Speaker. The fact is the 
Provincial Auditor looked into every single one of these 
questions as recently as one week ago, addressing these 
questions directly put from the members opposite. Her 
conclusion, Mr. Speaker? No wrongdoing, no fraud, no conflict 
of interest. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that utter nonsense doesn’t 
even merit a response from the floor of this Assembly. But it’s 
past time that the Deputy Premier or the Premier stand and 
answer to Saskatchewan people. They expect and they deserve 
nothing less. 
 
You know, this is a government that says time and time again 
they have nothing to hide in this deal that wasted millions of 
dollars, but they refuse to answer questions here. They refuse to 
do it with the media. They refuse to do it with their constituents. 
They refuse to have key witnesses come before Public 
Accounts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the auditor did her job. It’s past time that members 
of this government, members in this Assembly, do ours, Mr. 
Speaker, and serve Saskatchewan people, and serve 
Saskatchewan people and provide the kind of transparency and 
openness that we used to hear about. When will they come 
clean? And to the very straightforward question to the Deputy 
Premier, when did he learn the real identity of the concealed 
identity? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, the government was so 
desperate to hide things that we called in the Provincial Auditor 
for a full investigation of everything she possibly wanted access 
to. That’s her job, Mr. Speaker. We asked, we asked the 
Provincial Auditor to conduct this investigation on behalf of 
this Assembly. A committee of the Assembly, chaired by the 
members opposite, asked the independent officer within the 

context of her, within the context of her role as Provincial 
Auditor to look into all of these matters. That’s her job, Mr. 
Speaker. She did a very, very thorough job by her own, by her 
own testimony one week ago at the Public Accounts 
Committee.  
 
Her conclusion, Mr. Speaker, at the end of that very thorough 
investigation with access to all of the individuals and 
documents to which she requested access, her conclusion? No 
wrongdoing, no fraud, and no conflict of interest. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the now Minister of 
Government Relations is the only one whose name appears at 
the beginning of this scandal and who still sits in cabinet. The 
people of Humboldt-Watrous deserve to hear their 
representative clear the air. So will the current Minister of 
Government Relations and the member for Humboldt-Watrous 
please, please explain to this House, and more importantly to 
her constituents, when she was the Minister of CIC [Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan], why did she ignore 
the recommendations to have Highways buy the land, and 
instead she offered up valuable taxpayers’ dollars and Crown 
dollars for this scandal? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — This appears to be their new modus 
operandi, Mr. Speaker, impugning reputations of hon. members 
of this Assembly who have served the people of this province 
with significant distinction over decades. This is what they’re 
doing, Mr. Speaker: they’re throwing mud. They’re throwing 
mud because they’re desperate. 
 
The fact of the matter is the Provincial Auditor looked into all 
of these matters. The Provincial Auditor had access to every 
document to which she requested access. She had access to all 
of the individuals to whom she asked for access. The 
government provided full co-operation in all of these matters. 
 
She was asked to do this on behalf of all members of this 
Assembly through the Public Accounts Committee. She did that 
work, a very thorough job. Her conclusion at the end of that 
work, Mr. Speaker, was that there was no wrongdoing, there 
was no fraud, and there was no conflict of interest. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — What a weak display, Mr. Speaker, of trying 
to get to the bottom of these particular important questions. Mr. 
Speaker, the NDP are asking to lighten up this whole scandal 
behind the GTH. We’re not trying to throw mud. We’re trying 
to find out the truth behind the GTH scandal here. 
 
So why won’t that member or any members of the Sask Party 
government answer these questions? So I’m going to ask, the 
now Minister of Government Relations certainly gave money 
from CIC, and she refused to be open and transparent. The 
former minister endorsed this land scandal even before it made 
to the cabinet. So if she won’t answer that question, will the 
current Minister of CIC answer the question? Has he reviewed 



1360 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2016 

his ministry’s involvement in the scandal? Has he spoken with 
officials about what the recommendations were to the former 
minister? And, Mr. Speaker, will he finally, or will someone 
over there finally enlighten this House? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
says, who would get to the bottom of the matter? What’s the 
truth of the matter? What’s the truth of the matter? 
 
Do you know who got to the bottom of the matter and exposed 
the truth of the matter? The Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker. 
The Provincial Auditor, an independent officer of this 
Assembly, and her team of experts went through all of the 
documents pertinent to the transaction, went through and 
interviewed and had access to all of the individuals who were 
involved in the transaction, Mr. Speaker. She got to the bottom 
of the matter. She revealed the truth of the matter. Just because 
the members opposite don’t like what that truth is, because it 
doesn’t fit their narrative, doesn’t make it any less the truth, Mr. 
Speaker.  
 
And what was her conclusion after all of that work? It was that 
there was no wrongdoing, there was no fraud, and there was no 
conflict of interest. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, there may be only one minister 
over there who is assigned to stand up and not answer our 
questions, but let’s be clear. The entire Sask Party cabinet 
discussed this scandal, maybe even voted on it. They all know 
something about it. I suspect some of them are even getting 
tired of hearing the same non-answers over and over again. 
Maybe like me, they’re even hearing from the people they were 
elected to represent, and those folks want to hear a real answer. 
 
So I’d like to give the current Minister of Central Services the 
opportunity to clear the air. Will she tell us what she thought of 
the deal, and why it was dismissed the first time in cabinet but 
approved the second? Actually, Mr. Speaker, is there anything 
at all that she would like to tell her constituents about her 
thoughts on this scandal? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Invective, insinuation, smearing of 
members — not backed by fact, Mr. Speaker, because the 
Provincial Auditor provided the facts. Because the Provincial 
Auditor got to the bottom of the matter. Because the Provincial 
Auditor revealed the truth of the matter, Mr. Speaker.  
 
Just because they don’t like what that truth is, just because that 
truth doesn’t fit their narrative, what we see is the smearing, the 
smearing of members, the smearing of private citizens, 
invective, insinuation. The fact of the matter is this, Mr. 
Speaker. Again, the Provincial Auditor testified to this just last 
week and confirmed the findings of her report — the conclusion 
that there was no wrongdoing, that there was no fraud, and there 

was no conflict of interest. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

State of Provincial Finances 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This government 
loves taking credit for everything, but it seems like none of 
them want to accept accountability. The Sask Party locked up 
and hid their budget before the election, and when they did 
release it, it was worse than the Sask Party ever said it was. Mr. 
Speaker, this summer they went back to the secrecy and refused 
to release the quarterly update. And now they’re playing 
politics with leaks outside of this House and trying to soften the 
ground for more cuts. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are the ones who blew the rainy day fund, 
blew through the surplus, and refused to diversify the economy. 
And now it’s the people of Saskatchewan who are paying the 
price with job losses, broken promises, and deep, deep cuts. 
Could the Minister of Finance please drop the excuses and the 
revisionist history? Could he acknowledge that the Sask Party 
has been the government for close to a decade, accept 
responsibility for their actions, and apologize to the people of 
Saskatchewan for their total mismanagement of Saskatchewan’s 
finances? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’ve been waiting for a question with respect to the budget. 
Here we’re in the middle of the fourth week of the session, and 
finally the Finance critic decides she wants to ask a question 
about the financial situation of the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What I have indicated is that perhaps the members of the 
opposition haven’t been aware of the downturn in the 
commodity sector over the last couple of years, Mr. Speaker. 
That continues to — well they’re going to yell away from their 
seats, Mr. Speaker — that continues to plague our economy and 
certain sectors of our economy, Mr. Speaker. Therefore that has 
a lag effect. That has an effect with respect to personal income 
tax revenue, corporate income tax revenue, provincial sales tax 
revenue, and fuel tax revenue, Mr. Speaker. Those are revenue 
measures that impact the province’s finances. 
 
Now what I said on June 1st, that we were forecasting a $434 
million deficit, Mr. Speaker, as we get new information in with 
respect to those sources of revenue, notwithstanding a further 
drop in the non-renewable resource sector, Mr. Speaker, we 
continue to fund the priority areas of government. We continue 
to fund health care, education, social services, highways and 
infrastructure, our justice system, Mr. Speaker. We continue to 
fund those because they’re the priorities of the people of this 
province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, where the lag is, is between their 



November 16, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1361 

promises and the reality of this province. Mr. Speaker, this 
minister needs to stop with the shell games and the wordplay. 
They took credit when commodity prices were high. Now that 
they’re low, they have to accept the responsibility. Mr. Speaker, 
that’s why we created the rainy day fund. It was meant for times 
like this. They campaigned and told the people of Saskatchewan 
that everything was fine when they knew it wasn’t. The Sask 
Party knew all along that things were bad, and it’s their fault. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan deserve a government 
that’s open and transparent. Mr. Speaker, instead of leaking out 
selected information to the media to suit the Sask Party’s 
partisan political goals, won’t the minister release the full fiscal 
update in this House today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — I would have loved to have talked about 
this in this Chamber, Mr. Speaker, if the Finance critic would 
have asked a question the last four weeks about this. If any 
member over there would have asked a question about the 
economy in the last four weeks, we’d have been delighted to 
talk about that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Here’s a party, here’s a party, that Finance critic, Mr. Speaker, 
that during the campaign on April 4th, in the campaign leading 
up to the April 4th election, this was a party that campaigned on 
a point eight per cent increase in health care, Mr. Speaker, a 2.6 
per cent increase in education. Mr. Speaker, that’s less than 
what this government delivered in its budget on June 1st. 
 
Then that member, the Finance critic, stood in her place on June 
1st, on budget day, and said this, just two months after the 
election, Mr. Speaker, said this: “It doesn’t end there. We heard 
the minister today talk about investments in health care and 
education, but perhaps the minister needs a lesson in inflation 
and population growth.” Two months after the campaign, Mr. 
Speaker, she said, the member from Nutana: “A minimum of 6 
per cent annual increase is needed just to maintain the status 
quo programs like health care and education. Anything below 
that is effectively a cut.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, that would’ve added $550 million on to the deficit 
of this province, and she didn’t campaign on it. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. That 
minister, that minister is responsible for the province’s finances. 
He is not responsible for making excuses. The people of 
Saskatchewan know what happened: 11,000 more people are 
looking for work than a year ago; 4,200 jobs were lost last 
month alone, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Sask Party has broke their promise to reduce the provincial 
debt. They have actually grown it. The Education minister 
himself said the deficit this year will be $1 billion. And there’s 
no rainy day fund to back it up. Instead the Sask Party recently 
authorized themselves to borrow an unprecedented additional 
$6 billion. When will the minister stop making excuses and start 
doing his job? 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
interesting, Mr. Speaker. I went back and did a little bit of 
research as to when the NDP were in office in the last 16 years. 
Mr. Speaker, do you know that they received . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . They don’t want to hear this. They hate when 
we go back and visit their record, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I find it comical that members are having 
difficulty hearing the response from the Finance minister so 
they listen to their earpiece while chirping from their seats. 
Please, let’s improve the decorum in here. I recognize the 
Finance minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, we went back and did 
some research. They received, in 16 years in office, $4.4 billion 
in equalization payments. Mr. Speaker, this government has not 
received a dime in equalization payments since we came to 
office in 2007. Why? Because we’re a have province. 
 
So during the 16 years they were in government, Mr. Speaker, I 
can tell you they had some challenging times, and I can 
appreciate that. We’ve got some challenging times in our 
economy now. 
 
But here’s what we’re not going to do, Mr. Speaker. We’re not 
going to take $4.4 billion in equalization payments that we 
don’t even have, and close 52 hospitals, including the Plains 
Health Centre here in the city of Regina. We’re not going to 
close 176 schools, Mr. Speaker, one a month while they were in 
office. And we’re not going to watch as our children and 
grandchildren leave by the thousands to Alberta and Ontario 
and other places in the country, Mr. Speaker. We put in place 
programs to keep our young people here. That’s what we’re 
going to continue to do. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — That’s very rich, Mr. Speaker, coming from 
the minister who worked for the Grant Devine government. 
 
Instead of managing the people’s money, the Sask Party is 
playing with definitions. They have had five deficits. You can’t 
do that and have the debt go down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they love to brag about taking down the GRF 
[General Revenue Fund] debt. First, their talking points and 
their numbers are off on that. But more importantly, all they’ve 
done is created a new category of debt. They have taken what 
should have been added to the GRF operating debt and put it in 
another category called other debt for government service 
organizations. Mr. Speaker, debt is debt is debt, and this other 
debt went up by almost $1 billion just last year. They’ve 
already projected another $1 billion for this year, and that 
doesn’t count the debt that the Sask Party has piled onto our 
Crown corporations. 
 
Will the Minister of Finance quit the semantic games, put down 
the thesaurus, and pick up the spreadsheet? Will he admit they 



1362 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2016 

have mismanaged the economy so badly they’ve already added 
$7 billion in debt in the last seven years? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Here’s what I 
would say to the hon. member: 1.15 million people living in the 
province of Saskatchewan today, the most ever in the history of 
this province, Mr. Speaker. Thousands upon thousands of our 
young people taking advantage of the graduate retention 
program to stay here in the province of Saskatchewan after they 
graduate from post-secondary education. New hospitals being 
built across the province, Mr. Speaker, including a new hospital 
in Moose Jaw, a new children’s hospital in Saskatoon, a new 
mental health facility in North Battleford. Dozens of schools 
being built in this province, Mr. Speaker, dozens of schools 
being built in this province. 
 
What did we have when the NDP faced some economic 
challenges, Mr. Speaker? They raised taxes 22 times. They 
closed hospitals. They closed schools. They told the people of 
rural Saskatchewan to go pave your own roads, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re not going to do those kinds of things to the citizens of 
this province when faced with economic challenges. We’re 
going to manage it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Consultant Review of Education System  
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, the fact is the Sask Party has 
mismanaged the economy and they’re making the people of 
Saskatchewan pay. It’s offensive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Education minister won’t tell us what changes he is going 
to make to our children’s classrooms or how his recently 
announced quick review of school boards will take place. Mr. 
Speaker, there’s a lot that this minister isn’t telling the people of 
Saskatchewan, but what he is telling them is alarming. He is 
saying that school board amalgamations are on the table. He 
won’t rule out booting out newly elected school board trustees 
and replacing them with Sask Party approved appointees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister claims that he is consulting with 
school divisions before making any changes to the education 
system, but he’s given his consultant just four weeks to travel 
the province and speak with school divisions and other key 
stakeholders. We’re talking about major changes, Mr. Speaker, 
to our children’s classrooms. So why is this minister in such a 
rush? Why won’t he take more time and hold proper 
consultations with teachers, school board members, and 
parents? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I can advise the members 
opposite that we’ve asked former deputy minister to the 
premier, Dan Perrins, to do some work for us. He has been 
tasked with presenting options on governance in the education 
sector. 
 
Now the members opposite, some of them I appreciate haven’t 

been here that long, but those that have been here for a while 
will remember who the premier was when Dan Perrins was the 
deputy minister to the premier: Lorne Calvert. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Perrins has extensive experience. He spent the 
last 18 months consulting with the education sector on the 
funding model. Mr. Speaker, the options are going be presented 
in December, at which point we will take them to the sector for 
feedback. Mr. Speaker, we want to hear from the sector. We 
need to hear from the sector. Our focus is and will continue to 
be that we want to ensure student success. We want to 
strengthen accountability. We want to create efficient 
operational structures, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, if that minister truly wants to hear 
from people around the province, it’s going to take more than 
four weeks. But it’s clear that the only goal of this consultation 
is to find more ways to make cuts to our children’s classrooms. 
If it were anything other than that, then it would take longer and 
he would actually consult with school board trustees and 
parents, and actually listen to what it is that they’re telling him. 
Instead, he’s hoping to rush the process before anyone can 
figure out what is going on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even the SSBA [Saskatchewan School Boards 
Association] was not informed about this consultation. The 
outgoing president said that the announcement took her by 
surprise and that she hasn’t even been told how the consultation 
will take place, saying, “We’re not exactly sure how this 
process is going to unfold.” Can the minister expect to do 
proper consultations in a matter of weeks if school boards don’t 
even know what the process is? 
 
Mr. Speaker, our classrooms are already overcrowded and 
under-resourced. Teachers and parents are worried about how 
this consultation process will affect our children’s classrooms. 
So why is the minister leaving school boards in the dark, and 
will he commit to allowing more time to consult with teachers, 
school boards, and parents before going ahead and making 
major changes and deeper and deeper cuts to our children’s 
classrooms? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the length of 
the member’s question. I would like to give a very short answer. 
I will simply quote from Pat Maze: “We do not believe that 
education is an arena for political battles. In Saskatchewan, 
children and youth come first.” And Mr. Speaker, that’s what’s 
going to happen from this side of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Saskatoon Centre 
on his feet? 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Request leave to move a motion under rule 61. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has requested leave. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



November 16, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1363 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 61 
 

Support for Wanuskewin Heritage Park Application for 
World Heritage Site Status 

 
Mr. Forbes: — In light of a request that we’ve received from 
Wanuskewin Heritage Park, I would move the following 
motion: 
 

That this Assembly supports Wanuskewin Heritage Park’s 
efforts to seek United Nations Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization World Heritage Site status. 

 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 
moved the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly supports Wanuskewin Heritage Park’s 
efforts to seek United Nations Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organizational World Heritage Site status. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Minister 
of Parks, Culture and Sport. I recognize the minister. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker, and colleagues. It’s a great pleasure to speak to the 
motion before the Assembly today. Wanuskewin is one of the 
top-ranked tourist destinations in Saskatchewan, and the 
Ministry of Parks, Culture and Sport has been a long-term 
partner. Mr. Speaker, Wanuskewin’s renewal vision is closely 
aligned with and supports the government’s strategy for culture 
and recreation. In particular it promotes and protects our 
province’s treasured heritage. Our province has a remarkable 
history and cultural landscape, and it is important to be shared 
with current and future generations. Saskatchewan’s story has 
been shaped by many people, places, and events. 
 
This government was proud to support Wanuskewin at the 
February announcement earlier this year of the exciting vision 
for renewal, where they are going to apply for Saskatchewan’s 
first United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization, UNESCO, world heritage designated site. We are 
pleased to support Wanuskewin’s application efforts to bring 
global recognition to this remarkable heritage resource. 
Wanuskewin has been telling its story for nearly 25 years, and 
the renewal plans will ensure these stories continue to be shared 
for generations to come. 
 
The renewal will elevate Wanuskewin on the world stage and 
will highlight the cultural and historic importance of the 
Wanuskewin Heritage Park. We know from other Canadian 
sites that there are potentially significant social, economic, and 
conservation benefits becoming of a World Heritage Site. We 
applaud Wanuskewin for taking such a bold step and officially 
announcing today its intent to seek UNESCO world heritage 
designation. We look forward to participating in the renewal 
journey as it unfolds. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
thank the minister opposite for those fine comments, and also to 
my colleague from Saskatoon Centre for introducing this 
motion. Last night many of us were fortunate to attend 
Wanuskewin’s reception and hear Wanuskewin’s vision to 
become the first United Nations Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization, or UNESCO, World Heritage Site in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Wanuskewin has been a gathering place for indigenous people 
for 6,000 years, and in our way this Chamber is stepping up to 
support this initiative. We must do all that we can to protect 
Wanuskewin. Wanuskewin’s Thundering Ahead campaign calls 
for renovation and expansion of their current facility to attract 
international exhibits and expand the art gallery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the park is granted the designation, it will join 
the ranks of the Grand Canyon, Yellowstone National Park, and 
Vatican City, among many other iconic sites throughout the 
world. It will be the first in Saskatchewan. It will be our Tyrrell 
Museum. Wanuskewin board Chair Candace Wasacase-Lafferty 
said, “Our journey is just beginning, but we are excited to 
embark on the process of applying to UNESCO for recognition 
as a World Heritage Site.” 
 
Returning a small herd of plains bison to the area in its native 
prairie habitat is also part of the project. Here’s another quote: 
 

“The bison are what drew Indigenous peoples to 
Wanuskewin for thousands of years,” Tribal Chief Felix 
Thomas from the Saskatoon Tribal Council said. [He went 
on to say] “By understanding their story of near extinction, 
we are better able to understand the stories of Canada’s 
indigenous peoples. Bringing back the bison will be 
symbolic of the recognition of Indigenous cultures in 
Canada.” 

 
We wish to thank the board, the staff under the leadership of 
Wanuskewin’s CEO [chief executive officer] Dana Soonias, 
and especially Dr. Ernie Walker for their outstanding 
leadership. It’s important for them and this province to know 
that we in this Chamber are fully committed to this project. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion in front of the Assembly is: 
 

That this Assembly supports the Wanuskewin Heritage 
Park effort to seek United Nations Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization World Heritage Site status. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 



1364 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2016 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers for questions 177 through 183. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 
to questions 177 to 183. I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answers to questions 184 and 185. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered the 
responses to questions 184 to 185. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 34 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 34 — The 
Provincial Lands Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to stand in my place and offer a few more comments on 
Bill 34. I realize that I spoke on Bill 34 a number of times. But, 
Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity before the Bill does 
move to the committee stage to talk about a few of the issues I 
think are really important as it relates to Bill No. 34. And of 
course this is the lands Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What’s really important is that . . . I listened with great interest 
yesterday to my colleague from Saskatoon Nutana where she 
spoke about the importance of the indigenous people of this 
land and the role that the treaties played in settling all of 
Canada. And, Mr. Speaker, the most important, compelling 
point that she made, when it comes to provincial lands: that 
there must be consultation. There must be heavy involvement 
by the indigenous peoples of this land, because it’s all part of 
what the province really touts as their armour in terms of 
meeting the world challenge together, and that is “from many 
peoples, strength.” And, Mr. Speaker. I would highly 
recommend that these consultations be heavily involving the 
First Nations, the Métis people, and other Aboriginal groups 
and indigenous groups throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now the minister said there was 161 million acres of land, and 
of this . . . and they called it the province of Saskatchewan. And 
of that, 100 million of these acres are under the administration 
of the province. So if those figures are correct, Mr. Speaker, 1 
million acres of administrative control of the province is really 
an opportunity for the province to reach out to the indigenous 
people of the province of Saskatchewan and heavily engage 
them. 
 
We saw no evidence of that, Mr. Speaker. And what’s really 
important is, in the bill it’s really . . . the devil’s in the details, 
as people would like to say. As you look in the bill there’s one 
small mention under section 25 that talks about the Aboriginal 

people, the indigenous people of the province of Saskatchewan, 
in a very fleeting statement, Mr. Speaker. That cannot be 
accepted. The bottom line is the people of Saskatchewan should 
be heavily involved, and all people should be involved, 
including the indigenous people of this great province. 
 
One of things that I think is really important, Mr. Speaker, is 
you’ve had the discussion in northern Saskatchewan. I’ve made 
the statement time and time again that in northern 
Saskatchewan alone, for every man, woman, and child, we’re so 
rich in land that for every man, woman, and child, you’re 
looking at 7 to 8 square acres of opportunity. And one would, I 
would certainly try and understand, why is it we have such a 
vast piece of land with a lot of resources, and yet the indigenous 
people of northern Saskatchewan continue to struggle, Mr. 
Speaker? It is because we have not asserted ourselves strong 
enough on the issue around land. It is because the government 
has totally disrespected key players like the FSIN [Federation of 
Sovereign Indigenous Nations], the First Nations leaders, and 
the Métis community in consultation on bills of this sort. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the individuals that I want to pay 
tribute in this very brief presentation that I’m making is the 
former MP [Member of Parliament] for our area, Rick 
Laliberte. Mr. Laliberte has always championed the fact that the 
northern people should assert themselves with greater strength 
and greater opportunity when it comes to the land itself. And in 
our conversations with Mr. Laliberte, some of the initial 
comments he’s made around the lands Act is that, first and the 
foremost . . . the foremost question that he’s asking is who is 
lobbying for some of the changes in this particular bill. 
 
Now some of the changes in the bill talks about modernizing 
the whole bill itself, Mr. Speaker, but there are some omissions 
that are very glaring. And the omissions are the fact that the 
consultations with indigenous people did not occur to the level 
and certainly did not occur with the whole definition of respect, 
Mr. Speaker. So this is one of the points that Mr. Laliberte 
wishes to raise. 
 
He wants to point out that the consultations on this bill didn’t 
happen in many places, in many corners of this province, 
including northern Saskatchewan. A lot of the northern 
municipalities were not consulted, Mr. Speaker, on this 
particular bill that gives it a very important thing called land, 
Mr. Speaker. Why weren’t the northern municipalities involved 
in some of these consultations and discussions? Because, Mr. 
Speaker, many of the communities in the North are made up of 
70, 80, or 90 per cent of indigenous people, but they didn’t have 
the opportunity to express their concern around this particular 
bill. And, Mr. Speaker, they didn’t have the opportunity to 
express in detail what their view is, what their aspirations are on 
lands in northern Saskatchewan and throughout the province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Public lands are managed by the province of Saskatchewan. 
The indigenous people had every right, had every right to be 
part of those consultations. And, Mr. Speaker, this is exactly the 
problem that occurs in this day and age is that, why are we 
forgetting? And why are we not engaging the indigenous people 
of the province of Saskatchewan when it comes to the issue 
around land, especially in the North where 60, 70, 80 per cent, 
90 per cent of the communities are people of Aboriginal 



November 16, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1365 

ancestry? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we also want to talk about the traditional 
land users, which are a really important component in northern 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Laliberte has expressed that time and time 
again, in which he said everyone from the trappers have rights, 
Mr. Speaker; from the people that gather, whether it’s berries or 
medicine, Mr. Speaker; from those that harvest wood in any 
piece of land, Mr. Speaker; from those that even harvest 
opportunity such as forestry, Mr. Speaker. They have a right to 
be able to participate, an economic right to be able to participate 
in some of that activity in their backyard, and this bill did not 
take into consideration some of those solid points, Mr. Speaker. 
And we need to start to assert the rights of the indigenous 
people in northern Saskatchewan when it comes to land 
discussion, rules around land, and allocation of land, Mr. 
Speaker. And this bill barely mentions the indigenous people of 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The other thing that’s really important, Mr. Speaker, that Mr. 
Laliberte wanted to point out, is this is another example of how 
administrative decisions are being made in southern 
Saskatchewan with no respect for the northern community. And 
this is where . . . his final point, Mr. Speaker, that he knows and 
he asserts that northerners have to move to a model where we 
have more control over our political and economic destinies. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that is a statement that Mr. Laliberte has 
made time and time again certainly over his political career, but 
that battle, he continues from the community of Beauval. And 
he certainly speaks with great authority and great respect from 
many people throughout the North, including myself, when he 
simply tells the northerners that any rules and regulations 
around land, that we have a right to be engaged and we should 
assert ourselves on some of the decisions made around land, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now what’s really important is that if you ignore the indigenous 
peoples’ rights to be part of any discussion around land, you’re 
simply showing a great desire to create disparity amongst the 
Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal community, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the things that we talked about in this Assembly, we 
talked about at great lengths, Mr. Speaker, is the whole notion 
of reconciliation. We spoke about the challenge that many of 
the indigenous people have suffered throughout time, as many 
other generations of people from different backgrounds have 
suffered. We recognize that, Mr. Speaker. We’re not trying to 
diminish their suffering. We’re just trying to highlight ours so 
people know that we all have had difficulties in many of our 
generations and many peoples’ lives. 
 
But the point is, is as we reconcile, as we reconcile between 
each other, we cannot be put at odds with each other from a 
government that is totally ignoring one particular sector and a 
very important sector, the indigenous sector of Saskatchewan, 
when they talk about land allocation and decisions around lands 
and resources, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So there’s no question that from the perspective of the 
indigenous people of Saskatchewan, reconciliation involves 
First Nations, Mr. Speaker. Reconciliations involve the Métis 
people of Saskatchewan. Reconciliation involves the people of 

northern Saskatchewan. Reconciliation involves the 
non-aboriginal community as well, Mr. Speaker. All the 
reconciliation has got to happen. It has to occur, Mr. Speaker, 
because that’s how we begin to build “from many peoples, 
strength,” is that we start respecting one another and engaging 
one another and certainly involving one another around 
decisions that affect our lives. 
 
And most certainly, Mr. Speaker, some of the deep-rooted 
connection that northerners have to lands in and around their 
community — lands that their forefathers have harvested, either 
hunting or trapping, Mr. Speaker, and to the more recent 
economy of forestry, Mr. Speaker, or tourism — a lot of the 
Aboriginal people, the indigenous people have embraced the 
new economy and they’re part of that, Mr. Speaker. So they 
shouldn’t be excluded, and the consultations on this particular 
bill did not happen. 
 
And I want to say to the Assembly that there are champions out 
there watching very closely as to how this bill is being 
implemented and the consultation and the intent of this bill. 
They’re watching this to the committee process, to the 
legislative process. And I wanted to recognize one particular 
champion, Mr. Speaker, and that of course is Mr. Rick Laliberte 
who has really staked a lot of his time and his life on the notion 
that northerners must assert themselves on their own lands. 
And, Mr. Speaker, this provincial lands Act, Bill 34 does not 
mention the indigenous people or the northern people when it 
comes to allocation of land. And that is a crying shame, from 
my perspective. 
 
The consultations didn’t happen to the level it should have. 
FSIN was quite bluntly and very direct when it came to their 
involvement, Mr. Speaker. The First Nations leaders throughout 
the individual bands, Mr. Speaker, the Métis leaders, the 
northern municipalities, the traditional resource users, all of the 
people that make a living off that land, either harvesting or 
gathering or enjoying the land itself — northern people will not 
be pushed aside, nor will they take a second . . . or play second 
fiddle to the allocation of lands and the importance of lands that 
the lands represent to the people of the North. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s really important that the people of 
northern Saskatchewan pay very close attention to what the 
Sask Party does around bills of this sort. Pay very close 
attention to what the Sask Party does, Mr. Speaker, because if 
you’re not consulting to the level you should with the 
indigenous people of northern Saskatchewan, and even 
northerners in general, Mr. Speaker, then you’re doing a great 
disservice to governing for all. And more so, Mr. Speaker, 
you’re showing total disrespect to the people that have occupied 
that land for generations. And I can tell you, like many people, 
Rick Laliberte and our communities, there are many Ricks out 
there that are going to rally together and begin to form their 
own version of what they think land should be, how land should 
be allocated, Mr. Speaker. And they certainly want to be part 
and parcel of the decision making, and they will not accept 
anything less. 
 
So I want to point out to the Minister of Agriculture and the 
minister of SERM [Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management] that the northern people, all northern people — 
indigenous and non-Aboriginal people, whether they’re Métis, 



1366 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2016 

First Nations, or northerners — they have a right to be fully 
engaged in any bill that involves land. And I say shame on the 
Saskatchewan Party government for trying to have these 
consultations done in a disrespectful, very time-constrained 
manner, Mr. Speaker. They’re going to show a lot of attention 
to this bill. They’re going to express what they think their 
concerns are. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we can tell the people of Saskatchewan that 
the land is important to the northern people overall, whether 
they’re indigenous people or non-Aboriginal people. The North 
is their home, and they have a right and they have a duty to 
make sure that their interests are maintained. And northerners 
will stand together to make sure they have full involvement and 
full engagement around Bill 34 because if you don’t, Mr. 
Speaker, what they would consider that is a slap in the face. 
And, Mr. Speaker, no government should do that to any part of 
the province in any way, shape, or form because quite frankly 
that is not leadership, and that’s certainly not something that the 
people of Saskatchewan would want to see their government 
do. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of issues and a lot of points that 
we’re going to raise on this on this particular bill over time. But 
I can tell the minister one thing: that the consultations were not 
done at the level that they should have been done and that the 
northerners are paying very close attention to Bill 34.  
 
And if you think that I’m one person speaking up on this bill to 
represent the northern and indigenous peoples of the land on 
this particular bill, then think again because there are many 
champions out there within the First Nations community, within 
our Aboriginal organizations, our indigenous organizations, 
many people in our northern communities, many very 
knowledgeable people that are paying attention to this. And if 
you begin to make decisions around land without involving 
northerners and indigenous peoples of this province, then you 
quite frankly are treading where no government should tread 
because that’s not proper leadership, Mr. Speaker. That is 
simply a very disrespectful position to take when it comes to 
allocation of land. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we are watching. We are being very, very 
straightforward with our comments, very candid about the 
disrespect that has been shown thus far. And I can tell all the 
people out there that if there are other champions like Mr. 
Laliberte that want to come forward and join the effort to try 
and assert ourselves on our lands then, Mr. Speaker, I would 
invite them to do so. I would invite them to do so because land 
is not being developed, is not being built every day, Mr. 
Speaker. We only have a finite amount of land throughout this 
world. 
 
The northern people and all indigenous people of the province 
of Saskatchewan should have the right, should have the right to 
be fully engaged — not consulted — fully engaged and fully 
supportive of any rule or regulation when it comes to allocation 
of land in any way, shape, or form. And if any government tries 
to do it without their support, then shame on them, because 
they’re not going to accept it, Mr. Speaker. And they’re going 
to continue working very hard to get a government that is 
respectful of them and engaging of them when it comes to the 
one important critical issue of land, Mr. Speaker. We are not 

going to back down, and we’re going to get organized. 
 
So I’d highly recommend to the ministry that they start 
engaging northern people to the extent that they should, and 
that’s indigenous people and non-Aboriginal people as well. 
Mr. Speaker, it’s important that they hear this message. And I 
can assure the Government of Saskatchewan, if the Sask Party 
tries to do this, then they won’t be Government of 
Saskatchewan very much longer, Mr. Speaker. So on that note, 
I make my comments around Bill 34. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the member that Bill No. 34, The Provincial Lands Act, 2016 
be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill 34, The Provincial Lands Act be sent to the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 26 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 26 — The Patient 
Choice Medical Imaging Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As always, it’s a 
pleasure and a privilege to be able to enter debate here in this 
House on bills before us. And today I will be speaking to Bill 
No. 26, The Patient Choice Medical Imaging Act, Mr. Speaker. 
I’ll talk a little bit about what this bill does and then express 
some of the concerns that have been flagged for me by other 
people and from evidence from other jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker, 
and some of the Premier’s own comments as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So Bill No. 26, it repeals the government’s MRI facilities 
licensing Act that this government had introduced last session 
that saw the ability for the government to move away from a 
single-payer system when it came to MRIs [magnetic resonance 
imaging], Mr. Speaker, so people could then pay out-of-pocket 
for MRIs. So this is repealing that bill, Mr. Speaker, but it’s not 
good news. They haven’t changed their minds on that, Mr. 
Speaker; in fact they’re replacing it with a new law that 
includes MRIs as well as CT [computerized tomography] scans. 
And it also opens up the door . . . I’ll tell you about that in a 
moment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So under this bill, patients will be able to pay for an MRI or CT 



November 16, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1367 

scan out of pocket and the clinic will need to provide a second 
scan to the public waiting list at no cost to the taxpayer. So 
that’s the model that this government has been using as they 
moved away from single-payer for MRIs and now are 
expanding it to CTs. 
 
And a new feature of this bill, which is different from The MRI 
Facilities Licensing Act of last year, is that it defines medical 
imaging services as including MRIs, CT scans, and any other 
prescribed services, Mr. Speaker. So this gives the Premier and 
cabinet a back door to add any other medical imaging services 
like scope procedures or X-rays to its two-for-one pay system, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think it’s important to point out that I think a value that we all 
share here in Canada and the principle of medicare, Mr. 
Speaker, our whole system rests on that principle that an 
individual’s financial resources should not determine access to 
services, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Romanow, the former premier here in Saskatchewan, when 
he did his cross-Canada health report, his commission in 2002, 
Mr. Speaker, that was some of the language that he used. But I 
think that that’s a commonly accepted thread, Mr. Speaker, in 
our values here in Saskatchewan and Canada, that our system 
rests on the principle that our finances, Mr. Speaker, should not 
determine our access to health services. That’s why many 
people were in support of medicare, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know actually even talking to someone who had a father who 
was, at the time of the strike in the ’60s, Mr. Speaker, his father 
was a physician, and at the time was very much opposed to 
medicare. But when it came time or, when push came to shove 
and he was no longer being paid in chickens, Mr. Speaker, he 
really appreciated the fact that we had a public medicare, 
single-payer medicare system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s not just Mr. Romanow who is articulating that vision of 
access to services shouldn’t be based on your wallet. Dr. 
Brown, the former SMA, Saskatchewan Medical Association 
president, when this first bill was introduced, was quoted as 
saying: 
 

We believe in a publicly-funded health care system. We 
really believe that access to MRIs should be determined by 
whether a patient needs it or not, not by their ability to pay. 

 
And just in recent conversations with the SMA a few weeks 
ago, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to have a discussion with them and 
hear again if that is a position that still stands for their 
organization that represents doctors from across this province. 
The SMA still supports that principle, that belief in a publicly 
funded health care system, that access to medical . . . to MRIs 
should be, and other services should be determined by whether 
a patient needs it or not, not by their ability to pay, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I find it interesting too as the Health critic. There are many 
challenges in health care right now. We continue to have a crisis 
in seniors’ care, Mr. Speaker. We’re short-staffing. Actually 
short-staffing is across the piece. Whether you’re in a hospital, 
Mr. Speaker, or in a seniors’ care facility, short-staffing is a 
very real issue that is impacting our loved ones, our parents, our 
grandparents. Those in long-term care are really struggling, Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of getting a bath on a regular basis or being 
woken up early, very early, 5 in the morning, Mr. Speaker, to 
start their day because that’s when the staff has to . . . because 
they have limited staff, they have to start getting people up to 
get the daytime routines under way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So long-term care and issues around long-term care are very 
real, Mr. Speaker. I would’ve liked to have seen a bill around 
minimum quality of care standards. So I think about priorities 
of this government and the challenges in health care. So we talk 
about long-term care, but there’s emergency waits. In 
Saskatoon in recent weeks, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon Health 
Region has experienced record over capacity at our health care 
facilities, Mr. Speaker. More people waiting in emergency 
rooms and in pods and in makeshift tents or forts, Mr. Speaker, 
that staff try to create for patients in hallways, Mr. Speaker. 
There are no shortage of issues in health care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Waits for specialists. There was a story yesterday on CBC 
[Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] talking about the 
challenge in recruiting pediatricians. And we have a hospital 
opening in 2019 if the government . . . That date kept getting 
pushed back, Mr. Speaker, and I don’t think that that probably 
bodes well for your ability to recruit and retain staff when your 
facility gets pushed back, Mr. Speaker. But in 2019 we have a 
facility that will be opening up, a beautiful brand new facility, 
and many people, both families with young children, and 
experts, are questioning whether or not we’ll be able to staff 
that facility, Mr. Speaker. So there are no shortage of issues in 
health care. 
 
The growing wait times for surgeries, Mr. Speaker. This is one 
area where the government had made some really good 
progress, and I’ve commended them for that. But as of last year, 
starting in March when there were budget issues and money 
started to get pulled back, those wait-lists went up and up and 
up, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[15:00] 
 
So we have some serious issues in health care, Mr. Speaker, and 
I would challenge whether or not this should have been the 
priority for this government’s Legislative Assembly. It was one 
of three health bills brought forward and I really would have 
liked to have seen, for example, a minimum quality of care 
standards bill, Mr. Speaker. So again this speaks to priorities. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, this is a government where we’ve had a 
Premier talk about something in the not-too-distant past and 
change his mind, Mr. Speaker, do a complete about-face. We’ve 
talked a little about that around privatization, and this is 
privatization again. Make no mistake about that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But we had a Premier and a government bring forward a bill 
despite the fact they’ve said they will not privatize, without 
going to the people, any of the Crowns under the Crown 
protection Act. We’ve had them, Mr. Speaker, do an end run 
around referendum and going to the people of Saskatchewan by 
introducing a bill, an amendment to The Interpretation Act, Mr. 
Speaker, which will define privatization, Mr. Speaker, as 
anything less than . . . you can sell a business, a Crown, up to 
49 per cent, Mr. Speaker, and it will not be considered private 
under this government’s language or this government’s 



1368 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2016 

definition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is the same thing. So the Premier had committed many 
times over, since 2003 basically, when the then Sask Party 
opposition had flagged that they would be interested in selling 
Crowns and they realized they had to pull that narrative back. 
And our current Premier has said many times that he wouldn’t 
be interested in privatizing. So we’ve seen that now, him do a 
change, an about-face on that issue, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve 
seen the same thing in health where we have a Premier, in 2009 
he said in the media that offering medical services such as 
MRIs for a fee seems to be outside the Canada Health Act and 
is in an area where the government doesn’t want to tread, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This is a Premier who recognizes the importance of the Canada 
Health Act, and realizes that this particular bill, there’s some 
potential for having introduced something beyond single payer, 
and private MRIs creates a problem, Mr. Speaker. This current 
Premier also has used the language, which I couldn’t agree 
more with, that people shouldn’t use a bulging wallet to jump 
the queue. No kidding, Mr. Speaker. I couldn’t agree with that 
statement more. That is not how we should access medicare or 
any kind of services here around health, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to point to a 2013 . . . Actually in Alberta in 2013, under 
a Conservative government, actually the Progressive 
Conservatives, Mr. Speaker, so this isn’t a recent report, Mr. 
Speaker. This was under the former Conservative government, 
the health services. There was a report done called the health 
services . . . I really need to start wearing reading glasses, Mr. 
Speaker. The Health Services Preferential Access Inquiry of 
Alberta. So I’d like to just read this into the record here, Mr. 
Speaker, and this was from their executive summary of this 
particular report: 
 

Private diagnostic imaging: A person who pays for 
diagnostic imaging at a private facility, instead of waiting 
for the same service through publicly funded channels, can 
receive a prompter diagnosis. If the diagnosis indicates a 
need for treatment, that person can immediately step into 
line for treatment. The person waiting for a diagnosis 
through the publicly funded system cannot step into that 
line for treatment, since he or she has not received a 
diagnosis. By circumventing the long wait for diagnosis, a 
patient who steps outside the public system for diagnosis 
obtains preferential access to treatment when he or she 
rejoins the public system. 
 
The proliferation of private diagnostic services poses a true 
ethical dilemma in the context of access to health care. It 
undermines the principles of fairness and equity in access 
to health care and provides an advantage to those who can 
pay for this service. On the other hand, the practice is not 
illegal. It is accepted by governments and by physicians’ 
regulating bodies. 

 
Mr. Speaker, so that was from Alberta’s own report on Health 
Services Preferential Access Inquiry, Mr. Speaker. So they’re 
saying the very same thing: that if you can buy services, Mr. 
Speaker, that means you can jump the queue and get services 
before others who cannot afford those services. And that is 
contrary to the Canada Health Act. 

I’d be curious, I’d be curious . . . I know when I’d asked in 
committee — and I’ll follow up here again when this bill gets to 
committee next week, Mr. Speaker — but I’d asked in 
committee last year if there was any legal opinion. And the 
ministry hadn’t actually reached out, hadn’t done any work 
around a formal legal opinion on whether or not this 
contravened the Canada Health Act and whether or not it would 
put any of our transfers at risk, Mr. Speaker, some of our 
federal health transfers. This government hadn’t done any of 
that due diligence to find out if that was in the realm of 
possibilities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I understand, I’ve been told and I will look forward to an 
answer from the minister but I believe that there’s been some 
correspondence with the current minister on this particular 
issue, and I’d like to delve into that a little bit, Mr. Speaker. 
Because I would hate to think that our government is making 
decisions that can put us at risk of losing some of the federal 
dollars that we’re entitled to receive, Mr. Speaker. That’s a very 
real concern. 
 
I think something else to keep in mind is, and I just want to 
point us back to that Alberta report, Mr. Speaker. So there are 
already disparities, even without people having the ability to 
purchase some of these diagnostic services. There are already 
disparities in how many different people access health services. 
And this particular report in Alberta, one of the presenters, the 
Consumers’ Association of Alberta, made a proposal or a brief 
to the Health Services Preferential Access Inquiry. And this is 
one of things they pointed out, is that the disparities of access 
already exist. So if you live in a rural area, if you’re an 
individual without a family doctor — particularly an individual 
with complex medical issues, the poor people, elderly people, 
individuals whose first language is not English, those with 
hearing or vision or mobility issues, and First Nations 
communities already have a lack or less access to health 
services than the rest of us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But this particular decision around privatizing or creating the 
opportunity for people to purchase diagnostic services certainly 
is not going to improve that access, Mr. Speaker. I would have 
suggested to the minister, and I know that I did last year, that 
perhaps we could have worked on improving equity of access to 
health services instead of just allowing the opportunity for those 
who have money to purchase services, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know in Romanow’s health commission too, I want to point 
out something that the government could have tackled or could 
have used as its barometer, as its guiding statement around 
tackling some of the wait times. Because I would not deny, Mr. 
Speaker, that there are challenges for many people in obtaining 
necessary medical imaging, Mr. Speaker. I have people who 
come to my office, as the Health critic, who tell me about the 
wait times they’re experiencing. And I can’t even imagine 
having a loved one, a child who has been told that they need a 
diagnostic service and then find out that that wait is quite 
lengthy, Mr. Speaker, someone who maybe doesn’t have a 
critical issue but has a health issue that is really impacting their 
quality of life, impacting their ability to work, impacting their 
ability to live a full and meaningful life, Mr. Speaker, because 
they’re in pain. Definitely we need to improve things here, but 
this should be about improving access for all people. 
 



November 16, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1369 

So I just want to draw your attention to the Romanow 
commission here again, Mr. Speaker, and read into the record 
this. He writes: 
 

Taken together, the recommended actions to manage wait 
[times or] lists should achieve three broad goals — 
fairness, appropriateness, and certainty. Fairness means 
that wait times are set on objective criteria based on 
patients’ needs rather than by individual providers or 
hospitals. Appropriateness means that the time people wait 
is appropriate for their condition. And certainty means that 
people have a clear understanding of how long they can 
expect to wait and why. In future, it should be possible to 
set benchmarks and track progress in meeting those 
benchmarks on an ongoing basis. 
 

I would have liked to have seen the minister then, when the 
MRI bill first came forward last year, Mr. Speaker, focus on 
this instead. And I would like to have seen the now current 
minister really keeping this in mind, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We can talk about increasing access, and I know this is 
something of which the government is very proud. There’s a 
new hospital in Moose Jaw and an MRI in Moose Jaw. And I 
know we’ve advocated on this side of the House for improving 
capacity throughout the public system, Mr. Speaker. And one of 
the challenges that I’ve heard from people in Moose Jaw, Mr. 
Speaker, one of the frustrations is the limited hours that MRI is 
operating. And I would argue that that goes, I believe it’s five 
days a week, Mr. Speaker, sort of business hours. But I know 
health regions are facing enormous pressures, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The government didn’t announce many cuts in the budget in 
June, but they left . . . They have foisted all those very difficult 
decisions onto the health regions, Mr. Speaker, by not properly 
funding them. And then they’ve also done things like taking, 
when there was an opportunity to have a little bit of money for 
example, workers’ compensation in health and education. So 
employers, of which the health region and education sector all 
have many, when employers got rebates from workers’ 
compensation, Mr. Speaker, and I know from comments that 
the then deputy minister made in committee that they actually 
were very proud of the work that they’d done around workers’ 
compensation. And getting some of that money back would 
have been useful, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As well, in committee right after the budget, we learned that 
this government has placed on health regions a $40 million 
efficiency target. So really, dollars that were budgeted weren’t 
really dollars that were budgeted, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So you think about those limited hours of MRIs in Moose Jaw. 
Is that the health region having to manage a very tight budget 
and saying that they can’t do those? I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, 
but we’ll have the opportunity to ask many questions in 
committee on that. 
 
I think one of the challenges too with telling people . . . So 
when someone can pay for an MRI, that does allow them to 
access, as per the Alberta report, it does mean that they can 
access services more quickly than everybody else, Mr. Speaker. 
And again, no denying that the system needs improving, but I 
think this was the wrong fix and this government is moving 

even further in the wrong direction around MRIs, CT scans, and 
other diagnostics, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So there are many people . . . And one of the members from 
Moose Jaw is heckling, Mr. Speaker, and he should talk to 
some of his constituents about their concerns around this issue 
too, as well, Mr. Speaker. I was in Moose Jaw a couple of 
weeks ago and had an opportunity to hear from people in 
Saskatchewan. I had an opportunity to hear from people in 
Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker, who . . . and Walsh Acres, Walsh 
Acres is heckling that there were eight people there. I can let 
him know that there were a heck of a lot more than eight people 
there. But perhaps it’s way more than he has consulted on this 
issue or that this government is doing, particularly around 
education, Mr. Speaker. Four weeks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the member from Moose Jaw who is heckling, he should sit 
down and talk to some of his constituents about their concerns 
around not only the hospital, but access to diagnostics, Mr. 
Speaker, and the fact that they have huge concerns that people 
with large paycheques and big wallets, Mr. Speaker, can get 
ahead of the queue. This should be about fixing the system for 
everybody, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I do have concerns about people. I think about . . . They’re 
awfully, very encouraging today, Mr. Speaker, the members on 
the other side of the House, very encouraging, which I always 
appreciate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The one demographic, Mr. Speaker, that I have a huge concern 
with . . . so sometimes people when faced with tough decisions, 
so if you have a child who has an illness, that you need, you 
feel like you need to get that treatment right away, that your 
child has been ordered to have an MRI and you have to wait. I 
can totally understand the desire to get it as soon as possible, 
Mr. Speaker. But I can tell you that people take on debt, Mr. 
Speaker, for all kinds of reasons. And I have concern that 
people who can’t afford it would feel like this is their only 
access or entry point into speeding up the process, Mr. Speaker, 
is by purchasing, by spending money and taking on more than 
they can, Mr. Speaker. They’re borrowing money from friends 
or family or putting it on a credit card, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We know that health care debt . . . We’ve had many stories in 
this Assembly about ambulance fees, Mr. Speaker, putting 
people thousands of dollars in debt. People who cannot afford 
to pay it, Mr. Speaker. So I worry about two big pieces that 
there are people . . . Instead of improving the system for 
everybody, Mr. Speaker, we are going against the principles of 
medicare and, as pointed out by the SMA, that this should be 
about access to service because you need it, not because you 
can pay for it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I have some concerns around that, but I’m also very 
concerned that people who can least afford it will try to find 
whatever way possible they can to pay for diagnostics, Mr. 
Speaker. And those are very real concerns and those are 
concerns that have been shared with me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[15:15] 
 
One last point, Mr. Speaker, is that private diagnostics have not 
actually proved effective in other jurisdictions. I will take you, 



1370 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2016 

Mr. Speaker, to a report, and I’m sure the folks opposite will 
love this, Mr. Speaker. But it’s from an article, Eroding Public 
Medicare: Lessons and Consequences of For-Profit Healthcare 
Across Canada. This is from October 6th, 2008 report, page 34: 
 

Eroding Public Capacity: Poaching Staff from Local 
Hospitals 
 
The experience of for-profit MRI/CT clinics in Canada 
yields very clear evidence of damage to the public 
non-profit hospital system as a consequence of 
privatization. For-profit clinics in Manitoba and Ontario 
have demonstrably caused reduction in MRI hours in 
nearby public non-profit hospitals as a result of recruiting 
radiologists and technologists out of the public facilities. In 
Ontario’s experiment with eight for-profit MRI/CT clinics 
in the early 2000s, three clinics were publicly reported to 
have lured technologists away from non-profit hospitals, 
forcing the hospitals to reduce their MRI hours. In 
Manitoba, the poaching of radiologists caused a shortage at 
the nearby public hospital, forcing it to reduce its MRI 
hours. 

 
Mr. Speaker, so the reality is there are only so many, there are 
only so many radiologists and so many technologists, Mr. 
Speaker, and so that is a very real concern. And I asked the 
minister in committee last year if he’d asked Ontario why they 
had moved away from this and he hadn’t, Mr. Speaker. So I 
wonder why we wouldn’t have looked at other jurisdictions to 
say, hey, you were doing this; why have you stopped doing 
this? Hey, other jurisdictions, or hey, federal minister, is this 
going to impact our . . . And, Mr. Speaker, they’re mocking me. 
I’m really glad that they’re engaged because this is an important 
discussion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You think you would have sought a legal opinion, Mr. Speaker, 
on an issue. 
 
But I look forward to the opportunity to ask the new minister 
some questions in committee on this particular bill, both around 
results thus far, but I also will reiterate some of the questions 
that I didn’t feel were answered fulsomely enough last time we 
were before the committee having this very discussion on this 
very similar bill, Mr. Speaker. So thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 
look forward to committee. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The question before the 
Assembly is the motion by the Minister of Health that Bill No. 
26, The Patient Choice Medical Imaging Act be now read a 
second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — To which committee 
shall this bill be committed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
designate that Bill No. 26, The Patient Choice Medical Imaging 

Act be committed to the Standing Committee on Human 
Services. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — This bill stands 
committed to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 28 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 28 — The 
Extension of Compassionate Care Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 
pleasure to enter into the debate on The Extension of 
Compassionate Care Act, even though the real title is An Act to 
amend The Saskatchewan Employment Act. And I think it’s 
been a bit of a misnomer because a lot of people are focusing on 
the compassionate care part of it, and I will speak to that 
because it is an important part. It is something that the 
government promised to do in the campaign. But there was a 
couple of pieces that they didn’t talk about in the campaign that 
has raised a lot of flags. 
 
And so I just want to take a minute to review what the minister 
had said when he moved this, back on June 14th. This is a result 
of changes to the federal legislation that allows employees to 
collect up to 26 weeks of benefits after observing a two-week 
cooling-off. And that’s a good thing going from 8 weeks to 28 
weeks. Fair enough. And then he goes on and talks about this 
was a campaign promise and that fulfills the promise. 
 
And then he talks about, one of the first jurisdictions to increase 
its leave. But I do want, because we have a lot of work today to 
do, to flag some of the concerns that people have had. And this 
is something that I hope the folks on the opposite side 
recognize. 
 
There has been a real concern raised about the changes in the 
legislation because it says now that you can take, not entitled 
. . . And this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is section 2-56(3), and it 
says, “In a period of 52 weeks, an employee is not entitled to 
take more than one compassionate care leave pursuant to 
subsection (2).” That is a complete change from the old Act 
where it says “. . . not entitled to take more than two . . .” So we 
went from having to take two, to one. And it’s very clear in the 
legislation. This is the bill. This is what we’re voting on. This is 
not what they went campaigning on. They did not say that they 
were going to reduce the benefits from two to one. That is not 
what they said. They didn’t say anything about that. And it 
cannot be fixed in regulations. 
 
This is something that people have raised, and in fact, Mr. 
Speaker, this has been raised by the folks from the Cancer 
Society who have some real concerns about this and that they 
were not consulted. In fact this is what they say, and I quote 
from Donna Ziegler: 
 

Unfortunately with cancer, the leading cause of death, 
people can be palliative for a while and can improve for a 



November 16, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1371 

while even though they are terminal. With children, they 
can rebound from treatment after a short amount of time 
and parents can return to work for a while. The limiting of 
flexibility in how many times you can access these benefits 
negatively affects the caregiver. 

 
And so why are we even changing it? I would suggest we 
should drop it. We should . . . Oh, this is interesting. They are 
chirping that . . . This will be something we’ll have a lot of 
discussion about in committee because clearly we’re hearing 
two different messages. And the minister said nothing in his 
remarks on June 14th. 
 
We agree that it should go from 8 to 28 because that’s the 
changes in EI [employment insurance]. That’s the federal thing. 
But nothing in the federal regulations or laws . . . In fact today 
my colleague did some good research work on EI and there’s 
examples of people being able to take the leave in two different 
periods. For example, here’s one where your father becomes 
gravely ill. You receive an existing claim for benefits. You take 
10 weeks from January 10th to March 19th and then 16 weeks 
from May 1 to August 20th. So you can break it up. You can 
break it up. So why is this being changed from two to one? 
 
And this is really something that we’ve flagged. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, I did write a letter to the minister on Monday, and I 
identified four areas that we have concerns here because the 
minister . . . And I appreciate that he asked for input. And this 
was one, and it really . . . We are obviously supportive in 
increasing the compassionate care leave for so many reasons — 
obviously it’s a very good idea — but removing the flexibility 
makes no sense and the minister will have to make a very 
powerful argument about why is he changing it from two to one 
in the legislation. 
 
And I know there’s some talk that maybe we can fix it in 
regulations but you can’t because it’s so specific in the bill. 
This will be some kind of Houdini act if they can say you can 
do one thing in the bill or the legislation and something in 
regulations. That make no sense. 
 
The other three things are changes that we’ve been proposing to 
him, and of course one is very important. And I think that we 
should recognize . . . And this minister very often, and the 
whole government, will side . . . They do a great job of 
consultation. We know the minister has an active minister’s 
advisory committee when it comes to labour issues, a very 
active one, and one that is . . . that he takes a lot of pride in 
because he talks to them about all sorts of issues. 
 
This is the bill he didn’t talk to them about. Being released in 
June, he failed to mention all summer, even going to the SFL 
[Saskatchewan Federation of Labour] convention, that the 
employment Act is now open. It was only last week when I 
mentioned to the president of the SFL, did you know that we 
are looking at the employment Act. And he said, I didn’t know 
anything about it. I didn’t know anything about it. And the 
minister who’s got an advisory committee did not even check it 
out. 
 
They have two major concerns. One is with the firefighters, 
have raised a whole issue about arbitration, continue to raise 
that issue that it’s unfair. A system that worked for decades in 

the province of Saskatchewan and is very, used extensively 
throughout Canada, all of a sudden was upended with the 
employment Act. And the government and the ministers refused 
to listen about going back to the way that it was before. 
 
And the other one that I want to raise, and this one is . . . You 
know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have seen this movie over and 
over and over again with this government. And this is where the 
government digs its heels in and says it’s absolutely right and it 
will not admit to anything. And I’m glad that we have many 
members of the cabinet in here because this is going to be a bill 
that they have to pay. Because this is about the designation of 
supervisors in bargaining units, and I know it’s before the 
Labour Relations Board right now. 
 
But we know, we know, and the unions have said, and they’ve 
said very clearly, they’re going to fight this right all the way up 
the legal channels. And we know this government does not have 
a good track record when it comes to fighting in court. In fact 
they have a pretty lousy record. And here you have an 
opportunity, here is an opportunity to meet and talk with the 
labour leaders, use your advisory committee, use your advisory 
committee and say, what’s not working? What’s not working? 
 
And you know, this government here has made exceptions in 
the health regions with the nurses. So they’ve recognized in 
some places it doesn’t make any sense. Well it doesn’t make 
any sense at all what they’ve done in section 6-11. It should 
repealed. Now they know it’s before the Labour Relations 
Board, and they know the unions are right on this, and they’re 
going to take it right up to the top. And this government, again 
as I said with their track record in the Supreme Court, and we 
saw it when they lost the issue about right to strike. And we see 
that enshrined. We saw that when they intervened on behalf of 
the Government of BC and they lost to the teachers in BC. And 
here’s another one that they’re going to have a problem with. 
 
Why don’t they, Mr. Deputy Speaker, simply meet and say, 
let’s work this out? This may be something we can work out. 
Let’s save everybody a lot of time, a lot of money, a lot of pain. 
But do you see, here already they’re preparing the case, but I 
know . . . And it is interesting because I understand that with 
the couple of times they’ve gone to the Supreme Court, it didn’t 
cost them any money. We still have an argument about that 
because I think it did probably cost them a lot of money, a lot of 
money. 
 
And here they’re willing again to dig their heels in on that 
section. Why not meet, why not meet, why not meet with the 
minister’s advisory committee? This is why he set it up. This is 
exactly why he set it up, so we can talk about the issues. And 
here we have a simple one, 6-11. Talk about it; resolve it, 
because it’s going to be a hodgepodge. Some unions get an 
exemption; some don’t. Why is that? Well we don’t know. It all 
depends. Simply get rid of 6-11. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other one that I really do want to spend a few 
minutes on, and it is really, really quite important. I think that 
it’s one that I want to get on the record today, and I think this 
makes a lot of sense. And this was raised with me at the SFL 
convention, and someone pointed out the inequity in section 
2-54, and all of us here can appreciate this section. This section 
is “Nomination, candidate and public office leave.” And I have 



1372 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2016 

talked to the minister and he is somewhat interested in it, so I 
appreciate if people may have some interest in it. 
 
It talks about, it talks about an employee is entitled to a leave, 
“(a) to seek nomination as a candidate for a municipal, 
provincial or federal election or an election for a board of 
education or the Conseil scolaire fransaskois, for a reasonable 
period.” And it goes on and it talks about to be a candidate and 
if you’re elected. 
 
Interestingly a woman of First Nations approached me at the 
SFL convention from the Gordon First Nations and said, you 
know what’s missing in this piece of legislation is protection if 
you’re running for a First Nations office or a Métis office. And 
I think that’s an oversight, and I think today . . . And I 
appreciate the members going to Louis Riel Day and I wish 
them well there, but I think this is something we can take up 
and I hope in the spirit of bipartisanship, we can fix this. This is 
an oversight. And I know the minister is checking it out with 
the Justice folks to see if there’s something in other legislation. 
I don’t think there is. 
 
[15:30] 
 
But to be clear, we should be respectful of and provide that 
same protection. If you’re working off a First Nations reserve, 
you’re working for SaskTel or a Crown or a private employer, 
you should have that protection to run if you’re seeking office 
in your First Nations band elections or of a Métis Nation 
election. That should be the case. Here we have now, you have 
protection if you are running for a municipal, provincial, or 
federal election, or election for a board of education or the 
Conseil scolaire fransaskois. 
 
So myself and the member from Athabasca have been checking 
this out informally. We have not engaged in a period of 
consultation, but we think this is reasonable. And I know and I 
realize time is ticking here, and we want to have this out. So I 
would put this out there, and I would hope that we would get 
support from the other side in looking at this fully and making 
sure that it is equitable. So what we want to do, to be clear, is to 
amend those so there’s parallel for First Nations elections and 
for Métis elections so there’s job protection for those folks. 
 
And so with that, Mr. Speaker, I want to say again my four 
concerns so they’re on the record, and I know we’re wrapping 
things up here quickly. And when I conclude my remarks . . . 
And the minister has seen this letter so he’s quite concerned. 
We’re talking about flexibility in using compassionate care. We 
want to see that limitation to one period taken out and have it 
just left as it was. There is no good reason for that amendment. 
 
We want to see section 2-54 amended so it’s including 
indigenous elections. We think that’s important that we have 
. . . And we want to make sure it’s done right, that there’s 
appropriate consultations. 
 
I would urge, I would urge, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 
minister go back and speak to his advisory committee about 
section 6-11 and save us all a lot of time and save me from 
having to say I told you so; I told you so. Because I don’t want 
to be here two years from now when they have come back from 
the Supreme Court with their tails between their legs having 

lost yet again, having lost yet again when they could have 
resolved it. They could resolve it next Monday. They could 
resolve it by Monday, adjourn their . . . You know, get their 
advisory committee together. Resolve that. 
 
And then also pay attention to firefighters. They do such good 
work in our province. They’re going to be coming and I know 
they would appreciate some serious consideration to their 
concerns. And I think this is very important. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a critically important bill. 
People across the province are watching the changes that are 
happening and also opportunities to fix some of the issues in the 
employment Act that we know. I mean this isn’t all of them, but 
we moved a few things forward and that would be . . . If we 
move forward together, I think that it would be excellent. So 
with that, Mr. Speaker, I conclude my remarks. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The question before the 
Assembly is the motion by the Minister of Labour that Bill No. 
28, The Extension of Compassionate Care Act, 2016 be now 
read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — To which committee 
shall this bill be committed? I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
designate that Bill No. 28 be committed to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The bill stands 
committed to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 

 
Bill No. 1 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 1 — The 
Crown Corporations Public Ownership Amendment Act, 2016 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to rise 
today and enter into debate on Bill No. 1, An Act to amend The 
Crown Corporations Public Ownership Act. Mr. Speaker, this is 
a bill that has certainly garnered a lot of attention and some 
time in committee, and it’s a very, very tiny piece of legislation, 
a very small bill, in fact just a few lines. But there are a number 
of very significant impacts here. 
 
What is proposed is amending, removing subclause 2(b)(ii) of 
The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Act and repealing 
it, essentially removing it from that legislation, Mr. Speaker. A 
small piece of legislation, but very big impacts. And I think 



November 16, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1373 

when we’re talking about what the impacts might be, I’ll go 
back to the minister’s comments from June the 14th of this 
year. The then minister noted that “By doing this, we will 
simplify and expedite the process for expanding the private 
retail system of alcohol in this province,” Mr. Speaker. 
 
So certainly we are finding those words quite frequently here: 
clarifying, expediting. And when we’re talking about that, I 
think it’s important that we know exactly what it is that we’re 
expediting. You know, removing processes that are important 
for oversight and governance may be expedient, Mr. Speaker, 
but they don’t necessarily allow for the type of scrutiny that 
people in this province want and frankly deserve. 
 
So I’ll read a little bit of the preamble to The Crown 
Corporations Public Ownership Act. This was a bill that was 
passed back in 2004. And for those that were here or perhaps 
following at home, this was a bill that was passed unanimously 
by members of this Assembly at that time, Mr. Speaker, by both 
sides of the House. And I’ll go into a little more history first, 
but I want to just read what exactly it is that this bill, this Act 
does. 
 
In the preamble it’s noted that: 
 

WHEREAS Saskatchewan Crown corporations are an 
investment in the future of Saskatchewan to provide 
necessary public services, [and] to assure the quality of life 
of residents and to promote economic development; 
 
AND WHEREAS the public investment in Saskatchewan 
Crown corporations reflects an historic decision to 
maintain control of necessary public services within 
Saskatchewan to assure that those services are operated in 
the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan; 
 
AND . . . in order to respect the reasons for establishing 
and maintaining Crown corporations, and the public 
interest and rights over their disposition, an Act of the 
Legislature is required to assure that a decision to privatize 
a Crown corporation reflects the will and the rights of the 
people of Saskatchewan; 
 
AND WHEREAS the public ought to be fully [fully] 
informed as to the terms, costs and benefits of any 
privatization of a Crown corporation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s some of the preamble. Again, this was an 
Act that was agreed to unanimously by both sides of this House, 
and it existed in a larger context. Those who were here, again, 
or those who follow the history, the political history of this 
province, will know that prior to 2004, there was a lot of 
concern about privatization. And perhaps members opposite 
knew in voting for this legislation that our Crown corporations 
are beloved and valued by people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Further, clause 3 in this Act notes that no Crown corporation 
shall be privatized unless that privatization is authorized by an 
Act enacted after this Act is coming into force. And also it notes 
that: 
 

. . . every Act authorizing the privatization of a Crown 
corporation must contain a provision stating that the Act 

must not come into force until a date that is at least 90 days 
after the date fixed for the return to the writ for the next 
general election . . . [in] . . . The Election Act . . . 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, it allows protection so that our Crown 
corporations, those listed under the protection of the Act, which 
currently includes SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority], cannot be arbitrarily privatized without a process, 
Mr. Speaker. And certainly the members opposite know that 
and know that the people of this province value their Crown 
corporations. 
 
One further piece that I’d like to note: a bill to amend, repeal, or 
override or suspend the operation or any of this Act triggers a 
policy field committee. And certainly we had opportunity, 
because of the proposed privatization of 40 liquor stores in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, we had the opportunity to sit as a 
committee and hear submissions from those who are concerned 
about the privatization of liquor stores. 
 
So that was a process. Certainly I will give members opposite 
that they did campaign on the privatization of the 40 liquor 
stores, Mr. Speaker, but they didn’t talk so much about fully 
pulling SLGA out of the protection of this Act, which is a big, 
important piece that they failed to talk about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So because of the protection of this Act, the committee was 
triggered and we had the opportunity to hear from a number of 
people across the province about their concerns, Mr. Speaker. 
And it was a very varied, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it was a very 
varied group. We heard from business owners. We heard from 
liquor retailers. We heard from the Gravelbourg Chamber of 
Commerce. We heard from public sector employees, all of their 
thoughts and ideas and concerns about the privatization of 
liquor stores in the province, Mr. Speaker. And that’s an 
important part of our democracy, the ability to listen to people, 
to run . . . when legislation is proposed, to be able to get that 
type of input, to have a more fulsome discussion. 
 
And that’s what protection under this Act allowed. If this bill is 
passed, that will no longer be afforded to SLGA, and I think, 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of concern about that. Again as I’ve 
noted, there was a mandate to privatize the liquor stores. I 
would suggest that there was not a mandate nor really a 
well-stated reason to fully pull the SLGA out of the protection 
of the Act entirely. So were the government to want to privatize 
a number of liquor stores in the future, there would be no 
requirement that they form committee, that they give notice, 
Mr. Speaker. It would not have the scrutiny that we did see in 
that committee. 
 
I think it’s important when we’re talking about pulling out that 
protection that we look at some of the comments that were 
made and some of the submissions that were made because, you 
know, even with all 61 elected members, Mr. Speaker, there are 
pieces that maybe we would miss. And that’s why it’s important 
that the public has the opportunity to come and speak to us and 
provide their input. 
 
One of the submissions we had was from Laurie Leigh who was 
the rocking horse cook out . . . who owns The Rockin’ Horse 
Cookhouse & Bar in Maple Creek, Mr. Speaker, a small town 
of course in the southwest of the province. And she had some 



1374 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2016 

significant concerns that I’m not sure anyone on the committee 
had — I’ll speak for myself, I guess — had thought of prior to 
going into that committee. And that’s really the value of having 
this level of public scrutiny. And I’ll quote from her 
presentation: 
 

As a restaurant bar owner, I am now being asked to 
negotiate a discount with my competition. We are all 
competing for the same food and drink sales . . . [as] the 
off-sale vendors also own restaurants and bars. They will 
now have a 25 per cent discount to work with while I have 
lost my 10 per cent [discount]. 
 

Mr. Speaker, so that was one of those impacts that we certainly 
didn’t hear about in the campaign, we didn’t hear about in the 
minister’s preamble to the introduction of this bill, but is a very 
real impact. And again that type of input will be lost with 
pulling SLGA completely out of the protection of the Act. 
 
Another thing that she noted is that now she’ll have to go to her 
competitors and ask them for a discount as well. And she has 
over 6,500 a year in purchases, and they have . . . She noted that 
they have a 25 per cent discount. I asked, and she asked, in any 
way how does this level the playing field, Mr. Speaker? So 
that’s the type of comment and scrutiny that’s allowed by 
protection under this Act. 
 
I’m going to go to some more comments by SGEU 
[Saskatchewan Government and General Employees’ Union], 
and they noted the number of claims that were made by the 
minister. That this will create a level playing field was one of 
the claims made by the minister. And certainly we’ve heard 
from a business owner that there is some question to that. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Another claim was that they had campaigned on the 
privatization of liquor stores, Mr. Speaker. As I’ve stated, I 
think twice now, certainly I concur with that, but not with 
pulling SLGA completely out of the protection of the Act, Mr. 
Speaker. I don’t think that that was widely known during the 
campaign. 
 
That this will only impact 190 employees, Mr. Speaker. Well 
certainly it has very dire impact for those 190 employees. But 
again this really does pave the way for easy privatization of the 
remaining stores once SLGA is pulled out of the protection of 
this Act. So I think there is reason for concern there. 
 
Talking about the competition, competitive pricing, SLGA 
prices have been compared and shown to be lower than prices 
offered in private liquor stores since their door opened in 2014 
and 2015. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this committee, this 
protection under the Crown protection Act allowed that type of 
scrutiny. It allowed members of the public to respond directly to 
claims being made by the government about the impact of this 
legislation. And I think it’s a very, very important body of 
oversight, Mr. Speaker, that will be lost. We will lose those 
voices. And again what we will see with this is increased ease 
of privatization of SLGA under, if this bill is passed, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now the context again of the Crown protection Act and the 

unanimous approval on both sides, this government knows, as 
they have known for some time, that people in this province 
value their Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. I think they 
learned that lesson prior to 2007 certainly, and they even 
campaigned in 2007 on . . . And I’m reading from their 
campaign material, Mr. Speaker, “The Saskatchewan Party will 
ensure Crown corporations continue to provide Saskatchewan 
people with the highest quality at the lowest cost.” 
 
They also noted that they did vote in favour of this legislation. 
It featured prominently in their campaign literature, Mr. 
Speaker. So I think that this government knows that people in 
this province value their Crown corporations and those that are 
listed in the Crown protection Act. They’ve been less than 
forthcoming about their already stealthy privatization of a 
number of portions of public services in this province, and 
we’re continuing to see this government go down that road, 
certainly with Bill 40. I look forward to having further 
comments and highlighting my concerns and add to my 
comments that I made at the end of the committee proceedings, 
Mr. Speaker. But with that I will conclude my comments. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The question before the 
Assembly is the motion by the Minister of Crown Investments 
that Bill No. 1, The Crown Corporations Public Ownership 
Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — To which committee 
shall this bill be committed? I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I designate that Bill No. 1 on the docket, and number 
one in my heart, will be designated to the Crown and Central 
Agencies. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — This bill stands 
committed to the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 32 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 32 — The 
Automobile Accident Insurance (Benefits) Amendment Act, 
2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Now it’s sort of 
in reverse of the previous bill. What I am speaking to today is a 
very long piece of legislation, in fact quite a detailed bill, Mr. 
Speaker, 35 pages, and proposes more than 30 changes to the 
automobile insurance Act. I’m just going to summarize some of 
the changes. And certainly this type of legislation, I think, lends 



November 16, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1375 

itself well to further discussion in committee with officials. 
There’s a fair amount of detail and there is . . . I think that level 
of detail and scrutiny is better suited frankly to being asked at 
committee, but I’ll just summarize what exactly it is that is 
found or proposed with this legislation. 
 
The bill proposes to increase the amount of weekly benefits for 
employed injured persons, equivalent to 40 hours at minimum 
wage for fully employed or for homemakers, Mr. Speaker, and 
20 hours for partially disabled persons or those confined to a 
hospital bed and wheelchair. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that it’s important, certainly when you’re 
looking at prescribed benefits such as are prescribed in this Act, 
that you review them frequently to make sure that you are up to 
date in terms of the minimum wage, which is anticipated with 
these changes and other inflationary measures, Mr. Speaker. So 
that part is pretty straightforward. 
 
There are some other provisions, however, that again will 
require that higher level of scrutiny that will be provided in 
committee. One of them is, prohibits SGI [Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance] from paying benefits to a person who is 
in prison, Mr. Speaker. And certainly some of my colleagues 
have had some questions about that, and I think that lends itself 
very well to further scrutiny and input from some of those who 
have an interest and stated some of their opinions on this. 
 
It also prohibits SGI from paying benefits to a driver who is 
more than 50 per cent responsible for a collision, who is 
convicted or charged of causing death or bodily harm by street 
racing, being negligent, or fleeing a police officer, Mr. Speaker, 
or someone who has been found guilty in the last five years of 
causing death or bodily harm by street racing, being negligent, 
or fleeing from a peace officer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again as I note, this is a very lengthy piece of 
legislation, more than 30 changes. And today while I’ll 
conclude my comments today, I will have a number of 
additional comments and stakeholders to consult prior to 
committee. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The question before the 
Assembly is the motion by the minister of Crown Investments 
that Bill No. 32, The Automobile Accident Insurance 
Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — To which committee 
shall this bill be committed? I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
move that Bill No. 32 be committed to the Standing Committee 
on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — This bill stands 

committed to the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 33 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 33 — The Child 
and Family Services Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Prince Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure for me to stand up today and discuss Bill No. 33, The 
Child and Family Services Amendment Act. This was brought 
forward by the former minister of Social Services in the spring 
sitting. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s a lot of information 
within this Act and I have a lot of questions I plan on bringing 
forward to the committee, but due to time restrictions today, 
I’m just going to go over a few things with regards to this Act. 
 
First of all, one thing that the previous minister indicated when 
she was bringing forward the amendment of this legislation, she 
indicated that the renewal of our province’s child welfare 
legislation is a key priority for the Ministry of Social Services 
and its child welfare transformation strategy. So to me, this is 
really important if this is part of any of the transformational 
change that we’ve been hearing with regards to some of the 
plans that the government has, and what exactly with regards to 
the changes to this legislation is, maybe possibly those plans. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, some of the changes that are going to be 
implemented within this legislation is the fact that there’s some 
changes to . . . And I don’t like the language and I’m glad 
they’re changing it within this Act, but it indicates there’s 
changes to the Indian child welfare agreements. And so 
obviously there’s going to be language change with regards to 
some of that, and rightfully so in this day and age. That’s not 
kind of the way, the language that we use when we’re talking in 
this Assembly. So there’ll be a new section. So this will be 
changes for section 61, and there’ll be a new section and it’ll be 
62.1. 
 
There’s some concerns that I have with regards to what’s being 
implemented with the changes to the First Nations . . . with the 
agreements with First Nations Child and Family Services 
agencies. I have some questions with regards to the language 
that’s being presented within this new legislation. 
 
And definitely some of the suggestions I’m going be having is 
what consultation has been made with the stakeholders. I’ve 
been spending some time making some contacts and speaking 
to people who would be directly affected by some of these 
changes. And I do certainly hope that the ministry also has been 
making those contacts. And I plan that we’ll have some good 
discussion with regards to that within committee because, you 
know, Mr. Speaker, the fact is is that the Ministry of Social 
Services doesn’t have a shining example with regards to child 
welfare. 
 
And I don’t understand why they feel that they should have 
control and be in charge of First Nations family services. And 



1376 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2016 

actually when you review the truth and reconciliation calls of 
action, it’s more about working with First Nations family 
services so that they become independent. And I want to see 
that some of the wording that’s in this legislation works towards 
the cause of actions with the Truth and Reconciliation. And I 
also hope that, with the changes with this legislation, that some 
of the information was reflective to the Jordan’s principle also. 
As a government, we need to stop determining who is paying 
for what. Make sure there’s services available for kids in our 
community. Then we worry about which government is 
responsible for that. And so again I know we’ll have a lot of 
discussion with regards to that in committee, and I look forward 
to having that discussion with the minister and her colleagues. 
 
So also some of the changes that are happening with regards to 
this piece of legislation is disclosure of information. And again 
I’m definitely a big believer that confidentiality is very 
important, and services that we provide as a government, we 
have to really take that into account when we’re working with 
clients, especially when we’re working with some of the most 
vulnerable people in our province. And we want to make sure 
that . . . A lot of people, they have some tricky situations, and 
they have some situations in their life that they want to ensure 
that when they’re disclosing this information to workers that 
this information is kept confidential. 
 
So I do realize, and I know it’s really important to work with 
other agencies in our community. But we also have to make 
sure that we’re not violating any privacy rights here when we’re 
making this legislation because that’s first and foremost. People 
have the right to having their information kept confidential. 
And I hope there was some discussion with the Privacy 
Commissioner, you know, with regards to what some of the 
changes in here would look like, and does that fall accurately 
with other legislation that we might have with regards to 
people’s information. And especially, like I think it’s really 
important to protect a child’s autonomy and that child’s 
confidentiality. 
 
So we’re dealing with really sensitive situations, and with 
children that, they don’t have a choice of whether they’re 
involved with the system or not. And I think it’s our 
responsibility to make sure that all their rights are being 
respected. 
 
And so with that, Mr. Speaker, like I said, I’ve got a real list of 
questions that I plan on bringing forward to committee. And I 
know we’ll have a great discussion and I’m looking forward to 
that. But at this point in time, due to time constrictions, I’m 
going to leave the rest of my discussion for committee. Thank 
you. 
 
[16:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the member that Bill No. 33, The Child and Family Services 
Act, 2016 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 
that Bill No. 33 be committed to the Standing Committee on 
Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 35 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 35 — The Small 
Claims Act, 2016/Loi de 2016 sur les petites créances be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise and speak to Bill No. 35, which is a bill that essentially 
completely overhauls the old small claims Act and replaces it 
with a new small claims Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ve had the opportunity to read the minister’s remarks when he 
had tabled this legislation and reviewed it. There’s quite a few 
changes to The Small Claims Act that I’m not going to go into 
particular detail at this moment, Mr. Speaker, as I know I will 
have time during committee to speak to it with the minister and 
ask further questions. 
 
I understand there’s been some consultation that’s gone on with 
respect to this bill. I actually have some personal knowledge of 
that consultation because I was still practising at the time that 
the consultation was taking place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
However there was one change or a couple of changes to this 
bill that I know were not a part of the consultation and were not 
actually mentioned in the minister’s remarks when he was 
discussing this bill. And it’s some pretty significant changes 
with respect to essentially the authority that has been used 
traditionally in small claims court to allow court clerks and 
those within the court services to assist self-represented 
individuals in terms of helping draft their documents. So 
specifically the provisions that I’m talking about, it removes . . . 
So the new small claims Act removes the provision that allows 
a clerk to help an individual draft a statement of claim and also 
removes the ability for a clerk to assist a third party. 
 
I was quite alarmed to see that, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pretty huge 
step back in terms of access to justice, Mr. Speaker. And I was 
extra alarmed to see that after reading the minister’s remarks 
where he mentioned access to justice several times when he was 
talking about this bill. And I’m just going to quote a few things 
that the minister had said at the time. He said: 
 

The Ministry of Justice developed the justice innovation 
agenda in 2014 with a vision to create understandable, 
timely, and affordable justice for Saskatchewan citizens. 
As part of that agenda, the ministry is reviewing the way 



November 16, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1377 

justice services are delivered and what improvements can 
be made to ensure Saskatchewan citizens have access to 
these important services. 

 
And then, Mr. Speaker, he goes on to talk about all the changes 
that are included in this new Act but fails to mention that he’s 
actually removed provisions that helped improve access to 
justice in the province. And then concluded his remarks by 
saying, and I quote, Mr. Deputy Speaker, “ . . . access to justice 
remains an important issue in the legal community as well as 
the public at large.” This bill will make important changes that 
will “enhance access to justice for Saskatchewan residents . . . 
[by providing] timely, cost-effective, and citizen-centred 
dispute resolution through the small claims process,” Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So he talked about access to justice twice at length when tabling 
this legislation but failed to mention that there’s some pretty 
significant provisions in here or that were in the old Act that are 
not being included in the new Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the small claims court is a very important court in our 
system. It’s one of the more accessible courts that we have. It’s 
typically one where you’ll more frequently see unrepresented 
litigants. You do see more and more lawyers present, but there 
are quite a few people who need it and who access it to try and 
resolve issues that they have, be it contract disputes or things 
like that. It’s really important that individuals who are using 
that service have the ability to at least have some resources to 
be able to understand the process and create documents that 
make sense. 
 
I’m not too sure what the logic is behind this change, Mr. 
Speaker. What it’s going to do is it’s going to slow down the 
process because these individuals aren’t going to be able to 
have the resource available to help them make sure that their 
statement of claims makes sense and that it actually follows the 
requirements within the small claims court. And not only is this 
important, clear documents important for individuals who are 
writing the statement of claim, it’s better for defendants, and 
it’s better for the judiciary, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If we want to improve access to justice in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, we need everyone to come to the table. We need the 
Ministry of Justice. We need court services. We need the 
judiciary. We need non-profits who are already doing this 
front-line work, Mr. Speaker. This is a serious step back. We 
should be expanding these services not retracting from them, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s going to create some significant delays. And 
I’m not sure if the minister’s expecting that non-profits or the 
legal community’s going to pick up the slack, but I think he’ll 
be disappointed to see that it’s going to create some serious, 
serious issues. 
 
The organization that I used to work for provides free legal 
services for individuals who qualify financially in terms of 
getting legal advice on areas like this. But their ability to do that 
work is limited, and it’s subject to income screening which 
creates quite a gap in terms of people who are using this service 
who aren’t going to be able to get anything in the future. 
 
So if the minister and his staff frankly want to continue going 
around the province talking about how access to justice is 

important to this government, I’d strongly encourage the 
minister to really rethink this provision and the direction that 
we’re going in terms of access to legal information and access 
to legal services in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’m looking forward to having an opportunity to have a 
deeper discussion about these issues as well as some questions 
that I have with respect to some of the changes, Mr. Speaker. 
But I think for now that concludes my remarks. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the member that Bill No. 35, The Small Claims Act, 2016 be 
now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill 35, The Small Claims Act, 2016 be committed to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 36 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 36 — The Small 
Claims Consequential Amendments Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now this bill is an 
accompanying bill to the bill I just spoke about, No. 35. It 
makes some essentially consequential amendments to some 
other legislation in reference to the changes that were made in 
Bill 35, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think if anyone’s interested in my thoughts on Bill 36, I 
encourage them to look at my remarks with respect to Bill 35 
and the concerns that I have with respect to the severe 
impediments to access to justice that are contained therein, and 
that members opposite, when they’re thinking about whether or 
not they should be voting in favour of this bill, if we’re not able 
to be successful in making appropriate amendments at 
committee, to remember this moment when they have 
constituents coming to their office expressing concern about the 
justice system and its inaccessibility and how it’s difficult and 
they can’t get the help that they require from the small claims 
office, for example — that they remember that they voted in 
favour of this. 
 
And I hope we’re able to . . . I hope that doesn’t happen, Mr. 
Speaker. I hope we’re able to make some changes at committee. 



1378 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2016 

But I suppose we’ll wait and see. So with that, I will conclude 
my remarks on Bill 36. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the member that Bill No. 36, The Small Claims 
Consequential Amendments Act, 2016 be now read a second 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — What committee shall this bill be committed? 
I recognize the Government House Leader? 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 36 be 
committed to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 
Bill No. 12 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 12 — The Public 
Health (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to enter 
the debate on Bill No. 12, The Public Health Amendment Act, 
2016. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to walk you through some of the 
things that this bill will do. I won’t make my remarks too long 
here. I know we have a few other items that we have to attend 
to before 5 o’clock. And I will look forward to the opportunity 
to ask some questions in committee, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So with respect to this bill, Mr. Speaker, there’s some basic 
things, some housekeeping changes which isn’t the focal point 
of the bill, but moving the term “department” to “ministry,” Mr. 
Speaker, those kinds of items. The term “nurse practitioner” 
where this bill is updating the definition of “clinic nurse” to be 
in line with the bylaws of the SRNA [Saskatchewan Registered 
Nurses’ Association], Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, and they’re keeping it quite . . . I’d just like to tell you from 
the explanatory notes that accompany this bill: 
 

[A] new definition for nurse practitioner is needed as this 
type of nurse is added to sections relating to physicians and 
clinic nurses. 
 
[But] there . . . [was a] need to modify the definition for 
“clinic nurse” to include nurses that have been granted 
appropriate rights and privileges to carry out testing, 
screening, counseling, and treatment for category II 
communicable diseases. Understanding that there is 
currently work being undertaken to create clinical 

protocols and medical directives to address this . . . [In this 
bill, the attempt was] to keep the wording rather general 
[Mr. Speaker] . . . to be inclusive of RNs with additional 
authorized practice and may include specialty practices. 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, they’ve chosen to keep that quite general for 
now. 
 
It also adds new reporting duties for nurse practitioners when 
treating patients with category II communicable diseases. And it 
allows the government to create a new public health registry 
system similar to the one in place for restaurants. And I thinks 
that’s where I’ll focus most of my comments on today, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I’ll just recite some of the explanatory notes on this 
particular piece, Mr. Speaker. So this amendment around the 
new public health registry system: 
 

[This] amendment broadens the ability for public access to 
health inspection reports and enforcement information. 
Currently this is limited to public eating establishments. 
The Ministry in the future will look to developing or 
amending regulations to specify the types of inspection 
reports . . . (Examples of inspections reports that could be 
made available to the public include those that are related 
to public swimming pools and public water supplies 
regulated by Health). 

 
So I’d like to talk a little bit about . . . So in June 2009 . . . So 
we talk about the restaurant registry or the public reporting 
system that’s in place right now. So since 2009 there’s been 
online information from public health inspection reports about 
restaurant-type facilities, Mr. Speaker. So you can go on that 
registry right now and check out . . . There’s more than 5,000 
facilities actually currently listed, Mr. Speaker. It’s quite 
interesting to go and take a look at your favourite restaurant and 
see how they’re stacking up, if there’s been any complaints or if 
there’s anything that’s arisen from an annual or a regular 
inspection, Mr. Speaker. So that’s what currently happens 
around eating establishments. 
 
So this bill is proposing moving that a little bit broader to 
actually, I think, match the scope of what our regional public 
health inspectors do right now. So the regional public health 
inspectors, they conduct inspections and monitor activity to 
safeguard the environment and the health of the public. So our 
regional public health inspectors who work out of every health 
region, Mr. Speaker, they do it through education, through 
consultation, through inspection, through monitoring, and 
through enforcement of health legislation, regulation, and 
standards. So through such things as The Public Health Act, Mr. 
Speaker. So that’s what our regional public health inspectors 
do. 
 
So inspections of restaurants and other type of food facilities, 
that’s a piece of the work that they do. So inspectors go out to 
the restaurants and to other food establishments and do regular, 
or they should be doing regular inspections but are also 
complaint driven as well, Mr. Speaker, I believe. But they also 
do communicable disease investigations, Mr. Speaker, and 
inspect monitoring of public recreational facilities like water 
supply, public swimming pools, and sewage disposable 



November 16, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1379 

systems, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So this Act moving to a public registry just beyond an online 
public registry, beyond restaurants, is a very good idea, Mr. 
Speaker. So public health officers inspect restaurant-type 
facilities to determine compliance with the food safety 
regulations and standards, so that’s what they do right now as 
well as these other pieces of work. 
 
[16:15] 
 
But this is around the public reporting to find out if there’s been 
issues at your favourite swimming pool, Mr. Speaker, for 
example. One thing that has come up though, that I’ve heard 
from people who work in this area, Mr. Speaker, is the shortage 
of staff. They are understaffed, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to 
. . . And this will be some questions that we ask in committee, 
Mr. Speaker, around the number of inspectors and what has 
happened with their workload. 
 
So this hopefully shouldn’t increase their workload. It’s simply 
making the work that they’re doing more visible, Mr. Speaker. 
But I do know, from conversations with health inspectors, that 
they feel under an enormous amount of pressure and feel like 
they are not able to do the work that they should and could be 
doing, Mr. Speaker, on inspection and follow-up, those kinds of 
things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I look forward to the opportunity in committee to try to get a 
better picture of the resources that health regions have in this 
regard to be able to conduct these inspections, not only of food 
facilities and restaurants, but their communicable disease 
investigations and inspection of those other public facilities, 
Mr. Speaker. So that’ll be an opportunity to do that. 
 
So again as I’ve said, Bill No. 12, The Public Health 
Amendment Act, updates the definition of clinic nurse to be in 
line with the bylaws of the SRNA. And it’s a very general term 
because . . . So hopefully the bill won’t be back before us and 
so hopefully this . . . By keeping the term general, the ongoing 
discussions right now that I’d mentioned, hopefully that will, 
this general term will cover off what is decided here around that 
definition that folks come up with, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And again it adds new reporting duties for nurse practitioners 
who we know are increasing in numbers, Mr. Speaker, and are 
being utilized more fully in many parts of our province, Mr. 
Speaker. I actually had an opportunity a few weeks ago to 
attend a dementia summit and was in part of a group with a 
nurse practitioner in rural Saskatchewan who really is on the 
front lines of ensuring . . . Some of her work around supporting 
her patients around dementia was interesting to hear, Mr. 
Speaker, and she had some very, very valuable information to 
add to the discussion, Mr. Speaker. The nurse practitioners are 
doing wonderful work around our province. 
 
And again this bill also allows the government to create new 
public health registry systems similar to the one in place for 
restaurants, which I’ve spoken about a little bit. And that’s a 
positive change, but there’s some concern. I’ve heard concern 
from people who work in this area that there is a shortage of 
public health inspectors, especially when you compare it 
jurisdictionally as well. And not just comparing it 

jurisdictionally. You can look at numbers, Mr. Speaker, but you 
can look at workload and what they’re able to do in that time, 
and there are some concerns that have been expressed. And 
again I had mentioned the housekeeping change, changing the 
word “department” to “ministry.” 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, on Bill No. 12, The Public Health 
Amendment Act, 2016, I will look forward to the opportunity to 
discuss this a little bit further in committee. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the member that Bill No. 12, The Public Health 
Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill 12 be designated to the Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 

 
Bill No. 15 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 15 — The 
Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure and 
honour to rise today and speak with respect to Bill 15, The 
Provincial Court Amendment Act. This bill makes a few 
changes. More specifically, it takes the power to create a list of 
temporary judges from the cabinet and gives it to the Minister 
of Justice. Another change that it will make is it allows the 
Judicial Council to dismiss frivolous or vexatious complaints 
against judges, which is a similar . . . What I would say is that 
these changes in this bill are sort of the accompanying 
legislation to Bill No. 4, The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another one of the changes, it allows the Judicial Council to 
have one member respond to a complaint rather than the whole 
council. And then a final change, which is one that I spoke 
about at length when I had the opportunity to talk about Bill 4, 
Mr. Speaker, was some changes for the rules, changing some 
rules around court-appointed lawyers. It’s more in detail in The 
Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, but it’s also included in The 
Provincial Court Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker, because 
court-appointed counsel, of course, are counsel that are 
appointed both at the Provincial Court as well as the Queen’s 
Bench level, Mr. Speaker. 



1380 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2016 

So I would encourage anyone who is wanting to know more 
about my thoughts on Bill 15 to also look at my thoughts on 
Bill 4, because the two are very related pieces of legislation, 
Mr. Speaker. But as I said when I was speaking about Bill 4, 
there’s some very serious concerns about this change to the 
court-appointed counsel process, Mr. Speaker. It essentially 
flies in the face of over 30 years of tradition in this province in 
terms of the court-appointed counsel process, where typically, 
the way it works now, individuals who are applying for a 
court-appointed counsel have the opportunity to choose who 
their counsel are going to be. These provisions essentially take 
that right away from them, Mr. Speaker, which is very 
alarming. We’re not too sure how that’s going to work out. 
 
I’m also concerned about what this is going to do in terms of 
the court-appointed counsel list, Mr. Speaker. I’m not too sure. 
I hope it doesn’t detract people from, or lawyers from putting 
their names on the list. I know that, depending on the area of the 
province, Mr. Speaker, that that list can be quite sparse, and I 
hope that this doesn’t result in a situation that creates a list 
that’s even more sparse than exists now, Mr. Speaker. But I do 
worry that that could be one of the hopefully unintended 
consequences, but one of the unintended consequences of this 
legislative change, Mr. Speaker. So there are a few kind of 
alarming things. 
 
Another one of the alarming concerns that I have with respect to 
the changes to the court-appointed counsel process is the 
onerous burden on individuals who are unrepresented in terms 
of making the application for court-appointed counsel, Mr. 
Speaker. The legislation requires that the individual will have to 
serve several different bodies to be able to meet their service 
requirements before they’re able to get a court-appointed 
counsel, Mr. Speaker. And that’s going to be quite difficult, 
frankly, for the unrepresented individual to go through that 
process. I know it’s a difficult process even when you have one 
individual you have to serve, to kind of understand as a 
layperson who’s essentially . . . usually if they’re looking for 
court-appointed counsel, are dealing with quite a number of 
crises in their lives, Mr. Speaker, to, in addition to dealing with 
all the crises in their lives, have to figure out how the rules of 
court work, Mr. Speaker. There are some pretty stringent 
requirements in terms of what service looks like, who is 
allowed to serve documents, what sort of form gets filled out, 
ensuring that that form gets filled out appropriately, and then 
also gets filed in the right amount of time. 
 
And the different bodies that are required under the legislation 
to be served, Mr. Speaker, can be kind of confusing to people 
who don’t know the court process, aren’t used to normally 
serving people. For example if you’re told you have to serve the 
Attorney General of Canada and the Attorney General of 
Saskatchewan, you don’t know, am I supposed to go to that 
person’s house? Am I supposed to go to that person’s office? I 
don’t know where that person’s office is. It’s serious concerns 
that we often got when I was working to assist self-represented 
individuals, Mr. Speaker, and it’s very, very onerous and it’s 
very, very time-consuming on people who are going through 
already significant, significant crises in their lives, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s very much a farce to think that individuals are going to be 
able to fulfill this in a timely way, and all that’s going to result 
in, Mr. Speaker, are delays in the court process. Because 

individuals do have a right to counsel. And what’s going to 
happen is that, and I can tell you right now what’s going to 
happen is there’s going to be difficulties with filling out these 
forms. They’re going to be delayed because they’re going to 
have to fill them out again or serve them again because there 
were issues with that. It’s going to slow down the court process, 
Mr. Speaker, which is the opposite of what you’re trying to do 
when you’re trying to improve access to justice, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it’s also expensive. When we’re talking about tight times 
and all of these cuts we keep seeing in the Ministry of Justice, 
here’s one thing that we could in the long term make sure we 
that we don’t have to deal with. We have issues with respect to 
. . . issues in the justice system already in Saskatchewan. I don’t 
know why we would, why the government would be trying to 
create more hurdles, Mr. Speaker, or create more issues in the 
justice system, Mr. Speaker, when they don’t really have to. 
 
One solution, one very easy solution, Mr. Speaker, with respect 
to this, is if we’re going to have this process run through an 
administrator, how about we have the individual who’s 
applying for court-appointed counsel, instead of them being 
obligated to serve all these individuals, how about that 
individual simply fill out the form, give it to the administrator 
who’s then obligated to serve it on the appropriate parties. The 
administrator will have resources, I’m assuming, that would 
allow them to do that kind of work, and they’d be used to the 
process because they’ll be doing it multiple amounts of time, 
Mr. Speaker. This would exponentially speed up the process, 
make it easier on unrepresented litigants, which is what we’re 
supposed to be doing when we’re talking about access to 
justice, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I don’t even understand why I have to explain this to anybody 
who is connected to the justice system, Mr. Speaker, because 
this is sort of . . . This is quite obvious, and we’ve been talking 
about access to justice and sitting through committee after 
committee after committee for at least five years. It’s sort of 
been the topic du jour lately, Mr. Speaker, but we still seem to 
have these minor impediments that keep coming up. 
 
Justice Cromwell, or former Justice Cromwell of the Supreme 
Court of Canada has spoken often on improving access to civil 
and family justice, Mr. Speaker. And a lot of his suggestions 
come and talk about easing the process for unrepresented 
litigants, Mr. Speaker. And one of the ways we can avoid 
having an unnecessarily large amount of unrepresented litigants 
is making sure that the court-appointed counsel process is easy 
to access, Mr. Speaker.  
 
Everything essentially . . . And everybody knows who works in 
the justice system, who’s ever even been inside a courtroom 
frankly, Mr. Speaker — although I don’t think there’s a whole 
lot of members here who have — know that unrepresented 
litigants can really slow down the court process, which creates 
delays for everybody and frustrations for many, Mr. Speaker. 
So we should be doing everything we can, Mr. Speaker, to 
ensure that court-appointed counsel are easily accessible for 
anybody who qualifies and who should be getting it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Alternatively we could be adequately funding legal aid, Mr. 
Speaker. Legal aid is severely underfunded, which results in 



November 16, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1381 

more people actually needing court-appointed counsel. So 
here’s another suggestion to the Minister of Justice: more 
adequately fund legal aid and work with also his federal 
counterparts to ensure that they’re also covering what they 
should be doing as well. 
 
Legal aid in Saskatchewan, it covers significantly less areas of 
law than other provinces, Mr. Speaker. Ontario, BC, Alberta are 
ones that I can think of off the top of my head, Mr. Speaker, 
who provide a much more robust service than we do. We have 
very, very good, hard-working lawyers in legal aid, Mr. 
Speaker, who are constantly working — I speak to them often 
— are handling hundreds and hundreds of files, very, very 
high-profile, important files. We should be respecting the hard 
work that they do and ensure that they are adequately funded, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But to cover the gap in terms of legal aid and private practice 
counsel, that’s why we have court-appointed counsel, Mr. 
Speaker. And it’s a pretty large gap, so it’s pretty important that 
this system be respected and maintained. Although it should 
probably be clarified, Mr. Speaker, how the process goes, we 
need to make sure that it’s accessible. And these changes will 
make it less accessible, Mr. Speaker, than it is now, and that’s a 
huge concern that I have, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know I’ll have the opportunity to speak about this more at 
committee. I’m looking forward to having that opportunity with 
the Minister of Justice, so with that I’ll conclude my remarks 
for now. 
 
[16:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the member that Bill No. 15, The Provincial Court 
Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill 15 be committed to the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — The bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 16 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 16 — The 
Adoption Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur 
l’adoption be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 

Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I’m honoured to 
stand here today and talk about Bill No. 16, The Adoption 
Amendment Act, 2016. This was brought forward by the 
previous minister of Social Services in the spring session. And 
November is Adoption Awareness Month, so it’s a great time to 
sit and talk about adoption in our province and legislation with 
regards to it. So I look forward to having a good discussion in 
committee with the minister and her colleagues about adoption 
within Saskatchewan because I do have a lot of questions. 
 
But getting to the bill in front of us here, some of the changes 
with regards to what the minister was proposing with 
amendments to this legislation, the first change was changing 
the revocation period from 14 days to 21 days. I guess 
previously in the province it used to be 30 days, but that was 
changed in the late ’80s to 14 days. And now the minister is 
asking for that to be changed from 14 days to 21 days. 
 
I do have some questions with regards to those changes. I 
understand that there’s some provinces within the country that 
have the 21 days, but it seems like the provinces . . . it varies 
from 10 to 30 days. And I’m just wondering if this was based 
on some best-practice material that indicates that this might be 
the best time frame, and why was the extension deemed as 
being important. 
 
A lot of mothers that I talked to that have placed their children 
up for adoption, they’ve put in a lot of consideration with 
regards to their decision over the course of time. And they have 
the nine months to make up their decision, and that’s if they’re 
giving up the baby right from birth. But with some mothers it 
might be later on, but they put a lot of consideration into it. And 
I do believe that we need to have a time frame to allow them, if 
they change their mind. But sometimes that just puts another 
burden on them as well, and what will an extra week do? Why 
would an extra week provide them that much more time to 
make that decision? Has there been some people who came 
back within that time frame, and was there an issue before with 
regards to the 14-day time frame? What was the reasoning for 
the change? I have a lot of questions with regards to that. 
 
We also have to consider that right after, especially right after 
birth, mothers, like some mothers will have postpartum 
depression. And if you give your child up for adoption, they call 
it post-adoption depression. Will that play a factor? And would 
that make you think clearly at that time frame of what you 
should do? 
 
And I also have a lot of questions with regards to what’s the 
province’s role and responsibility with providing these parents 
support prior to the adoption and post-adoption. And I 
appreciate that there was some people here yesterday from the 
adoption support group that’s in the province, and my 
understanding is they’re volunteers that operate this group and 
help provide support for families who are newly adopting a 
child and for mothers who are giving up their child for 
adoption.  
 
But also is there . . . I know in other life circumstances — big, 
life-changing circumstances — that people may, oftentimes 
they’re provided services such as services with a psychologist 
or someone who could evaluate if they’re in the proper mental 
health to make that decision. And I don’t know exactly what 



1382 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2016 

kind of services are being provided to parents, and so again I 
have a lot of questions with the ministry with regards to that. 
They have a lot more experience with this than I do. 
 
And so that’ll be some of the questions I will be bringing 
forward. Because I know when the minister brought this 
forward she said, like the change is a shift from the focus to the 
needs of the child to remain connected to its birth family and to 
allow birth parents more time to consider the extent of their 
decision. And I’m a firm believer of trying to keep families 
together. And so if that is the focus of the shift from . . . the 
change is a shift from focus to the needs of the child to remain 
connected with their birth family, what is the ministry doing to 
try to support that? And so I have those questions that I plan on 
asking and look forward to hearing what the ministry’s plans 
are with regards to that. 
 
The second point of changes with regards to this legislation is 
the interview of the child, interviewing children when they’re 
going through the process of an adoption by a judge. And the 
suggestion in this legislation is to change . . . Right now, there 
currently isn’t an age. So the suggestion is to change it to seven 
years old. And I have some questions with regards to why seven 
years old was decided on. Was it based on developmental 
theory? Or is it best practice? Like what was the evidence basis 
to determine that that was a good age? 
 
I know there are some courts, and they provide some extra 
supports for families when they’re making these decisions and 
for kids in the court. So I’m going to quote what my colleague 
said with regards to some of the services courts provide for 
children to ensure that they have a voice. So she said: 
 

. . . there is the opportunity for children to have their 
interests reflected, maybe not their voices exactly heard 
directly, but there are children’s counsel, for example, in 
child and family services proceedings. And where if a child 
is fairly young and perhaps they’re not able to articulate 
their specific position on where they want to be placed, the 
children’s counsel has the ability to essentially act as an 
amicus in terms of making sure that the best interests of the 
child are reflected in the court proceedings and that 
nothing is essentially left out. So it’s important that even 
though a child is very young, that there are still avenues for 
making sure that their voice is heard in some way. 
 

And so I think that was a really good suggestion on her part. 
She has a lot more experience in the courts than I do, and so 
that’s good to know that those services are available. 
 
And I also, like, was wondering how much connection to 
stakeholders was done with regards to making these changes. 
Was this discussed with the courts, with judges who make these 
decisions? Because what if the judge says they want to still 
interview the child and the child’s under seven and it’s against 
our legislation? What would happen in a case like that? Or what 
if a child is seven but just isn’t developmentally able to provide 
that service? So there’s a lot of things to consider with regards 
to changing this piece of legislation because it kind of takes the 
onus away from the courts to make that decision of whether 
they want to interview the child or not, or have a third party 
interview the child. And the child’s voice, I wouldn’t want to 
see the child’s voice lost in this process. So I’m looking 

forward to having that discussion with the officials. 
 
The other point that’s being changed with regards to this bill is 
the Hague Convention. Some of the requirements that are being 
changed in the legislation is so that they fall properly under the 
Hague Convention, which is an important piece of legislation 
that helps to identify what is needed to do intercountry 
adoptions. 
 
And so it seems like this is a good guide to good practice, but 
there’s also a lot of discussion within this legislation about what 
to do when you’re working with countries that haven’t signed 
on to this convention and what kind of requirements are going 
to be needed to ensure that the adoption is the best practice for 
the child. We’ve got to look at child safety and rights as well as 
the parents’ rights because there are a lot of countries that aren’t 
as well off as we are in Canada. And people are put in positions 
where they might use children to make some money, and 
unfortunately that is the situation. We need to really consider 
that and we need to ensure that children are not in those 
situations and our province, the people that are living in this 
province, aren’t supporting that kind of behaviour in other 
countries. 
 
I also have a lot of questions with regards to how many children 
are adopted internationally within our province. I understand to 
adopt a Saskatchewan child, you have to be a Saskatchewan 
resident. I’m wondering what’s the policy to adopt other 
children within the country. What’s the policy of adopting 
internationally? What are some of the wait times or wait-lists 
for people who are waiting to adopt? How long do they 
generally need to wait to adopt? How many children are sitting 
on a list waiting to be adopted? Those are a lot of questions I 
have with regards to the adoption program within our province 
that really pertain to this bill because some of the changes in 
this legislation will really impact some of those policies that we 
have already in place. 
 
And so another aspect of this, the changes to this legislation, is 
with regards to deceased adoptive parents. So there’s some 
changes with regards to this legislation so that if a child is 
adopted and unfortunately something happens to the parents, 
that the benefit payments that they receive will transfer to their 
legal guardians. 
 
I think this is, in my opinion, a very important aspect. We want 
to ensure that the child’s best interest is at heart, that their needs 
are being met, and if they have another set of guardians that 
they’re able to be with, that they have the supports they need to 
provide the best environment for them. 
 
Also the other is the support, the educational and vocational 
plans for youth so when they’re between the ages of 18 and 21 
that they will receive some funding within our province for 
post-secondary education, which I think is a wonderful aspect 
and opportunity, so that we can get kids a good head start in life 
and be more successful. 
 
But I had some other questions with regards to that as well, like 
what happens after the age of 21. I know there was some talk 
before with the department looking at needing . . . I know the 
Children’s Advocate said that we need to look at a better plan 
for young adults that come from the system. Because they’re 



November 16, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1383 

oftentimes, as soon as they hit that age, then they lose the 
supports, and then they get lost in the system. So if a child is in 
post-secondary education and they hit the age of 21, does that 
mean that’s the end of their funding and their supports? Or what 
is the long-term plan, and has there been some discussion with 
regards to that? So there’s some information with regards to 
that. 
 
There’s also some changes, housekeeping changes with regards 
to this bill, changes in language, but there’s also a part where 
they’re going to be taking out simple adoption. And I have 
some questions with regards to that because the minister, when 
she presented this bill, said that they haven’t . . . “There is little 
to no documented history of simple adoption in Saskatchewan.” 
And so I’m wondering why this was part of the legislation. And 
she said “little to no,” so is there some documentation or not? 
To me, that’s kind of conflicting, so I would like to get some 
more information with regards to that because it removes a 
whole section within the legislation. And so that’s really 
important to have that discussion. 
 
[16:45] 
 
There’s also some changes with regards to release of 
information between adoptees and adopters. I guess previously 
there was situations where people would access information 
from, either the child that was adopted is accessing for the birth 
parents, or the birth parents were accessing for the child that’s 
adopted. And they had a hard time getting that information. 
And so it looks like the ministry is looking at ways to make that 
a little bit more easier. 
 
But I do have some concerns with regards to rights to 
confidentiality. What if a person doesn’t want to be contacted? 
I’ve heard on both sides: a child that was adopted that didn’t 
want to have contact with their birth parents, and birth parents 
that didn’t want to be contacted by the child. And I think we 
need to look at respecting people’s rights with regards to that. 
 
And I’m wondering if there was some consultation with the 
Privacy Commissioner with regards to releasing some 
confidential information without the consent of the individual. 
I’m looking forward to hearing more about that conversation, if 
that conversation has been had, what the rationale for this is 
now, if there has been a lot of issues that have been . . . with 
regards to this. 
 
And also there’s also going to be a removal of family service 
boards out of this legislation because they say that they were 
never established. And so they’re going to be wanting to 
remove that term out of this legislation and another one within 
the ministry. And I don’t understand, like, what was the purpose 
of the family service boards to begin with? Why were they 
never established? Like maybe if that’s something we need to 
look at at this point or not, it’ll be a good discussion to have in 
committee for sure. 
 
One area that I was really concerned about, and I noticed that 
they’re removing . . . removal of the child’s psychological 
needs when considering the best interests of the child. And I 
don’t know if this was just simply an error when they were 
establishing the new bill. But in the old bill it says, when 
determining the child’s best interests: “(a) the child’s physical, 

cultural, mental, emotional, psychological, and spiritual needs” 
will be addressed. But in the new legislation, it omits 
“psychological.” It says “. . . the child’s mental, emotional, 
physical, and educational needs, and the care or treatment to 
meet those needs.” So I definitely want to have some discussion 
with regards to why “psychological” was taken out. I think we 
really need to consider that. 
 
I know some children that have been adopted come with some 
extreme mental health issues and needs, and so we need to 
ensure that that’s going to be addressed properly and the parents 
that they’ll be placed with are able to address that, and also if 
the placement is going to be in the best interest of the child and 
their mental health condition. 
 
So I have a lot of questions. I’m looking forward to having this 
discussion in committee with the new minister and her 
colleagues. And due to time restraints for today, I think I’ll 
leave my discussion at this, and I look forward to discussing 
this in committee. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the member that Bill No. 16, The Adoption 
Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 16 be committed to the Standing Committee on Human 
Services. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 17 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 17 — The Power 
Corporation Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased this 
evening to rise and speak to Bill No. 17, An Act to amend The 
Power Corporation Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this bill has a substantial number of small changes 
to this Act, largely housekeeping, a number of items that pertain 
to using gender-neutral language, moving from singular to 
plural language. So all of that of course, Mr. Speaker, is under 
the heading of housekeeping and I don’t think warrants a whole 
lot of discussion or scrutiny necessarily from this side. 
 



1384 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2016 

However there are a couple of items that I do want to speak to 
with regard to Bill No. 17, and the first is in section 8. Section 
8, what is proposed here is amending this section to add the 
following which allows: 
 

to exercise any other powers that may be designated and 
prescribed by the Lieutenant Governor in Council and that 
the Lieutenant Governor in Council considers are 
necessary or desirable for the efficient operation of the 
corporation’s business for the public good. 

 
So what essentially that is doing is allowing cabinet increased 
powers to direct this Crown. And I think that’s something that 
we should look at very, very clearly, what exactly the reasons 
are for that change. And given the current context in this 
province with regard to management and Crown corporations 
and specifically perhaps, Mr. Speaker, SaskPower, I think that 
we should have our eyes wide open when we’re looking at what 
exactly is meant by that proposed change. 
 
I note that in the minister’s comments back on June the 14th, 
there was very little mention of the reasons why that change 
might be proposed. And I think that my colleague will have 
some questions and hopefully some answers in committee about 
exactly why that change was proposed in this legislation. 
 
However, the point that I think is most important and that I’ll 
spend most of my time and my comments on in this Bill No. 17 
is the proposal to again increase the borrowing limit of 
SaskPower. Mr. Speaker, this is the second time that the 
borrowing limit, if this bill were to pass, would have been 
increased since 2013. In 2013 that borrowing limit was 
increased by $3 billion from 5 up to 8 where we currently sit 
today. If this goes through, Mr. Speaker, what we would be 
looking at would be a $10 billion borrowing limit. For the 
simple math there, that’s a doubling of the borrowing limit 
since 2013. 
 
Now the minister did have some comments about the reasons, 
his stated reasons for seeking this increased limit. Back again, 
the former minister, back in June, he noted that “SaskPower 
continues to make substantial capital expenditures to replace 
aging infrastructure and to meet the province’s energy 
requirements . . .” 
 
And of course, Mr. Speaker, we should always be investing in 
preventative maintenance in dealing with aging infrastructure. I 
think that it’s an efficient way to deal with capital. Instead of 
waiting until things are obsolete or broken, you invest a certain 
amount, and that certainly is reasonable. A doubling in three 
years, I’m not sure if all of that can be attributable to that sort of 
investment in preventative maintenance and basic 
infrastructure, however. And there is another reason given, Mr. 
Speaker, and that is the 2030 targets of 50 per cent renewable 
— certainly a noble target, Mr. Speaker. I think the minister 
noted wind farms and increasing some renewable capacity that 
way, in his comments. And certainly that would be exciting and 
important to see some of those plans, but of course we haven’t 
really seen those plans or much of the discussion about how 
exactly we’re going to meet those goals, Mr. Speaker. I know 
having goals is lovely, it’s important, but you also have to 
operationalize those goals and figure out exactly how you’re 
going to do that, and I don’t see a plan here. 

And I suspect that my colleague will have a number of 
questions as to what exactly is intended to be invested in and 
purchased, given this again doubling of the borrowing limits 
since 2013. And I think those are very significant questions for 
members of the public, certainly for my colleagues. 
 
But you know, just a concern about the level of debt that we are 
experiencing in this province. Of course we heard brief mention 
yesterday and some scant details today about the fact that we 
are . . . Provincially this government is now $1 billion in deficit, 
Mr. Speaker. And of course we also are seeing increasing debt 
loads on our Crowns, Mr. Speaker, and that has very serious 
implications and concerns. And I think we have the attention of 
the province here, wondering exactly what is going on. 
 
But the minister did not mention, in terms of some of the cause 
of the debt that we see and the reasons for this increased 
spending . . . or borrowing limit rather, with SaskPower in Bill 
17, there’s no mention, but certainly there has been mention in 
the media and discussion with constituents, discussion, 
questions posed to both the government and members of the 
opposition. It’s a ways back, Mr. Speaker, but the $47 million 
wasted on smart meters and that whole mismanagement, that 
wasn’t noted in the preamble when the minister was speaking to 
this bill at second reading. 
 
Also not noted but certainly has to account for a significant 
portion, is the Boundary dam 3 project, over one and a half 
billion dollars, Mr. Speaker. And we all know that there were a 
number of cost overruns, underperformance issues, glitches that 
caused that investment to inflate greatly and quickly, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Also related to that were the penalties paid to Cenovus. Those 
penalties were $20 million in 2014 and 2015 — not a small 
amount, Mr. Speaker — paid because we failed to make our 
contractual obligations in terms of delivering CO2 because of 
undercapacity or underperformance of that BD3 [Boundary 
dam 3], Mr. Speaker. So that certainly is part of the picture 
here, and why we see the minister coming back to this 
Assembly seeking again an increase to that borrowing limit. 
And I think that’s extremely concerning, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I know that the people of Saskatchewan have a lot of 
questions about that, a lot of concerns. Are we going to allow 
SaskPower to do the very important work that it needs to do in 
this province in providing power at a reasonable rate to all 
residents of Saskatchewan, be they urban or remote? How are 
they going to meet their targets, their 2030 targets, Mr. Speaker, 
in investment in renewables? 
 
So I know my colleagues have had a number of comments on 
this, and they will have continued comments and raise their 
concerns and meet with stakeholders ahead of committee. But 
with that I would like to conclude my comments. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the member that Bill No. 17, The Power Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



November 16, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1385 

The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I recognize 
you too. I designate Bill No. 17 to be committed to the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
this House be now adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that this Assembly do now 
adjourn. And is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly now stands adjourned 
until tomorrow morning at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:59.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  McCall ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1353, 1354 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1353 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1353 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1353 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1353 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1354 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1354 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1354 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Carr .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1354 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1354 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1355 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1355 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1355 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1355 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1356 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1356 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Remembering Janet Wright 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1356 
 Bullying Awareness Week 
  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1356 
 La Ronge Resident Named Indigenous Female Entrepreneur of the Year 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1357 
 Habitat for Humanity Key Ceremony in Moose Jaw 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1357 
 Marjorie Hartman Celebrates 102nd Birthday 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1357 
 Ninth Annual Louis Riel Vigil 
  Parent ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1357 
 Manufacturing Sector Growing in Saskatchewan 
  Bonk ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1358 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Auditor’s Report and Details of Land Transactions 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1358 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1358 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1359 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1360 
 State of Provincial Finances 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1360 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1360 
 Consultant Review of Education System  
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1362 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1362 
MOTION UNDER RULE 61 
 Support for Wanuskewin Heritage Park Application for World Heritage Site Status 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1363 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1363 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1363 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1364 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 34 — The Provincial Lands Act, 2016 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1364 
  Merriman (referral to Economy Committee) .......................................................................................................................... 1366 
 Bill No. 26 — The Patient Choice Medical Imaging Act 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1366 
  Merriman (referral to Human Services Committee) ............................................................................................................... 1370 



 

 Bill No. 28 — The Extension of Compassionate Care Act, 2016 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1370 
  Merriman (referral to Human Services Committee) ............................................................................................................... 1372 
 Bill No. 1 — The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Amendment Act, 2016 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1372 
  Merriman (referral to Crown and Central Agencies Committee) ............................................................................................ 1374 
 Bill No. 32 — The Automobile Accident Insurance (Benefits) Amendment Act, 2016 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1374 
  Merriman (referral to Crown and Central Agencies Committee) ............................................................................................ 1375 
 Bill No. 33 — The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2016 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1375 
  Merriman (referral to Human Services Committee) ............................................................................................................... 1376 
 Bill No. 35 — The Small Claims Act, 2016/Loi de 2016 sur les petites créances 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1376 
  Merriman (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) .............................................................................. 1377 
 Bill No. 36 — The Small Claims Consequential Amendments Act, 2016 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1377 
  Merriman (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) .............................................................................. 1378 
 Bill No. 12 — The Public Health (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2016 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1378 
  Merriman (referral to Human Services Committee) ............................................................................................................... 1379 
 Bill No. 15 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2016 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1379 
  Merriman (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) .............................................................................. 1381 
 Bill No. 16 — The Adoption Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’adoption 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1381 
  Merriman (referral to Human Services Committee) ............................................................................................................... 1383 
 Bill No. 17 — The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2016 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1383 
  Merriman (referral to Crown and Central Agencies Committee) ............................................................................................ 1385 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


