






















































Hansard: November 08, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 38A  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 8, 2016, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (Ind.) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10; Independent (Ind.) — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1201 
 November 8, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Ministry of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 
to be able to stand today to introduce some guests seated in 
your gallery. These individuals are associated with the Inroads 
program. Inroads is a leadership training and employment 
internship program for post-secondary Aboriginal students. 
Since 2005 Crown Investments Corporation and Inroads have 
partnered together to provide opportunities for Aboriginal 
students through career-specific summer employment, 
professional development, leadership development, and 
academic coaching. To date 196 students have participated in 
this program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce our guests, and if you could 
stand please when I say your name. I know I can hardly see 
them, but they’re up there: Ayten Archer, who’s the director of 
Inroads Canada; Aimee Prefontaine, an Inroads ambassador; 
Jason Schell, an Inroads alumni; and Dayna Inkster, also an 
Inroads alumni. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I was fortunate to meet with these amazing 
individuals this morning, and they are our future leaders. It was 
very informative, and I commend them all for the work that 
they’ve put into their presentation and the passion they have for 
the Inroads program. Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to join 
me in welcoming these individuals to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with the 
minister in welcoming our guests to their Legislative Assembly. 
This Inroads program, which focuses on development and 
leadership skills, is certainly something that’s very important, 
and we are very honoured to have you here in your Legislative 
Assembly today. So if all members would join with me in 
welcoming Ayten and Aimee and Jason and Dayna to their 
Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to stand in the Assembly today to join with everyone in 
welcoming a group of individuals and introducing them. 
They’re seated in your gallery. In fact they take up, I think, the 
whole west side of the Speaker’s gallery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I met with this group earlier today, along with 
their MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly]. And it’s a 
group of individuals here to honour the life of Mr. Adolf 

Karakochuk while also recognizing the exemplary 
intercollaborative care that was provided to him in his final 
days. 
 
Adolf’s family joins us today, starting first with his wife of 62 
years, Margaret Karakochuk — you wave, Margaret. She is also 
joined by Judy and Joy Karakochuk. 
 
Joining Mr. Karakochuk’s family today is the care team who 
worked together to deliver innovative, patient-centred care for 
Adolf. Here today from Midway and Shamrock Ambulance 
Care are Mr. Steve Koroluk, primary care paramedic, along 
with his parents, Terry and Glenys Koroluk; Ms. Cheryl 
Rosher, primary care paramedic; Mr. Kelly Prime, paramedic 
chief; Mr. Tom Prime and Mrs. Bonnie Prime, co-owners of 
Midway and Shamrock Ambulance. 
 
And from Saskatoon Health Region, Mr. Speaker, Ms. Karrie 
Anne Prisiak, continuing care aid; Ms. Debbie Dakeniwich, 
continuing care aid; Ms. Natalie Bishop, occupational therapist; 
Ms. Kelly Tokarchuk, manager of rural home care east; Ms. 
Shirley Nordlund, manager of rural therapy services; Ms. Sherri 
Julé, manager of the pre-hospital emergency medical services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ll hear more about their story in members’ 
statements to follow. I ask all members to welcome them to 
their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
join with the Minister of Rural and Remote Health in 
welcoming Adolf Karakochuk’s family here today and the 
intercollaborative care team that worked with him. There were 
paramedics, care aids, a whole gamut of health care 
professionals, Mr. Speaker, who the minister mentioned. I’m 
looking forward to hearing the member’s statement a little bit, 
in a short while here and hearing about the experience here, Mr. 
Speaker. But with that, on behalf of the opposition, I’d like to 
welcome you to your legislature here today, and I ask all my 
colleagues in joining me as well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
for me to introduce to you and through you to all members of 
this honourable Assembly, a group of people in the visitors 
gallery, Mr. Speaker, including Garth Whyte, CEO [chief 
executive officer] of Fertilizer Canada and a number of 
members of Fertilizer Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re here today for the signing of a 
memorandum of co-operation with our government to work on 
the implementation and adoption of fertilizer application 
processes using the 4R Nutrient Stewardship nomenclature. 
And this is a great opportunity to get the message out about the 
terrific job that our producers do of using fertilizer products in 
an environmentally sustainable fashion, Mr. Speaker. I’d like all 
members to welcome our guests. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 



1202 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2016 

Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And on 
behalf of the official opposition, I would like to join the 
Minister of Agriculture in welcoming these guests to the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Certainly the program, the 4R Nutrient Stewardship program, is 
an important one. It’s one I know, I think about 70 per cent of 
producers are working towards right now. It’d be great to get it 
up to 100 per cent, and with your leadership I’m sure that that 
goal will be in reach. So looking forward to seeing the work 
that you do in co-operation with the ministry. 
 
And also I think we see up there Mr. Gay Patrick from Potash 
Producers is behind the clock, but also a very important 
member of the fertilizer scene here in Canada. And we look 
forward to meetings tomorrow on the work that you’re doing. 
So on behalf of the official opposition, I’d like to welcome you 
all to your Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you and to all members of this Assembly, I’d like to introduce 
an individual seated in your gallery, Mr. Larry Kowalchuk. He 
is a well-respected member of the Saskatchewan bar and a 
lawyer, Mr. Speaker, with practice experience exceeding 20 
years. He’s most well known for his work in areas of human 
rights law, constitutional law, environmental law, as well as 
Aboriginal law, Mr. Speaker. So I ask that all members join me 
in welcoming him to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would 
like to join with the member opposite to welcome Mr. 
Kowalchuk to his legislature. But I do want to correct her. She 
indicated that he’s been practising for 20 years, and I think it’s 
been 30. Mr. Kowalchuk is a classmate of mine and I know 
that, looking at the two of us, one of us has aged a little bit 
better than the other one perhaps. And I think that’s you, Larry. 
Anyway, I would ask everyone in the legislature to invite Larry 
again and welcome him to his legislature. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition to reverse cuts to the 
Lighthouse program. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that 
in April 2014 the Minister of Social Services said that the 
Lighthouse in Saskatoon would “. . . take pressure off of 
existing detox facilities, hospitals and police cells, while 
keeping people safe, especially in our brutally cold winters.” 
That same day, Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that the 
then-minister of Health said, “We want to ensure that 
individuals with mental health and addictions issues have a safe 
place to stay.” 

And the petitioners note that this government has repeatedly 
indicated that the Lighthouse stabilization unit keeps 
individuals out of hospital emergency rooms and jail cells. And 
they also point out that in 2015 the Provincial Auditor called 
upon the Ministry of Social Services to provide the correct 
amount of assistance, not to revoke this essential service and 
thereby putting the most vulnerable at extreme risk. 
 
And the petitioners also point out that the ministers are now 
trying to place the responsibility for repairing budget deficits on 
those experiencing addictions, unemployment, and poverty, and 
who are living from day to day without proper services. 
 
I think it’s important to note, Mr. Speaker, that in light of the 
pressures that the Saskatoon Health Region is experiencing in 
its hospitals, that although the stabilization unit isn’t the whole 
problem, making these cuts certainly doesn’t help the record 
over capacity, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately reverse 
their recent cuts to funding that allows extremely 
vulnerable people to access the services of the Lighthouse 
stabilization unit in Saskatoon, and revisit their imposition 
of a strict and narrow definition of homelessness in 
November of 2015 which forced the Lighthouse to cut 
back its hours of essential services in February of 2016, 
and take immediate steps to ensure that homeless people in 
Saskatchewan have emergency shelter, clothing, and food 
available to them before more lives are lost. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Saskatoon, of 
Swift Current, and of Regina. Mr. Speaker, I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 
Ms. Lambert: — I am pleased to rise today to present a 
petition from citizens who are opposed to the federal 
government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the province 
of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Saskatoon, 
Radisson, and Humboldt. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
proud to present a petition as it refers to SaskTel. SaskTel is 
owned by all of us. It was built by Saskatchewan hard work, 
innovation, and pride, and creates thousands of good jobs and 
serves service to parts of the province that other providers 
ignore, and offers the lowest mobile rates in the country. And as 
a Crown corporation, SaskTel delivers hundreds of millions of 
dollars more than private companies back to Saskatchewan 
people. In the last five years alone, SaskTel has returned $497 



November 8, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1203 

million to support government programs and services like 
education and health care. So: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to keep their promise, 
stop their plan to sell off SaskTel, and keep our valued 
Crown corporations in the hands of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 

 
And the people that have signed this petition are from all 
throughout the land, Mr. Speaker. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m presenting a 
petition regarding wetlands in Saskatchewan. The people who 
have signed this want to bring to our attention the following: 
wetlands serve a very vital function in our ecosystem. They take 
the form of marshes, bogs, fens, swamps, and open water. 
Wetlands are home to wildlife, including waterfowl. They clean 
the water running off of agricultural fields. They protect us 
from flooding and drought, and they are playgrounds where 
families can explore and play. In the worst cases, such as some 
areas on the prairies, as much as 90 per cent of our wetlands 
have disappeared. As they continue to disappear, so too do the 
many benefits they provide. So I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the Government of Saskatchewan to: 
 
Increase funding to do the proper inventory work, putting 
Saskatchewan in a better position to manage the water 
resource; 
 
Speed up the evaluation of high-risk watersheds where 
there is significant damage annually from flooding. This 
evaluation must include a recognition of drainage works 
that could be closed or restored that will alleviate some of 
the issues downstream with respect to flooding and nutrient 
loading; 
 
Create a sound and transparent mitigation process that 
adequately addresses sustainable development. The 
sequence should first focus on minimizing the harm with 
compensation being sought only when the development is 
deemed essential and the first two stages cannot be met. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by citizens of the 
town of Wadena. I so submit. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition in support of Wakamow Valley Authority. We know 
that as a result of the passage of The Wakamow Valley Authority 
Amendment Act, 2016 on June 30th, the Wakamow Valley 
Authority lost its statutory funding of $127,000 from the 
Saskatchewan government in addition to the $30,000 in 

supplemental funding. 
 
This loss of annual funding negatively affected the ability of 
Wakamow to maintain its lands and repair its facilities and 
provide services to Moose Jaw and the surrounding 
communities. And we also know this funding cut resulted in the 
layoff of one-third of the park staff, which included two 
summer students and two regular employees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on June 21st, 2016 the provincial government — 
including the two members from Moose Jaw, Moose Jaw 
Wakamow and Moose Jaw North — voted in favour of this bill, 
resulting in cuts to Wakamow and subsequent job losses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to immediately repeal The Wakamow Valley Authority 
Amendment Act, 2016 and reinstate statutory funding to the 
Wakamow Valley Authority. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing the petition today come 
from the city of Moose Jaw. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present to you a petition condemning the Sask Party’s cuts to 
the SAID [Saskatchewan assured income for disability] 
program. The residents signing this petition want me to bring to 
your attention the following: after nearly a decade of wasting 
the economic boom and blowing through the savings, the 
government is now forcing the province’s most vulnerable 
people to pay for the Sask Party mismanagement. 
 
The Sask Party’s latest cold-hearted cut will take money away 
from people who are unable to work due to a disability; and that 
the government’s heartless decision to cut funding to the SAID 
program will hurt approximately 2,700 Saskatchewan residents 
with disabilities; and that many of the people who are hurt by 
the Sask Party cut live with serious illnesses such as multiple 
sclerosis, cancer, autism, among other illnesses; and that 
contrary to the Minister of Social Services’ claims, the 
government underfunds clients in regards to shelter allowance 
and that shelter allowance should be reflective of the current 
rental costs, not availability. So I’ll read the prayer, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to stop their plan to cut 
the SAID funding and immediately restore funding for 
those living with a disability; that shelter allowance is 
reflective of the current rental costs; and that the 
Saskatchewan Party government implement the 



1204 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2016 

recommendations of the advisory group on poverty 
reduction. 

 
Mr. Speaker, people signing this petition come from the 
communities of Saskatoon, Battleford, and North Battleford. I 
do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today and present a petition regarding child care centres in 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, those who signed this petition are 
residents of the province of Saskatchewan and wish to bring our 
attention to the following: across Saskatchewan, licensed 
non-profit child care centres are taxed inconsistently. Many of 
our licensed non-profit child care centres pay commercial 
property taxes. This is not done in Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario, 
BC [British Columbia], or New Brunswick. 
 
Child care is essential to our economy, yet most centres struggle 
to balance their budget. This issue threatens both the number of 
child care spaces and the quality of care. Quality child care has 
an enormous positive impact on a child’s future outcomes and 
yields high rates of economic return. Child care centres are 
institutions of early learning and childhood development. It is 
appropriate that they have the same tax treatment as schools. I 
will read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan recognize 
that licensed non-profit child care centres provide 
programs that are foundational to a healthy society by 
including them in the Saskatchewan education Act and 
exempt all licensed non-profit child care centres in 
Saskatchewan from property tax through changes to the 
appropriate legislation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we have received literally thousands of signatures 
from all across the province on this petition. The ones I am 
submitting today are signed by residents of Regina. I do so 
submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise yet again today 
to present a petition calling on the government to reverse their 
short-sighted cuts to the Aboriginal court worker program. 
Those who have signed this petition wish for us to bring 
attention to the government the following: the Government of 
Saskatchewan cut the budget for the Aboriginal court worker 
program in the 2016-2017 provincial budget, along with 
alternative measures programs, deputy sheriffs we’re now 
learning, and now court employees, most recently. 
 
As those on this side of the House know, Aboriginal court 
workers play an important role helping Aboriginal people in 
criminal and child apprehension cases. Aboriginal peoples are 
disproportionately represented in Saskatchewan’s correctional 
centres, and Aboriginal court workers successfully help to make 
our communities safer through reduced recidivism rates. I’d like 
to read the prayer: 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan reverse its 
short-sighted and counterproductive cuts to the Aboriginal 
court worker program. 

 
Individuals who are signing this petition today are from 
Nipawin and Melfort. And I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
to stop the redirection of funding of the Northern Teacher 
Education Program Council, Inc. A recent report shows that 94 
per cent of NORTEP [northern teacher education program] 
grads found employment in the North. NORTEP has improved 
teacher retention in the North. NORTEP has a positive 
economic impact in northern Saskatchewan. NORTEP provides 
high-quality, face-to-face instruction and services to students. 
The province’s financial deficit cannot be fixed by cutting 
indigenous education in the North and a program that has 
served the North for over 40 years. The prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to immediately restore the 
five-year agreement to fund the Northern Teacher 
Education Program Council, Inc. and to continue to fund 
NORTEP-NORPAC programs in La Ronge. 

 
It is signed by hundreds of people in northern Saskatchewan. I 
so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 

A. E. Peacock Tornadoes Win Semifinal 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week I made 
a wager, a friendly wager with the MLAs from Moose Jaw, the 
member for Wakamow and the member for Moose Jaw North, 
as to a football game that occurred over the weekend. It was the 
3A high school semifinal in the Moose Jaw league between 
A.E. Peacock Tornadoes and my hometown Swift Current 
Comprehensive High School Colts. Mr. Speaker, the wager was 
that whoever’s team lost, they would stand in their place and 
make a member’s statement. So I’m going to tell you the score, 
but I think you understand who lost the game, unfortunately. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Tornadoes, to their credit, won their fifth 
consecutive Moose Jaw High School Football League 
championship. They beat the Colts 57 to 20 at Gutheridge Field 
in Moose Jaw. This is incredible. This program’s been 
incredible over a long period of time. This is their astounding 
37th game in a row that they have won, dating back to 2012. 
They got off to a quick start with running back Dawson Kurz, 
who scored a touchdown early in the first quarter. Kurz went on 
to score two more touchdowns while gaining 192 total yards. 
For their part, the Colts were led by their running back who had 
a great season, Tristan Lockman. He gained 156 yards on 19 
carries, scoring a 62-yard touchdown. 
 
I’d be remiss if I didn’t also acknowledge one of my best 



November 8, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1205 

friends since grade 10, Tom Christianson, who is a D 
[defensive] coordinator for the Colts, and all of the coaching 
staff, and all of the parents, but mostly the kids across the 
Moose Jaw League and especially with respect to the Tornadoes 
team and the Colts for this great game in the final. 
Congratulations to all the players, the coaches, the volunteers, 
and the parents on a great season. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

Strength of Our Women Gala and Awards 
 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I had the honour of attending the 
Strength of Our Women Gala and Awards held this past 
September 8th at TCU Place in Saskatoon, Treaty 6 territory. 
The awards and gala, hosted by the Saskatchewan First Nations 
Women’s Commission with the Federation of Sovereign 
Indigenous Nations, acknowledge the contributions and 
achievements of First Nations women. 
 
I quote: 
 

“First Nations women in Saskatchewan are artists, 
advocates, businesswomen, and mothers — they are 
leaders. We commend every one of these women and all 
the other nominees for their extraordinary work in their 
families, Nations, province, continent, and beyond each 
and every day . . . ” said FSIN Vice-Chief Heather Bear. 

 
Proceeds from the Strength of Our Women Awards Gala are 
dedicated to the initiatives that support the families of missing 
and murdered indigenous women and girls. 
 
Delia Opekokew, a lawyer from Canoe Lake Cree Nation was 
recognized with a lifetime achievement award. Other recipients 
included Tasha Hubbard in arts and entertainment, Nancy 
Linklater in culture and spirituality, Doris Greyeyes in business, 
Belinda Daniels in education, Dr. Bonita Beatty in health and 
wellness, Beverly Poitras in law and justice, Myrna LaPlante 
and Darlene Okemaysim-Sicotte in leadership and advocacy, 
Bridgette Laquette in sports, and Deseray Robillard in youth, 
and Barb Lavallee in environment. Mr. Speaker, 15 matriarchs 
were also honoured. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I call on all members to recognize these amazing 
First Nations women for their selfless contributions. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Canora-Pelly. 
 

Preeceville Emergency Room Reopens 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, two 
weeks ago I stood to announce the 10 new physicians that had 
begun practising in Saskatchewan thanks to the SIPPA 
[Saskatchewan international physician practice assessment] 
program, a program created by this government. I was proud to 
announce that Preeceville, a town in my constituency, received 
one SIPPA graduate along with one second new local doctor, 
bringing the physician complement to Preeceville to three. 
 
Nearly five months ago, our government stood in this Assembly 

and promised that the disruption in our emergency services in 
Preeceville was temporary. We committed to working with the 
community and Sunrise Health Region to restore the level of 
emergency services. Mr. Speaker, we keep our promises on this 
side of the House, and starting yesterday the ER [emergency 
room] in Preeceville is once again open. 
 
Mr. Speaker, rural health care is important to the government, 
and we are committed to meeting the health care needs of rural 
residents. Not only have we added 650 more doctors and over 
3,000 nurses across the province, but we have also stabilized 
physician services in over 25 rural communities. We recognize 
there is more work to do and we will continue to work hard for 
the residents of this province. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

BreakOut West and the Western Canadian 
Music Awards 

 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, BreakOut West and the Western 
Canadian Music Awards are the primary events hosted by the 
Western Canadian Music Alliance, an organization created by 
the Music Industry Associations of British Columbia, Alberta, 
Saskatchewan, Manitoba, the Northwest Territories, and the 
Yukon Territory, to promote and celebrate Western Canadian 
music. 
 
Each year, the event is held in a different Western Canadian 
region on a rotational basis. This year was the 14th year and the 
event was held here in Regina from October 13th to 16th. 
Multiple venues across the city were alive with independent 
music and, Mr. Speaker, I had the pleasure of attending some 
great performances at two venues located at the University of 
Regina. 
 
The festival had performers from across Western Canada but 
was not short of Saskatchewan talent. Some of our province’s 
brightest acts performed, including Alex Runions, Andino Suns, 
Bears in Hazenmore, Belle Plaine, Blake Berglund, The Dead 
South, Jay Semko, Jeffery Straker, Megan Nash, Nick Faye & 
the Deputies, Rah Rah, Ryan Hicks, and the Surf Dads. 
 
The Western Canadian Music Alliance’s music and awards 
festival was possible because of such a vibrant music scene 
right here in Saskatchewan, and because of the many 
enthusiastic organizers and volunteers who helped achieve a 
fantastic week of musical celebration. Mr. Speaker, I ask all 
members in helping me congratulate the organizing committee, 
the talent, and the volunteers for a making this regional cultural 
music event such a success. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 
Resources. 
 

Hospital Donation Honours Dylon Piper 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, for those of us that knew 
Dylon Piper, it’s hard to believe that 10 years have gone by 
since his untimely passing. Originally from Midale, Dylon was 
in his third year as a police officer with the Saskatoon city 
police when he passed away at just 25 years of age. 



1206 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2016 

On the news of his death, Police Association President Stan 
Goertzen called Dylon, and I quote, “one of the top ten best 
recruits of the last 20 years.” It was later determined that Dylon 
died from cardiac arrhythmia, an abnormal heartbeat that 
disrupted the normal functioning of his heart. 
 
The Piper family has always tried to make the best out of their 
incomprehensible tragedy, and that continued earlier this year. 
Dylon’s memory will live on at the children’s hospital of 
Saskatchewan thanks to a generous gift that will ensure that 
children and families receive the specialized cardiac care that 
they need. Thanks to a $125,000 donation made in loving 
memory of Dylon, children needing specialized care for 
heart-related conditions will soon see their specialists in a 
state-of-the-art echo exam room within pediatric outpatients at 
the children’s hospital. 
 
I ask all members to join with me in thanking Dylon’s parents, 
Dave and Tami, and the entire Piper family for honouring 
Dylon’s memory in such a meaningful way that will help 
children from all across this province for many years to come. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Working Together to Meet End-of-Life Needs 
 
Mr. Nerlien: — Mr. Speaker, we are joined in your gallery by 
some very special people from Wynyard, in my constituency. I 
was pleased to have met with them earlier today with the 
Minister of Rural and Remote Health, and to hear a story of 
family and care providers working together to meet end-of-life 
needs for Mr. Adolf Karakochuk. 
 
What began as request for home care to paramedics to aid with 
lift and move for Mr. Karakochuk quickly morphed into 
paramedics, home care aides, therapists, physicians, nurses, 
friends, and family all working closely together as a team to 
keep Adolf at home until his passing this February. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a story about a caring community of 
professionals and family putting the patient first. Adolf wanted 
to stay at home with Margaret, his wife and love of his life for 
62 years, who joins us here today. Margaret said, “I call them 
my angels, my stars from up above. That’s what they are to 
me.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, today we honour Adolf’s memory and, with 
Margaret and his family, we thank this incredible team that did 
everything possible to find innovative ways to respect the spirit 
of the patient-first initiative. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 

Royal Canadian Humane Association Bravery Awards 
 
Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to rise 
today to celebrate three citizens who displayed acts of heroism 
in my constituency of Cut Knife-Turtleford. In October, the 
Lieutenant Governor presented Royal Canadian Humane 
Association Bravery Awards to Clark Whitecalf, RCMP [Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police] Constable Daniel Dempster, and 

Constable Brenda Diachuk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the RCHA [Royal Canadian Humane Association] 
Bravery Awards recognize the heroic deeds of people who have 
gone above and beyond to save or attempt to save lives of 
others. 
 
Constable Dempster and Constable Diachuk were awarded the 
bronze medals for bravery they showed in saving a man from a 
fire at a truck stop restaurant and motel near Maidstone in April 
2015. The constables entered the complex around 2:30 a.m. and 
rescued a man who was asleep inside an apartment at the rear of 
the building. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Clark Whitecalf was acknowledged with the silver 
medal for rescuing an 18-year-old woman from a burning home 
on the Sweetgrass First Nation in August 2015. With the home 
fully engulfed in flames, Mr. Whitecalf heard coughing coming 
from the inside. So he entered the house, sustaining severe 
smoke inhalation while pulling the woman safely outside. 
 
I ask all members to join me in thanking Clark Whitecalf, 
Constable Diachuk, and Constable Dempster for their heroism 
and in congratulating all of the RCHA Bravery Award 
recipients. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Public Accounts Committee Meeting and 
Details of Land Transaction 

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, at the Public Accounts 
meeting this morning, the official opposition proposed a motion 
to invite four officials to appear before the committee as 
witnesses: the deputy minister of the Economy; the former CEO 
of the Global Transportation Hub, Mr. John Law; the former 
CEO of the Global Transportation . . . interim CEO of the 
Global Transportation Hub, Mr. Chris Dekker; the current CEO 
of the Global Transportation Hub, Mr. Bryan Richards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, surrounded by Sask Party MLAs and staff from 
executive council, all but one, all but one of the Sask Party 
MLAs voted against inviting these officials. They blocked 
them. And they even moved their own motion to invite only 
two officials. After weeks of the Sask Party refusing to answer 
basic questions on the floor of this Assembly and pretending 
they’re wanting to be open and transparent, can the Premier 
explain why he refused to support an open process to get to the 
bottom of the GTH [Global Transportation Hub] scandal? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, let’s be very clear. All of 
those four individuals that the members in their work, the 
opposition in their work at Public Accounts Committee, each of 
those four members they want to appear before Public Accounts 
to talk about this transaction were interviewed by the auditor in 
the report that they asked for. The NDP [New Democratic 
Party] asked for the auditor to report, then they asked for this 
meeting as the committee is wont to do. 
 



November 8, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1207 

Well we should actually look very carefully at the content of the 
Provincial Auditor’s testimony today before the Public 
Accounts Committee. She systematically answered every single 
question that the Leader of the Opposition has been asking in 
this House. She said there was no fraud or conflict of interest. 
She said that the reason she noted the April 2012 phone call 
was to show that there was “knowledge within the general 
community” about the government trying to acquire this land, 
and that by sharing the phone call with officials it showed the 
minister was concerned about this and wasn’t trying to keep the 
call secret. In other words, the fact that he shared it with 
officials was pretty good evidence that it wasn’t the secret call 
that the member opposite has claimed it to be. 
 
She also said the negotiations in December 2013 that the NDP 
and others called a “cabinet leak” was not a cabinet leak. She 
said when cabinet makes a decision, it shares that decision with 
affected individuals. She said that is not a breach of cabinet 
confidentiality. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, she went on to say a number of other things 
that answer every single allegation from members opposite, and 
I’m going to be happy to get into those in the subsequent 
question. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Unbelievable, Mr. Speaker. And of 
course this is from the scathing report of the auditor that 
exonerated no one, that was a forensic audit . . . or was not a 
forensic audit, in which she said she couldn’t even follow the 
money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you know, government can make all the noise they want. 
They wasted millions of dollars. The people of our province 
deserve answers. 
 
And let me remind the Premier that the Public Accounts is 
chaired by the opposition because it’s its role to review actions 
of government. And instead of supporting a fair investigation 
into this scandal, the Sask Party committee MLAs shamefully 
were playing games here today. Mr. Speaker, they blocked all 
but two officials, including the key negotiator of this scandal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the Premier block the deputy minister of 
the Economy? It just makes sense to have him there. Blocking 
this is totally unacceptable. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, nobody was blocked in the 
investigation. In fact all four individuals were interviewed by 
the Provincial Auditor. 
 
The member in his preamble just said that he didn’t accept the 
Provincial Auditor’s report as a fair investigation. That’s what 
you just implied. Mr. Speaker, that’s what he implied. Mr. 
Speaker, he needs to stand in his place and confirm for the 
record that he supports the work of the Provincial Auditor and 
that her investigation was fair. 
 
He went on now to say, well it wasn’t a forensic audit. The 
auditor answered that question today in the very meeting he’s 

talking about. Here’s what she said. She said she didn’t need to 
conduct a forensic audit because she saw no evidence of 
conflict of interest or wrongdoing. She said her audit was in fact 
actually broader than a forensic audit. 
 
And then she said this, Mr. Speaker. She even said they actually 
engaged a forensic auditor to be a part of the team, and the 
quote is, here from this morning’s meeting “. . . to figure out if 
we needed to pursue . . . [other] lines of inquiry . . .” And they 
determined, and this is important, with the forensic auditor on 
her team, they determined that further investigation was not 
necessary because there wasn’t a conflict of interest that has 
been alleged. 
 
None of this fits with the conspiracy the members have offered 
opposite. None of this fits with the smear campaign they’ve 
been doing against a member in this House. But the facts came 
out today. The Provincial Auditor testified no conflict of 
interest. No wrongdoing. No secret phone call. No cabinet leak. 
Mr. Speaker, yes or no, does the Leader of the NDP support the 
work of the Provincial Auditor? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, no answer there again, and 
the Premier’s pretty fired up here today. We support the auditor 
and the scathing report she brought forward, but we don’t have 
any faith in the Sask Party government who hide day after day 
from providing basic answers to some pretty important 
questions. 
 
Let’s get this straight. It would be standard practice, standard 
practice for the DM [deputy minister] of the ministry 
responsible, for them to be there. But instead the Sask Party 
today blocked him from coming to committee as a witness. The 
auditor has confirmed, the auditor confirmed that he set up the 
deal. So again, why block the DM to the Ministry of the 
Economy from a committee that is looking into a deal that he’s 
at the heart of? The Sask Party’s actions are indefensible on this 
front. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I think the opposition leader is 
starting to realize he is on very thin ice here. He doesn’t have a 
case to support what he is alleging. Because, Mr. Speaker, all of 
the four individuals that they’ve said they would like to appear 
before the Public Accounts Committee to be questioned, were 
questioned as a part of the Provincial Auditor’s report — all 
four of them. And the Provincial Auditor’s conclusions are very 
clear. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we believe on this side of the House that the 
Provincial Auditor should do the work assigned to it by the 
Public Accounts Committee. That work was done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The auditor appeared before the Public Accounts Committee 
today, Mr. Speaker. Having all of those people interviewed 
again because it fits their political agenda and their conspiracy 
is not frankly for the purpose of the Public Accounts 
Committee, especially when the auditor, who is a professional, 
a trained professional, has done all of this work. And she 
concluded no conflict of interest, no wrongdoing. Noted that 



1208 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2016 

there was a forensic auditor as a part of the team. Noted that the 
secret phone call wasn’t really a secret phone call, and noted in 
questions from the member from Nutana that there was no 
cabinet leak, despite the fact that they said it over and over 
again on the floor of this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again I say to that member: with respect to her 
testimony today on these substantive, material items, does the 
Leader of the NDP support the Provincial Auditor or not? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the DM was a key 
negotiator in this deal. There’s no excuse to exclude him. But 
that’s not all. The government also excluded allowing a 
long-serving, experienced professional public servant who 
worked under both parties. He was the CEO just before the first 
deal was discussed at cabinet and was booted after he raised 
concern and recommended that the GTH should not buy the 
land. 
 
So I guess the question is, can the Premier explain why they 
voted twice, twice to exclude the former CEO of the Global 
Transportation Hub, Mr. John Law? What’s the Premier hiding? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, these are the words of the 
auditor this morning. The Leader of the Opposition has been 
caught again, not necessarily telling the truth, presenting facts 
in a way that may not be consistent with parliamentary practice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here’s what was said this morning with respect to 
the question of the former CEO: 
 

We didn’t ask for specific documentation. We did 
interview both parties [Mr. Law and Mr. Dekker]. And we 
did, in our interviews, we did afford them the opportunity 
to . . . like the open-ended question if there was anything 
they felt necessary to share with us . . . And there was 
nothing that was relevant to the audit. 
 

Mr. Speaker, whatever the future of any of the individuals 
involved, the former head of the GTH, whatever happened 
with respect to his future employment, was not related to the 
transaction. 
 
I know again, I know again this fact does not fit with the 
member’s conspiracy. He’s invested almost every day in 
question period since we began sitting this fall on this issue, on 
something he calls a scandal, where none exists. The auditor’s 
report wasn’t good enough, so now the auditor came before the 
committee and testified that there was no conflict of interest, 
there was no wrongdoing. 
 
Where is the questions today about the secret phone call? Is it 
because the auditor said it didn’t happen? Where is his 
questions today about his so-called leaked cabinet document? 
There are no questions because the auditor today said it wasn’t 
a leaked cabinet document. Why won’t the NDP support the 
work of this independent officer of the Legislative Assembly? 
 
The Speaker: — I caution members with their language and 

their respect for each other today. I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — You know, I think the Premier might 
forget that 20-some million dollars of Saskatchewan people’s 
hard-earned money has been wasted on this deal. And if the 
Premier thinks he’s going to make a bunch of noise that’s going 
to scare us off from asking the questions for Saskatchewan 
people, then he’s got another thing coming, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They not only blocked the DM for the Ministry of Economy 
and the long-standing civil servant that was booted by this 
government when he raised concerns, they also blocked their 
own political operative who was in place as the interim CEO at 
the Global Transportation Hub. 
 
[14:15] 
 
I think the Premier perhaps forgets that this committee was 
open to the public here today. And it’s clear to everyone that 
this was a coordinated effort that came out of Executive 
Council and the Premier’s office. So can the Premier explain to 
the people of Saskatchewan how he can justify that he is being 
open and transparent while he shuts down debate and denies 
access to very key witnesses at the heart of this scandal? It’s 
simply indefensible. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — What a bunch of nonsense, Mr. 
Speaker. The Leader of the Opposition clearly wants to talk 
about process issues, which we’ve addressed. The individuals in 
question were interviewed by the Provincial Auditor. The 
auditor had full access to them. She indicated in the meeting 
even, when asked, she had no obstacles put in her way, that 
people were very co-operative with respect to interviews. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we saw this morning was the Provincial 
Auditor confirming emphatically the conclusions of the report 
that she made to the Public Accounts Committee and refuting 
very directly all of the allegations and the conspiracy theories 
that we’ve seen put forward in this House day after day after 
day, the attempted smearing of a member of this Assembly with 
unfounded allegations that are completely contrary to the facts. 
Those were dealt with head on today, Mr. Speaker, by the 
auditor, and the allegations of those members were found to be 
complete nonsense. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

SaskPower Rate Increase 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, there’s no denying this fact. 
Nearly 11,000 more Saskatchewan people are looking for work 
today than they were a year ago; 11,000 families who are being 
left out in the cold because of this government’s 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste. Yesterday the rate review 
panel recommended cutting the planned SaskPower rate hike 
for January, the third in less than two years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, job creators are speaking out. The Meadow Lake 



November 8, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1209 

Mechanical Pulp mill employs 716 people, and electricity 
represents 20 per cent of their input costs. They told the rate 
review panel, “Meadow Lake is not driving the need for 
increased costs due to expansion or infrastructure upgrades — 
but is paying for it.” Mr. Speaker, how did the SaskPower 
minister justify to the member from Meadow Lake that his $1.5 
billion job-killing carbon capture tax could cost jobs in his 
riding? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my first 
time to be able to stand up in this House and talk about our BD3 
[Boundary dam 3] project, Mr. Speaker: 800 000 tonnes of 
carbon out of the atmosphere; 200,000 cars off the roads, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there’s a great demand for electricity and 
great demand for a consistent and reliable delivery of electrical 
service in this province, Mr. Speaker. The demand is growing: 
over 8,000 new connections to the system in just one year, Mr. 
Speaker. So with our target of 50 per cent renewables by 2030, 
Mr. Speaker, there is going to be demands on the system, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And so these rates reflect the fact that we’re going to have to 
continue to invest significant amounts of money in our 
infrastructure, Mr. Speaker, over the next number of years to 
ensure that we can continue to provide a safe and reliable 
source of electricity to the people of this province, not only 
residential customers, Mr. Speaker, but industrial customers as 
well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I’m used to ministers shrugging 
off my concerns, but how about the Saskatchewan Chamber of 
Commerce: 
 

. . . after making such a significant capital investment in 
new technology, we think now is the time for SaskPower 
to look for smaller scale improvements and that large 
investments in new untested technology should be put on 
hold. 

 
Or how about the Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers 
who said, “In future capital expenditures, CAPP encourages 
SaskPower to examine all possible alternatives to obtain the 
lowest possible source of supply.” 
 
And further to that, the Saskatchewan Industrial Energy 
Consumers said that their members “. . . must manage 
significant price and margin compression and aggressively 
drive operating costs and capital spending lower. This is not a 
time for SaskPower to raise rates . . .” 
 
Mr. Speaker, their messages are clear: stop dumping money in 
carbon capture and stop hiking the rates. 
 
Will the minister commit to stopping any plans to expand their 
job-killing carbon capture tax? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General and of SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the success of our carbon capture project down at BD3 is clear. 
Mr. Speaker, it’s part of the solution to climate change. Mr. 
Speaker, we can quote article after article that speaks to the 
efficiency and the importance of carbon capture as a component 
of ensuring that we can deal with the issues of climate change, 
Mr. Speaker. We’ve spoken this again and again. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there’s no denying the fact that we need to 
make significant investments in infrastructure to ensure that we 
have a safe and reliable delivery of power in this province to all 
consumers and all customers of SaskPower. 
 
And I might say this, Mr. Speaker. One of the recommendations 
of the rate review panel yesterday was to engage the public in a 
full dialogue, Mr. Speaker, a consultation with how we’re going 
to continue to move forward with renewables, what the impact 
on rates is going to be in the future so that the public and all 
consumers of SaskPower, Mr. Speaker, have a full 
understanding of the importance not only with respect to the 
delivery of renewables as part of our overall package, Mr. 
Speaker, but with respect to all the carbon mitigation that we 
need to do in this province, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that we can 
have a good handle moving forward when it comes to climate 
change. And we’re going to continue down that road. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Measures to Protect Against Bovine Tuberculosis 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, on a different topic, a diagnosis 
of tuberculosis in a single cow is taking a terrible toll on 
Alberta cattle ranchers in southeastern Alberta. Cattle have been 
quarantined and herds could be at risk. The CFIA [Canadian 
Food Inspection Agency] has been called in and is doing 
testing. 
 
Obviously there is a need for calm, but it is equally important 
that here in Saskatchewan we’re doing all we can to protect our 
cattle and our ranchers. Once a diagnosis is found, the testing 
and the quarantine is a federal responsibility. But until then, it is 
the provincial government’s responsibility to keep our cattle 
safe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the Minister of Agriculture and the 
Minister of Environment’s plans to protect Saskatchewan 
herds? And is there any sort of testing planned here in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
member for that question. It’s very unfortunate that tuberculosis 
was found on a ranch in Alberta and that since the CFIA has 
been called in to investigate the issue, the issue has expanded to 
include a number of herds in Alberta. And of course, they 
border on Saskatchewan. And so there is concern for sure, and 
it’s a valid question. 
 



1210 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2016 

Our chief veterinarian is working with CFIA, who have the 
responsibility to run the investigation and direct the appropriate 
protocols. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 

Construction of a Road to Wollaston Lake 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, community members have 
been pushing for a road into Wollaston Lake for years, and yet 
there are still no firm plans to build this road. Yes, it would 
benefit northern communities, but it would benefit the entire 
province too. Not only will it grow the economy in the North, it 
is essential to getting resources from the North. 
 
We hear lots of talk about the road, but it is clearly not a 
priority for the Sask Party. They still haven’t dedicated any 
capital money towards this project. Mr. Speaker, as they sit 
back and watch thousands of jobs cut in Saskatchewan, why 
won’t the Sask Party get moving on this road that will provide 
jobs for northerners and bring money into our province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
member opposite for the question. I had the privilege yesterday 
of meeting with the northern community leaders and industry 
representatives to discuss this very issue on the Wollaston Lake 
road. 
 
We have received official . . . a letter from the federal 
government and INAC [Indigenous and Northern Affairs 
Canada] in support of this. And we are in the process now, the 
Ministry of Highways, in the budget process of bringing this 
road to a priority like we have many other roads in the province 
of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, this road would grow the 
economy, increase public safety, and help us get fish to 
markets. Waiting for the ice road and crossing the lake is 
getting less and less reliable. The whole community felt the 
impact when a teacher lost her life. Mr. Speaker, just last year 
the barge was frozen in, but the ice road was not safe. There 
was a shortage of gas and food shortage in Wollaston Lake. 
And, Mr. Speaker, the issues with the fire evacuation is an area 
we all know well. 
 
We often hear a lot of words from this government about the 
desire to help the North. So will the Sask Party commit to 
moving forward with this opportunity to do something concrete 
to address it in a real way, many of the issues facing northerners 
in these communities? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our government 
does recognize and realize the importance of the North and 
northern communities. We have invested over $52 million in 
northern projects this year, Mr. Speaker. And we are looking at 
this project with great interest, and we are in the process now of 
evaluating the project and trying to move this project forward, 

Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

Donations to Political Parties 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday just moments after I 
asked the Premier if he’d be willing to stop using corporate 
dollars to fill his pockets and his party coffers, he pulled this 
stunt, calling for public money to fill corporate coffers. Irony is 
not dead, Mr. Speaker, and the people of Saskatchewan . . . our 
democracy to be alive and well too. On this side of the House, 
we’re committed to updating the elections Act to ban corporate 
union and out-of-province donations and making our 
democracy more democratic. 
 
Mr. Speaker, both the Premier and the Minister of Justice have 
stood in this place and argued corporations from Alberta are 
Saskatchewan people too. Is there another minister who would 
like to join them and proclaim that they will ignore the will of 
the people of Saskatchewan who are calling for changes to 
legislation and instead side with the corporations who are filling 
the Sask Party coffers? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday 
the member opposite stood in his place and said Saskatchewan 
democracy belongs to Saskatchewan people. And I said this 
yesterday in the House, that we couldn’t agree with that more, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The fact of the matter is that the companies that are making 
contributions, Mr. Speaker, have significant presence in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, both in terms of employees and by 
economic investment in this province. And it seems reasonable 
to us, Mr. Speaker, that in terms of public policy that affects the 
people that work for those companies, all of whom, Mr. 
Speaker, live in Saskatchewan, pay taxes in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, and support our economy should have that voice, Mr. 
Speaker. And we’re going to continue with this. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre, and I would caution him in his words that he uses. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party just can’t get 
enough of that corporate money. Mr. Speaker, when discussing 
government business, the appearance of influence is as bad as 
actual influence. It’s all pay-to-play, Mr. Speaker.  
 
One example, one example: a single lobbying firm hired the 
Sask Party’s former development director in 2011. Prior to that 
hiring, this lobbying firm had donated nothing to the governing 
party. Since then, they have given nearly $27,000. And since 
the lobbyist’s registry went live in August, that former staffer 
has lobbied the government on behalf of 19 clients — 19 
clients. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a problem. So will the government work 
with us to change the financing rules and ensure Saskatchewan 
democracy rests in the hands of Saskatchewan people? 



November 8, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1211 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker, and I’m glad the 
member opposite referenced The Lobbyists Act because prior to 
The Lobbyists Act — which was introduced on the floor of this 
House, Mr. Speaker, supported by this government — there was 
no ability for the people of Saskatchewan to learn who are 
lobbying their elected officials, Mr. Speaker. And now we have 
a full process, Mr. Speaker, where the member opposite can get 
that information, so he knows exactly who’s talking to members 
on the government side of the House, Mr. Speaker.  
 
So it seems to me that there’s no, there’s no conflict here, Mr. 
Speaker. The Lobbyists Act is in place to ensure that people in 
Saskatchewan know who are lobbying their elected officials, 
Mr. Speaker, and so it should be. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. During question 
period today, the Premier said that the Leader of the 
Opposition, quote, did not use the truth. Mr. Speaker, you’ve 
been recently making attempts to bring more decorum to the 
House and preventing language exactly like this. The rules of 
debate are clear that this is against both the rules of debate and 
it’s unparliamentary language. I’m asking that you, Mr. 
Speaker, find that those comments were out of order. 
 
The Speaker: — Today I cautioned both sides of the House on 
two different examples. I do not believe . . . I believe the 
caution that I expressed on this one goes enough towards 
returning decorum into the Assembly, so we will not be hearing 
this point of order or other point of orders that may have been 
raised because caution was expressed to said members. 
 
[14:30] 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answers to questions 140 through 143. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered answers 
to questions 140 to 143. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: —Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to question 144 and 145. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled answers to 

questions 144 and 145. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 5 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 5 — The 
Electronic Information and Documents Amendment Act, 2016 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure and 
honour to rise this afternoon to speak to Bill No. 5, The 
Electronic Information and Documents Amendment Act, 2016. 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the pleasure of reading the 
comments from my colleagues and others in the other second 
reading debates with respect to this bill, Mr. Speaker, but I’ve 
also had the opportunity to read the minister’s comments with 
respect to this bill as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
From what I understand, Bill No. 5 updates references that 
stayed in the legislation from “department” to “ministry.” Now 
I’ll specifically point out where those changes are. Now it 
sounds like it was actually noted in a lot of different portions of 
The Electronic Information and Documents Amendment Act, 
Mr. Speaker, including section 17. It used to have a reference to 
“department” and we’re now substituting “ministry” there. 
 
Similarly section 26 will be removing “department” and 
substituting that with “ministry,” and subsection 28(1) this is 
happening, as well as subsection 28(3), subsection 29(1), 
similarly clause 30(2)(b), Mr. Speaker. This makes sense. It’s 
simply just modernizing the language. Typically “department” 
isn’t used as much anymore, but more “ministry” is what’s 
referred to, Mr. Speaker. So as with all things, things move 
slowly, and we need to make sure that we’re continually 
updating the language in the Acts to reflect what we see in our 
legislation, or to update the legislation to reflect what we see in 
real life, Mr. Speaker. So it makes sense to make those fairly 
minor changes in keeping with the current vernacular. 
 
There is a few other changes that I wanted to comment on with 
respect to this bill, Mr. Speaker, one of which repeals clause (e) 
of section 4(1), which are the exceptions to the Act. Now the 
purpose of The Electronic Information and Documents Act is 
essentially to oversee the electronic documents provisions. And 
essentially instead of having to change all of the legislation to 
allow for electronic documents, what was created was this Act 
so that this Act could sort of supersede and allow these changes 
without us having to go through each and every piece of 
legislation in Saskatchewan, and making sure that there’s 
nothing that’s excepted except for what’s explicitly provided 
within the Act now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the exceptions that currently exist include wills and health 
care directives, Mr. Speaker. And that makes sense because 



1212 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2016 

there’s some specific legal requirements for valid wills, Mr. 
Speaker, as well as valid health care directives, Mr. Speaker. So 
it makes sense, and it makes sense that those are being 
essentially preserved and do not fall within The Electronic 
Information and Documents Act. 
 
Similarly trusts created by wills, they have a similar base of 
legal requirements that have been set out in years of common 
law as well as in statute, Mr. Speaker. So it makes sense that we 
have those as well as powers of attorney. And a lot of that has 
to do with ensuring that we have original signatures on 
documents and that we’re not using copies of things. They’re 
very highly sensitive documents, and they’re often subject to 
legal challenges. So it’s important that we have those provisions 
in place, and I’m happy to see that those aren’t being removed 
from the Act. 
 
Now the one that is being removed from the Act is subsection 
(e) like I said, and I quote, “documents that create or transfer 
interests in land and that require registration to be effective 
against third parties,” Mr. Speaker. So this is the portion of the 
exceptions that are going to be repealed in the Act once the bill 
is passed into law. 
 
Now I’m just going through the . . . Now when we were handed 
the explanatory notes it didn’t much explain why this repeal 
was done, but when you look at the discussion that the minister 
has provided it does provide a little bit more information. Now 
when the minister tabled this bill he indicated that the reason to 
remove this exemption was first of all led by requests made 
from the real estate and credit union communities, essentially to 
update the bill. From what I understand, Mr. Speaker, I believe 
that this legislative change is going to be or is supported by 
both the Sask Chamber of Commerce, SaskCentral, and Sask 
realtors’ association. 
 
Now based on what the information the minister has provided, 
the new land registry process already renders this void, so I’m 
not sure. Now he says specifically: 
 

. . . the modern electronic registry process has removed this 
concern and overrides the Act by specifically . . . 
[providing] the electronic registration requirements for the 
land registry. Accordingly, transactions for real estate 
matters between private parties are not caught by this 
exemption as they are not actual documents used by . . . 
[Information Services Corporation] to file transfers in the 
electronic registry. 

 
But I believe there was some concerns just making sure that 
there was some common understanding, that in fact then that 
people aren’t caught under this exemption just to clarify 
essentially what’s been going on based on the information that 
the minister has provided. And at committee I am hoping I can 
ask a few more questions with respect to how that works in 
particular. 
 
And that’s the important thing here is making sure that 
everyone is properly consulted and that essentially all the i’s are 
dotted and the t’s are crossed with respect to this legislation, 
especially when it’s legislation like this that’s essentially 
modernizing and keeping us up to speed. And it seems, 
generally speaking, supported by most of the main players in 

this area, but we want to make sure that, like I said, there’s been 
no stone left unturned and no unintended consequence with 
respect to this legislation. 
 
Because you don’t ever want to have to . . . And sometimes you 
often see having to go back and correct an error or there’s an 
unintended consequence of a legislation that can result 
sometimes in very expensive legal proceedings between either 
private parties or it could involve government, which can 
involve a lot of tax dollars essentially going to waste trying to 
clarify confusing legislation when really, if the due diligence 
had been done, that the legislation would be clear to begin with, 
and we wouldn’t have had to deal with that issue in the first 
place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it sounds like — and I’m going to need clarity on this in 
committee — that essentially this has become somewhat a 
redundant exemption with respect to private land transfers and 
how they relate to ISC [Information Services Corporation of 
Saskatchewan]. 
 
But I’m going to ask some questions about whether, or what 
exemption . . . who is still caught by this exemption, if there 
were any type of other land transfers that wouldn’t have been 
caught under this, although I can’t think of any off the top of 
my head because I know ISC is the main land registry body for 
Saskatchewan, which is an interesting organization to talk 
about.  
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, it was once a Crown and is now 
essentially a public . . . Well it’s a publicly traded company so 
it’s not a Crown any more, and even though it still provides a 
very invaluable service to the people of Saskatchewan of 
managing all of land titles, mineral titles, also manage the 
personal property registry amongst other things, Mr. Speaker. I 
believe it’s also part of . . . It also runs vital statistics . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Oh it used to, my apologies. It used 
to run vital statistics but that’s been now transferred to eHealth, 
although it does also run the corporate registry and business 
registrations Saskatchewan. So it is a really important company 
and it’s very interesting. 
 
In my past years of practice, I found them to be very efficient 
and the turnaround time to be very quick in terms of getting 
requests filed, getting documents filed. Since I’ve become 
critic, I’ve heard from lawyers who have expressed some 
concerns as to the lag time in terms of what’s . . . the lag time in 
terms of responses being received at ISC. So I’m not too sure 
what’s been going on over there since the ISC has been 
privatized, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It was once one of the . . . a very successful, essentially very 
profitable Crown corporation. And it was also, I believe, one of 
like a very . . . It was a very highly respected employer in 
Saskatchewan. I believe it actually won even some awards back 
in the day. 2012 and 2013, I understand ISC was named as one 
of Canada’s Best Diversity Employers and a top 20 
Saskatchewan employer, and was also one of Canada’s 
Greenest Employers. Oh, it looks like also, Mr. Speaker, in 
2012, ISC was named by Mediacorp as one of Canada’s Top 
Employers for Young People, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it was also well respected within the legal community, as I 



November 8, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1213 

had said, in terms of being very effective. And sometimes you 
always . . . You know, your clients always want to get things 
yesterday, so nothing is every quite fast enough in terms of this 
modern day and age, Mr. Speaker. But if there was one thing, 
we always felt that we got very good service, and there’s still 
good service. But as I had said, I have heard complaints 
recently from lawyers who are concerned about what they’re 
seeing in terms of some slowdown in the quality of responses 
that they’re receiving. And as critic, I think it’s important that I 
make sure government is aware of those concerns, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So with respect to that, the removal of that clause (e), Mr. 
Speaker, I’m going to have the opportunity, and I look forward 
to having the opportunity, to asking more questions with the 
minister. But in seeing that both the credit unions, the realtors’ 
association and the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce are 
both in favour of removing this exemption, I’m somewhat 
happy to see that. 
 
And if members opposite can’t hear me then, which they’ve 
apparently said, they’re more than welcome to stop heckling, 
Mr. Speaker, and they’re more than welcome to listen because 
these are very important bills that we’re talking about. We do 
have earpieces for a reason, Mr. Speaker, and I know that the 
members opposite, I feel, are fully capable of using them. So I 
have no intention of raising my voice because I think it’s 
important, Mr. Speaker, that in this House we maintain a level 
of decorum and respect for members opposite, and we’ll 
continue to do so. 
 
[14:45] 
 
But I’m happy to see that some members opposite are interested 
in the thoughts that I have with respect to these bills, and the 
thoughts that the members on this side of the House have with 
respect to these bills. And I’m happy to see that some members 
opposite on the government side are listening intently and 
closely. It’s very good to see, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I do have a few more things I want to speak to with respect to 
this bill. One of them . . . Now I’ve lost my note. I apologize. 
There was one other change that I noticed here, including the 
exemption and then the ministry. There was this update to the 
regulations allowing for . . . Oh no, I’ve got that one. That was 
another change to the prescribing . . . or “department” to 
“ministry” as another change, Mr. Speaker, so I don’t think that 
one’s too exciting, frankly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s been a lot of work lately in terms of the law 
surrounding electronic documents, and there’s definitely a trend 
universally towards modernizing and accepting more electronic 
documents, electronic signatures, Mr. Speaker, and things of 
that sort, so it makes sense in this day and age that we do what 
we can in terms of modernizing our legislation to reflect that, to 
reflect what’s become the standard across the world while at the 
same time ensuring that the documents that we’re submitting 
and those that we’re relying on in terms of doing important 
transactions like land transactions, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Oftentimes land transactions and mortgages are the most 
expensive thing that you’ll ever buy in your lifetime, so it’s 
important that these documents aren’t void and are held up to a 
high esteem. And I know the people at ISC and the good work 

we’ve been doing here has helped maintain that level of 
respectability and allows us to move forward in terms of 
modernizing, so it’s essentially just another step, another 
process in terms of modernizing business, frankly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
More and more often we’re seeing that business is being 
conducted online, so it simply makes logical sense that as more 
and more business is conducted online, more and more paper 
documents become electronic documents. I know we talk a lot 
about creating a paperless world and a paperless industry, and 
that would be one thing that we would focus on for sure. And I 
think it’s really important to do what we can, essentially, to . . . 
you know, it’s a little step in terms of preserving the 
environment, but it’s an important step. I know a lot of law 
firms are looking towards creating a paperless work 
environment. It’s a slow, slow process, but it’s one that’s 
important. And frankly, Mr. Speaker, land transactions are 
some of the most paper burdensome transactions. So if we can 
do anything to break down the amount of paper that’s being 
used in these transactions, then I think we’re heading in the 
right direction, Mr. Speaker. So that makes sense essentially to 
me. 
 
Now I’m looking forward, Mr. Speaker, to having the 
opportunity to speak to this bill and to speak with the minister 
about this bill at committee and ask him questions. Like I said, 
I’m going to be focusing a lot on . . . less on the minor 
vernacular changes from “department” to “ministry” but 
probably more so on this repeal of clause (e) of section 4(1), the 
exemptions to the Act, just to ensure that all the i’s are dotted 
and the t’s are crossed with respect to this change, just seeing as 
it’s very important to make sure that everything has been 
thought through and we’re making important legislative change, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So with that, I think I’m prepared and ready to move this bill to 
committee. So with that, I will conclude my comments. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the member that Bill No. 5, The Electronic Information and 
Documents Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 9 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 9 — The 
Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 



1214 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2016 

2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’exécution des jugements 
canadiens be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure and 
honour to rise today and speak with respect to Bill No. 9, The 
Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Act amendments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the luxury of hearing and listening in on 
my colleagues’ comments with respect to Bill No. 9 over the 
past couple of weeks. I found them very helpful, and I’m very 
grateful to them for their hard work in speaking to bill 
adjournments day after day and night after night, often until 
10:30 at night, Mr. Speaker. But that time has given us the 
opportunity to take a look at these bills and really investigate 
them and have an opportunity to really go through them and 
thoroughly digest them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This bill amends The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Act. 
Essentially it’s another wording change, but this one is much 
more beefier, Mr. Speaker, than the last bill, Bill 5, that I just 
spoke to. 
 
Now it amends the definition of “Canadian judgment,” Mr. 
Speaker, to now include “Canadian tax judgment.” And then 
there’s a definition for “Canadian tax judgment.” And then it 
also updates a cross-reference that’s made to the Criminal 
Code. 
 
Now “Canadian tax judgment,” like I said, Mr. Speaker, has 
been added to section 2, the section’s provision of The 
Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Act, Mr. Speaker. And it 
now includes . . . And I think that it’s important that I read it 
into the record, Mr. Speaker, as this is essentially the crux of 
this legislative change. Canadian judgment means: 
 

(a) a judgment for the recovery of an amount of money 
payable under a law imposing a tax made by a court of a 
province or territory of Canada other than Saskatchewan; 
or 
 
(b) a certificate of an amount of money payable under a 
law imposing a tax that is: 
 

(i) registered in a court of a province or territory of 
Canada other than Saskatchewan; and 
 
(ii) deemed under the law of that province or territory to 
be a judgment of that court. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I understand that this is a trend that is quite 
new in Canada but has been recommended by the Uniform Law 
Conference in terms of something that we can do to . . . 
Understanding that this is jurisdictionally a provincial matter, 
but it’s important for courts and for those who work within the 
. . . or who are trying to enforce judgments to be able to work 
within a similar scheme wherever they are, Mr. Speaker, to be 
able to look at this and to be able to use a similar pattern and 
similar enforcement mechanism no matter which jurisdiction 
they’re in, Mr. Speaker. 
 

And it’s also important for those who are . . . who essentially 
receive a judgment order in a province outside of Saskatchewan 
but wish to enforce that order within Saskatchewan, have the 
ability to do so. And that’s essentially the crux of why The 
Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Act exists. 
 
I had the opportunity and the honour of learning a lot about this 
Act from one of the most, I would say, well-respected academic 
leaders in this area, Mr. Speaker, Ronald Cuming, QC [Queen’s 
Counsel] I believe, who is a professor at the University of 
Saskatchewan. He’s an expert in the area of judgments and 
judgment enforcement. I think I might have gotten him . . . It 
might have been my only A in law school, Mr. Speaker, so I 
hang pride with that. I think there’s a joke that those who get As 
in law school end up as judges; those who get Bs in law school 
end up as lawyers, and those who get Cs make adequate 
politicians. So I think I’ve lived up to my expectation in terms 
of the average grade I got, but I will take a point of pride in 
getting my one A in judgment enforcement. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, Professor Cuming taught me a lot about this, 
and I understand that he’s taught at the law school for 50 years, 
Mr. Speaker, which is quite, quite incredible to have that long 
of a distinguished career. It’s quite impressive. But I digress, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The importance of this bill and this change, like I said, the 
importance of The Enforcement of Money Judgments Act is to 
recognize and create the ability to enforce judgments outside of 
Saskatchewan in Saskatchewan. Now what this changes, is it 
going to include Canadian tax judgments? I understand there 
was some lack of clarity as to whether or not Canadian tax 
judgments were included under this Act. And it just makes it a 
little bit clearer and makes it a little bit easier for those who 
need to enforce Canadian tax judgments that are ordered outside 
of Saskatchewan, now can be enforced inside of Saskatchewan. 
 
And from what I understand, as I said, it’s one of the 
recommendations that had been made in the Uniform Law 
Conference. And it’s also been confirmed as something that is 
important to do by the Supreme Court of Canada. Now thankful 
to the minister for providing some good information as to this 
bill, and from what I understand, he’s explained that Manitoba 
has recently implemented these amendments. But Manitoba is 
the first jurisdiction to implement these amendments, and we 
will now be the second jurisdiction once this . . . as long as no 
one beats us to the punch, I suppose. But we will, I guess that 
will mean we’ll be one of the top, one of the first jurisdictions 
in Canada to start creating this more uniform code. And it’s 
important for us to lead by example. Oftentimes, especially in 
recent years, our government unfortunately has failed to do that. 
So it’s nice to see that in some legislation we are actually doing 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the minister indicates that “Extending the Act to . . . tax 
judgments will make administration easier and will allow for 
uniform and equitable enforcement of Canadian tax 
judgments,” Mr. Speaker, which makes sense. Now I’ll be 
interested to hear — and I’m hopeful that at committee I can 
ask questions with respect to this — this change with respect to 
essentially the Supreme Court’s recommendations and the 
Uniform Law Conference’s recommendations, just to ensure 
that there isn’t any recommendations that have been missed and 



November 8, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1215 

to ensure that we’re doing all we can in terms of creating an 
enforcement of judgment regime that’s helpful to everyone, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now another thing I noticed that’s a bit of a change with respect 
to this bill is subsection 7(4) which requires an application to 
the court for directions on enforcement. So this creates a 
mandatory requirement that there must be an application to 
court for the court to direct how enforcement shall proceed. 
Now the Canadian tax judgments, the new definition — or there 
wasn’t a definition before, I suppose — so this definition will 
be exempted from this requirement. But that doesn’t necessarily 
mean that those who wish to apply to the court for directions 
are required to not apply to the court, so it provides that avenue. 
 
Now I’m not sure off the top of my head . . . I think those who 
would be trying to enforce any type of Canadian tax judgment 
wouldn’t be, you know, obviously wouldn’t be an 
unrepresented litigant. It would likely be the other municipality 
perhaps or someone . . . [inaudible] . . . some sort of 
government body perhaps. Maybe not, but that’s the point of 
having committee is that I can ask these kinds of questions. 
 
But I’m less worried about . . . Sometimes I worry about 
creating extra steps in terms of the judicial process and what 
that can mean in terms of money that it costs individuals to go 
through that court process to get what they need out of the court 
system. 
 
[15:00] 
 
But I’m less worried about this specific change and this 
requirement for an application as it’s likely, more likely than 
not it’s going to create more of a burden on tax enforcers which 
would typically, I would think, not be smaller clients. However 
I will have that opportunity. I’m not sure if there’s some 
mom-and-pop shops that I’m not thinking of or if I have some 
tax lawyer friends who are watching this who will quickly 
prove me wrong or make sure that I know that I’m wrong later, 
which is always a good thing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another change that’s happening is that this or these changes 
are going to be retroactive with respect to Canadian tax 
judgments. Now that’s a bit of a unique legislative change, Mr. 
Speaker. Typically and traditionally, legislation that’s imposed 
can’t be retroactive and typically isn’t retroactive for a variety 
of reasons. Mainly, it’s hard to enforce legislation. I believe it’s 
been found to be historically unconstitutional in certain 
situations to have retroactive legislation. And those are some 
questions I’m going to be asking at committee. 
 
However from my understanding, the Uniform Law Conference 
. . . and in my reading under the Uniform Law Conference 
recommendations, which I printed off and have now . . . seem 
to have magically walked away from my desk during question 
period, Mr. Speaker. It’s always a bit of a wild time, and there’s 
always papers flying in the air and who knows where it’s gone 
off to now. But it’s probably found a better place, Mr. Speaker, 
than on my desk, and I’m sure it’s with someone who’s a much 
more eloquent speaker than myself. 
 
In any event, when I did read portions of the Uniform Law 
Conference, Mr. Speaker, I did note that there was a 

recommendation that this change with respect to Canadian tax 
judgment be made retroactively so to essentially require, Mr. 
Speaker, some consistency in terms of enforcing tax judgments. 
We don’t want or the Uniform Law Conference didn’t want any 
type of confusion or inconsistency around which judgments 
could be enforced through these changes and which judgments 
could not be enforced because they were done perhaps prior to 
this bill being tabled, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’ll be interested to hear comments from anyone who works 
in this field as to any concerns that they may have with respect 
to these changes and whether or not there’s any issues that 
they’re seeing. 
 
Oh, lucky me, Mr. Speaker, I found the Uniform Law 
Conference printout that I had made, and I guess it didn’t take 
off as far as I thought it had. Now just to be clear, as I know 
that this was what was used mostly when making these 
legislative changes to the enforcement of judgments Act, I think 
it’s important that we understand fully what this report is 
saying. 
 
I believe what happened, the creation of the report . . . and I am 
looking at an application, and now this may not be the actual 
report that was used because it wasn’t actually clarified in the 
minister’s remarks. But what I was able to find was a civil 
section application drafted by Vincent Pelletier and Isabelle 
Paradis of Quebec called “Application of the Uniform 
Enforcement of Canadian Judgments and Decrees Act to Tax 
Judgments,” Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I believe that the reason why this was created, and it was 
created back in . . . or the report was tabled back in 2006 at an 
annual conference held in Edmonton. So I’m not too sure what 
the delay was in terms of including this, but often, as I well 
know, that the wheels of justice turn painfully slow. And what 
I’m learning now in my days as a politician is that the wheels of 
legislative change turn almost slower. 
 
Although I’m sure that the good people and the good lawyers at 
the Ministry of Justice and the good legislative drafters at the 
Ministry of Justice have been working long and hard on this for 
quite a long period of time, probably consulting with quite a 
bunch of different . . . quite a numerous amount of jurisdictions 
to make sure that we’re coming in line with legislative changes 
that will likely happen in the future and in other jurisdictions, 
not just Saskatchewan and Manitoba, Mr. Speaker. I absolutely 
respect the hard work that they do and the long days of slogging 
over legislation that I know that they do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What I did want to point out with respect . . . and it goes to what 
I was talking about in terms of the retroactive nature of these 
legislative changes, because I think it’s a bit important to speak 
to that. This paper spoke to that a little bit. It makes it clear that, 
and I’m just going to quote from this: 
 

While true in Canada under the non-retroactivity principle 
applying to legislation in both civil law and common law 
jurisdictions, it ensues that statutes are presumed to be void 
of any retrospective effect. That presumption, however, is 
not a rule of law, being but a rule of interpretation for cases 
of doubt as to the statute’s temporal operation. Canadian 
courts have always been respectful of the lawmaker’s right 



1216 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2016 

to depart from the presumption. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that the drafters of this paper saw a 
need and were advocating for this legislative change to be 
retroactive and are presenting a case for why legislative drafters 
can make legislation retroactive. 
 
So at committee I’ll be interested to speak a little bit more to 
this and to ask the minister what’s been done in terms of the 
constitutional branch of the Ministry of Justice in terms of 
ensuring that there’s nothing in here that’s going to subject the 
government to any type of constitutional challenge in the future 
because that would be . . . essentially we wouldn’t want any 
type of undue waste on taxpayers’ money, Mr. Speaker, at least 
any more than this government already seems to be fine with 
doing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So those are the main changes to this bill, and I think it’s 
important and imperative that we have gone through them. 
 
The Enforcement of Money Judgments Act is a very important 
piece of legislation that we have in Saskatchewan. Oftentimes 
regular, everyday folk don’t have to encounter it until, 
unfortunately, either they have received a judgment, perhaps in 
small claims court, that they need to enforce or any other type 
of judgment that requires them to go through the court process 
to enforce, whether that’s Queen’s Bench or something else to 
that matter. 
 
However there are people that work within this area every 
single day. Oftentimes there are business owners who have to 
utilize the provisions in this Act, so it’s very important that 
when we’re opening this Act up for legislative change that 
we’re making sure that everything we’re doing is kosher, 
essentially, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure there’s a much better word 
for “kosher,” but that’s what I can think of right now. 
 
So I’ll be very interested to see, like I said, how those who are 
in this field feel about these changes. I think it’s going to be 
very important to make sure, as I said, that we are very careful 
and cautious with these legislative changes. It sounds like, 
according to what the minister has said, this isn’t going to 
change this area all that much, that it’s essentially just adding a 
definition for the purposes of clarifying some potential 
confusion within the legislation. But I do want to make sure that 
there isn’t anything untoward, or there’s anything that we 
haven’t thought of with respect to this change. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I think I’m . . . With that, Mr. 
Speaker, I think I will conclude my remarks with respect to this 
bill. I’m prepared for this bill to now go to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the member that Bill No. 9, The Enforcement of 
Canadian Judgments Act, 2016 now be read a second time. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I designate 
that Bill No. 9, The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments 
Amendment Act, 2016 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 15 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 15 — The 
Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
wade into the discussion on Bill No. 15, The Provincial Court 
Amendment Act, 2016. Please bear with me; I’m using all 
different kinds of resources here to enter into the debate here, 
between my laptop, my phone, my notes, and many different 
articles here. So please have a little bit of patience here when 
I’m searching for a document or an item. 
 
So Bill No. 15, The Provincial Court Amendment Act, I think 
it’s important to recognize that, starting out . . . I’m just going 
to go to a source that I normally actually would discourage my 
18-year-old daughter from using when she’s writing a paper, 
Mr. Speaker, but Wikipedia certainly does have its advantages 
at times. I’d like to point you to the Provincial Court of 
Saskatchewan Wikipedia page, because I think people at home 
need to understand the level of court that we’re speaking of 
right now. So the Provincial Court of Saskatchewan is this 
particular bill and the court amendment Act, 2016. 
 

The Provincial Court of Saskatchewan is a provincial court 
of record for the province of Saskatchewan. It hears 
matters relating to criminal law, youth law, civil law, 
family law, traffic law and municipal bylaws. 

 
And the jurisdiction of the provincial court, it’s a creation of a 
statute. And that is the statute actually, Mr. Speaker, that is 
before us right now. 
 

. . . [It] is a creation of statute and as such its jurisdiction is 
limited to those matters permitted by statute. It has no 
inherent jurisdiction, other than to the limited degree in 
which it may control its own procedures. 
 
In criminal matters, it is a trial court for all summary 
conviction offences. For indictable criminal offences, it 
can be a trial court if an accused person elects to have his 
or her trial in that court. When an accused charged with an 
indictable offence elects trial by a superior court (the 
Saskatchewan Court of Queen’s Bench), the preliminary 
inquiry will be held in the Provincial Court. The Provincial 
Court is also designated as the Youth Justice Court under 
the Youth Criminal Justice Act of Canada. 



November 8, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1217 

In civil matters, the Small Claims division of the court is 
limited to claims for up to $20,000. The Provincial Court 
also has limited family law jurisdiction, except for divorce 
proceedings and the division of matrimonial property. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the Judges of the Court: 
 

The Court is composed of the Chief Judge and 48 other 
judges. The judges are appointed by the provincial 
government. To be eligible for appointment, a person must 
have at least 10 years’ experience as a lawyer, or have 
other legal experience which is satisfactory to the Judicial 
Council of Saskatchewan. 

 
And we’ll talk a little bit about the Judicial Council here in a 
short bit, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Once appointed, judges are independent of the 
government, and can only be removed from office 
following the procedure set out in the Act. The judges 
serve until age 65, although the Chief Judge may grant an 
extension up to age 70 [Mr. Speaker]. 

 
The Sittings of the Court, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The Provincial Courts has permanent offices in 13 towns 
and cities [and those include]: Estevan, La Ronge, 
Lloydminster, Meadow Lake, Melfort, Moose Jaw, North 
Battleford, Prince Albert, Regina, Saskatoon, Swift 
Current, Wynyard and Yorkton. The Court also sits in 
almost 70 smaller centres across the province. Judges of 
the Provincial Court are [you might be interested in 
knowing this, Mr. Speaker] . . . as “Your Honour,” or 
“His/Her Honour.” 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, that tells us a little bit about the court of 
Saskatchewan, Provincial Court of Saskatchewan, whose statute 
we have before us for an amendment, Bill No. 15, The 
Provincial Court Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I would like to walk you through the explanatory notes that 
point to what some of the changes are, Mr. Speaker, and I will 
make some comments about a few, a few more in-depth 
comments about sections when I get there. So the explanatory 
notes, which describe what is actually being changed in this bill 
. . . So we have an existing provision of the current bill, Mr. 
Speaker, that states that we have: 
 

List of names 
18(1) The Lieutenant Governor in Council [which is the 
Executive Council] may cause a list to be compiled of 
persons who are eligible to be appointed as temporary 
judges. 
 
(4) Except as the result of a request pursuant to subsection 
(3), a removal pursuant to subsection (4.1) or section 62 or 
the death of a person, the Lieutenant Governor in Council 
shall not remove any names from the list mentioned in 
subsection (1). 
 
(4.1) The Lieutenant Governor in Council may remove a 
person mentioned in subclause (2)(b)(iii.1) from the list 
mentioned in subsection (1) if that person has been 

suspended or removed from office as a provincial court 
judge in a province other than Saskatchewan. 

 
[15:15] 
 
So that’s the existing provision in the bill that is to be amended, 
Mr. Speaker. And I’ll tell you a little bit about the amendment. 
So: 
 

Section 18 is amended to substitute “minister” for 
“Lieutenant Governor in Council” wherever it appears. 

 
So the minister now will be the individual . . . Sorry, Mr. 
Speaker, I have way too many notes that I’m referring to. This 
kind of looks like my desk in my office in the caucus office, 
Mr. Speaker. So let me just . . . So, Mr. Speaker, this authorizes, 
as I said, this moves the authority from the Executive Council 
to the Minister of Justice instead here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as well a “New subsection (4.2) establishes that the list 
must be published in the Gazette.” Mr. Speaker, I’m not a 
lawyer and I know there are many in this Chamber. So it’s 
always interesting to me to hear sort of practices on how our 
judicial system works. 
 
Another existing provision is review and investigation of 
complaint. So the council currently . . . So what this particular 
Act right now that we’re amending states, is that in section 
55(1): 
 

The council shall review and, where necessary, investigate 
the conduct of a judge where the council: 
 

(a) receives a complaint respecting the judge alleging 
misconduct or incapacity; or 
(b) otherwise becomes aware of possible misconduct by 
the judge or possible incapacity of the judge. 

 
(2) On completion of a review and any investigation, the 
council may: 
(b) review the matter with the judge, make a finding of 
misconduct or incapacity and make an order pursuant to 
clause 62(2)(b), (c), (d), (e) or (f) or clause 62(3)(a), (b), 
(c) or (d) where the council is of the opinion that the matter 
may appropriately be resolved by it without the 
appointment of a hearing committee and the judge consents 
to a resolution of the matter without the appointment of a 
hearing committee. 

 
So that’s how the current piece of legislation reads, Mr. 
Speaker. So to explain a little bit further about that, the changes 
being made in: 
 

Subsection (1.1) provides that for the purposes of 
conducting a review or an investigation pursuant to 
subsection (1) the council may ask the chairperson or 
another single member of the council to act on behalf of 
the council. 
 
(1.2) Where designated, the chairperson or member may 
dismiss the complaint without further consideration where 
the complaint is determined to be frivolous, vexatious, or 
without merit. 



1218 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2016 

The matter may also be referred back to the full council for 
further review and investigation. 
 
(1.3) A decision by a single member acting on behalf of the 
council is deemed to be an action of the entire council. 
 
The new clause 55(2)(b) clarifies that the council may 
make any of the orders in clause (i) as well as such other 
remedial order as the council considers appropriate. 

 
And before I move on to other clauses, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
speak a little bit further about that particular piece. So we had a 
case . . . So we’ve heard that this bill, I’ve mentioned earlier 
that this bill takes the power to create a list of temporary judges 
from cabinet and gives it to the Minister of Justice. And right 
now I’m speaking about the point that allows the Judicial 
Council to dismiss frivolous or vexatious complaints against 
judges, and it allows the Judicial Council to have one member 
respond to a complaint rather than the whole council. 
 
So just drawing on the minister’s second reading comments for 
a definition of the Judicial Council, he describes in his second 
reading comment: 
 

The Judicial Council is comprised of representatives from 
all levels of the judiciary in Saskatchewan, as well as 
members of the bar and government appointees under the 
chairmanship of the Chief Justice of the province. 

 
So that is the definition of the Judicial Council, so all 
professions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I am a social worker. We have a code of ethics, and we are 
committed to our profession, our professional body. You can’t 
call yourself a social worker unless you are a registered social 
worker meeting certain criteria and abide by your code of 
ethics. The same goes, Mr. Speaker, for teachers, for doctors, 
for registered nurses, all kinds of professions. And this goes for 
judges as well, Mr. Speaker. And as in every profession, we all 
need to be held accountable for our actions and our role as 
professionals, Mr. Speaker. So that is what the Judicial Council 
does. 
 
I want to . . . This point actually, and this change actually 
interested me or stuck out for me, that this particular change 
will allow the Judicial Council to dismiss frivolous or vexatious 
complaints against judges and allow the Judicial Council to 
have one member respond to a complaint rather than the whole 
council. And why that’s interesting, I just would like to draw 
everyone’s attention back to just this year actually, Mr. 
Speaker. There was a judge in Alberta actually, Mr. Speaker, 
Robin, and I’m forgetting his last name. I just need to find my 
papers here. I will reference this a little bit more fully here, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So just this last year a federal court judge was under review for 
berating a sexual assault complainant. So that is the headline 
from a story, actually, Mr. Speaker, from CBC [Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation]. Actually it was last year. It was 
already last November, Mr. Speaker, that the Canadian Judicial 
Council was reviewing the conduct of a federal court judge who 
questioned the efforts of a sexual assault complainant to fend 
off her attacker. 

So I’ll speak a little about that, but I think the important thing to 
note is that having the body that deals with complaints or 
misconduct is very important. As all professionals, we need to 
adhere to certain codes of ethics. And we’re all human, Mr. 
Speaker, and sometimes people err. And there needs to be the 
mechanism to file a complaint or express concern, Mr. Speaker. 
And sometimes some of those complaints that arise are more 
serious in nature and actually speak to something perhaps 
culturally entrenched, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So Justice Robin Camp, during a 2014 case he adjudicated 
while serving as an Alberta provincial court judge, was being 
reviewed last year. And this case involved the alleged rape of a 
19-year-old woman by a Calgary man whom she accused of 
sexually assaulting her over a bathroom sink during a house 
party. The review came after a complaint from four law 
professors at Dalhousie University and the University of 
Calgary who described Camp as dismissive if not contemptuous 
towards sexual assault laws and the rules of evidence. 
 

In the 11-page complaint, Elaine Craig, Jocelyn Downie, 
Jennifer Koshan and Alice Woolley said that in the 2014 
case, Camp asked the complainant, “Why couldn’t you just 
keep your knees together?” and, “Why didn’t you just sink 
your bottom down into the basin so he couldn’t penetrate 
you?” 

 
So those were comments made during a trial. 
 

The legal rules that Justice Camp took issue with were 
those aimed at removing from the law outdated and 
discredited stereotypes about women and sexual violence. 

 
That was the complaint to the Canadian Judicial Council, Mr. 
Speaker. So again, acknowledging that sometimes complaints 
are sort of a micro or individual nature, Mr. Speaker, but 
sometimes there’s broad social context as well. 
 
And we can talk a little bit about rape culture here and abroad. 
Actually it’s interesting on this day of the American election 
that we have a president, Mr. Speaker, who has used language 
that has been captured on tape that was, I would argue, 
perpetrates this rape culture. Sexual assault is normalized, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I want to talk a little bit about rates of sexual assault, Mr. 
Speaker, here in Canada. And why when you have a court, the 
arbiter of justice at the highest levels, Mr. Speaker . . . 
Acknowledging rape culture and addressing it has to happen 
from the grassroots, from everyday life, Mr. Speaker, up to 
those who make some of these decisions. 
 
But I want to talk about some of the rates of sexual assault. So 
according to the Sexual Assault Services of Saskatchewan, 
some statistics: 
 

All people are potential victims, regardless of gender, age, 
race, religion, sexual orientation, education or physical 
description. 

One of every 17 Canadian women is raped at some point 
in her life. 
Girls and young women between the ages of 15-24 are 
the most likely victims. 



November 8, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1219 

80% of assaults happen in the victim’s home. 
70% of rapes are committed by a perpetrator who knows 
the victims (relative, friend, neighbour, colleague, or 
other acquaintance). 
Approximately one half of all rapes occur on dates. 
62% of victims are physically injured in the attack; 9% 
are beaten severely or disfigured. 
Statistics Canada has found that one in four girls and one 
in eight boys have been sexually abused by the time they 
are eighteen. 

 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes to bringing these issues forward, 
actually there was a — I’m just going to refer to my phone here 
— there was a Ipsos Reid poll done on the issue of why victims 
don’t report sexual assault to police: 56 per cent feeling young 
and powerless; 40 per cent feel shame; 29 per cent, self-blame; 
26 per cent, desire to move on; 21 per cent have the belief that 
reporting wouldn’t do any good, Mr. Speaker, that concern 
around bringing issues forward; 19 per cent don’t want to turn 
in a family member; 18 per cent are concerned about the effect 
on future relationships; 15 per cent are afraid of further damage 
from the attacker; 11 per cent are afraid of the legal process; 
and 9 per cent knew the person and didn’t want to destroy their 
life. 
 
So often, if members of the judiciary have this dismissive 
attitude around sexual assault, it permeates down to the rest of 
us, Mr. Speaker, and women don’t come forward. And then 
when they see women who do come forward — or not just 
women, but victims who come forward — and then go through 
the court process and it is a negative experience, it means that 
they’re not going to want to come forward either. So it’s this 
cyclical process, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I think it’s important to talk a little bit. So again, with 
respect to this bill and the amendments around vexatious 
complaints, obviously, clearly that can very much happen. But 
I’m just again drawing your attention to a case in Alberta where 
a Provincial Court judge had made some comments during a 
trial, completely unacceptable actually in 2016, Mr. Speaker. 
As the mother of an 18-year-old and a 9-year-old, both girls, I 
have huge concerns that that is a message that that judge was 
sending, that there is a way for women to stop sexual assault 
from happening. 
 
There’s an article here I think that’s quite interesting from 
Global News about “Why don’t women report rape? Because 
most get no justice when they do.” So in this particular news 
story, it points out that “Chances are a woman in Canada will be 
sexually assaulted while you’re reading this and never tell 
police,” Mr. Speaker. 
 
The reporter goes on to say that: 
 

Decades after the Criminal Code was changed to better 
protect rape survivors and punish their assailants, fewer 
than one in five victims of sexual assault say they reported 
their violation to authorities. 

 
So we’ve heard those kinds of numbers. And then I talked about 
the: 
 

. . . Ipsos poll for Global News found that while 30 per cent 

of those surveyed said they’d experienced sexual assault in 
their lifetimes, fewer than one in five (about 18 per cent) of 
those had told police. 
 
Some felt young and powerless, or ashamed, or they 
blamed themselves or just wanted to move on. Many felt 
reporting would do little good. 

 
And in the last respect, the reporter goes on to write that “. . . 
the evidence bears them out, at least when it comes to 
conviction.” 
 
So when you look at conviction around sexual assault: 
 

Twenty-three per cent of sexual assault charges in 2011-12 
adult criminal court resulted in a guilty verdict, according 
to Statistics Canada. 
 
And that’s only the cases that go to trial . . . [and many 
don’t] make it that far. 
 
Women reported being victims of 472,000 sexual assaults 
in 2009, according to Statistics Canada’s General Social 
Survey; men [reported] 204,000. Yet police-reported crime 
statistics for that year show barely 21,000 incidents of 
sexual assault, and 7,951 persons [actually] charged. 

 
And the writer goes on to point out that: 
 

. . . the women most vulnerable to sexual exploitation — 
those with mental illness; anyone new to Canada or the 
English language who may not know her rights or her way 
around; First Nations and Inuit women; women who are 
poor or . . . [sex-trade workers] — are also those least 
likely to get justice through the legal system. 

 
[15:30] 
 
So those are some of the reasons, Mr. Speaker, why people 
don’t come forward. So it’s important that the Judicial Council 
is a place where complaints, if a judge errs or says things that 
are rules, or says things that are inappropriate, that there’s a 
place to go, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to tell you a little bit, something that I read in a CBC 
article actually around, “How should Canada’s court system 
deal with sexual assault cases?” So again we’ve got a high 
number of unreported cases and a relatively low number of 
convictions. Sexual assault cases are under increasing scrutiny 
in Canada, and I think the issue last year of Robin Camp’s 
comments actually brought some or shone some light on this 
issue, as well as high-profile cases: the Dalhousie dentistry 
students who had a Facebook group that had some really awful 
things on that Facebook group, Mr. Speaker — misogyny and 
sexual assault, all kinds of things, or talk of behaviours that 
were not befitting of most individuals, Mr. Speaker. So some of 
the suggestions that have come about: 
 

Separate, specialized courts, similar to courts that already 
exist in Ontario for mental-health cases, drug-related cases 
and for domestic violence. This could include giving 
complainants in sexual assault cases access to free legal 
advice, and giving extensive training to everyone involved, 



1220 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2016 

from first responders to judges. 
 
The reporter goes on to point out that: 
 

Restorative justice, which one researcher described as “a 
community-supported process whereby survivors are able 
to outline their needs and also perpetrators are pushed by 
communities to take accountability in alignment with 
survivors’ needs, but also in alignment with working to 
change their beliefs.” 

 
And a third point that has been raised about improving the 
culture around being able to report sexual assault: 
 

More education about consent and more sexual education 
generally, at an earlier age. 

 
Mr. Speaker, so it was interesting, because in this CBC forum 
many people weighed in. It was a live hosted discussion about 
topics, about this particular topic. And many commentators felt 
that little could be done. One commentator felt that: 
 

Restorative justice is all very well, but how can it apply 
until after guilt or innocence is determined? That’s the part 
of our justice system that seems to be difficult here: finding 
ways to minimize trauma for the complainants without 
compromising the necessarily high standard of proof 
required for a guilty verdict. 

 
And that was from someone named JamesPH, the handle he 
went by. 
 
Others stressed the importance of educating people long before 
the court system is needed. One person whose handle was Off 
the post: 
 

As a father of a 17-year-old girl, those stats give me chills. 
Luckily the B.C. curriculum has been very good at 
teaching concepts like consent, and at home we’ve made 
sure that we’ve talked about her staying safe. 
 

Another quote, Mr. Speaker, again someone thinking that 
education is the way to do this: 
 

I agree with the idea of more education in school. If all 
genders are more aware from a younger age, I believe it 
would make a difference. Teaching empathy skills, how to 
talk about emotions and mental hygiene is part of the 
puzzle too [Mr. Speaker]. 

 
So the piece around education is absolutely imperative. And it’s 
interesting, I’ve got an almost — well she’s eight, almost nine 
— and that’s actually one of the tools that I’m trying to use to 
better equip my daughter. There is a book, actually, called Talk 
Sex Today and it’s actually written by two Canadian authors 
who have framed sexual education and sexual health in a really 
great way starting with really young kids. And I actually . . . My 
nine-year-old, or almost nine-year-old, I think has way more 
information than many of her peers. But I think the whole goal, 
and the authors of this book actually make the whole point of 
this, is about equipping our next generation to better be able to 
deal with consent and to have some power and capacity and 
agency in their own sexuality, Mr. Speaker, which I think is 

part of the solution here. 
 
One of the other suggestions was making sexual assault trials 
private, and that was a common suggestion. So these are just 
general people who are weighing in on the issue around how to 
make it easier for sexual assault victims to come forward or turn 
the abysmal record of reporting rates around, Mr. Speaker. So 
around that point around making sexual assault trials private, a 
poster with a handle Stop To Think said: 
 

Were we to grant anonymity to the accused as well as the 
accuser, it would remove the power of false accusations 
and reduce the frequency. Secondly, it would make it 
easier for some victims to come forward. 

 
Another poster with the handle Abc says: 
 

Complete media ban on reporting of sexual assault trials. 
No identifying the defendant or the complainant. If the 
verdict is guilty, then release the defendant’s name. Do not 
identify complainant unless he/she are later convicted of 
perjury or a crime similar. Do not allow either party to 
waive ban. 

 
And another individual weighing in on the sexual assault trials 
being private: 
 

There are conflicting ends: deterrence means publicity, and 
restoration calls for a more private process. I would like to 
see a hybrid: a quasi-criminal process by consent of all 
parties with non-publication of proceedings, and a result 
with meaningful fines and/or peace bond/probation. 

 
And that is by a poster called Pundit bear. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there were a number of other suggestions 
in this open forum and many of them, though, would reduce the 
usual rights of defendants which is not something that I would 
be advocating, Mr. Speaker. But I just think they’re interesting, 
the ideas and notions that people throw out when they are 
talking about trying to find solutions to issues. So again, this is 
not . . . I don’t think throwing out rights of anybody is a good 
thing to do, but I’ll just read into the record what this particular 
poster, with the handle j23 said: 
 

Maybe the defendant should not be allowed to opt out of 
testifying. If the complainants have to suffer through 
cross-examination, surely the defendant shouldn’t get to 
bypass that. 

 
Someone else noted — he posted as Jim: 
 

Having been on a jury and witnessing its weaknesses, I can 
safely say that no jury should be used in such trials. I 
believe these cases need to be heard by a tribunal 
consisting of judges and subject-matter legal experts. 

 
And some people actually feel like this system doesn’t need to 
change. And I would argue, I think, that that person is off base 
when you look at reporting rate versus actual . . . police 
reporting rates versus women-self-reported or 
people-self-reported numbers of sexual assault. And I’ll talk a 
little bit about that in a moment. But the individual who felt that 



November 8, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1221 

the system doesn’t need to change went by the handle Bilbo 
Baggins, and said: 
 

The current court system is OK and tinkering with it to 
produce a ‘kangaroo court’ will not help anyone. False 
accusations do happen, so complainants must be required 
to explain themselves in as much detail as is required for 
juries to be able to make a safe decision. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’ll just . . . I think although really traumatic 
and probably horrific for the 19-year-old in the Robin Camp 
case, I think that the one good thing this has done is shone a 
light on the fact that even the judiciary can make mistakes or be 
prone to cultural biases as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So there is a paper from the Government of Canada called 
“Addressing the Needs of Victims of Abuse,” and this is 
Making the Criminal Justice System More Responsive to 
Victims. And I’d just like to read a little bit of this into the 
record, because I think it’s important. 
 

Improving the experience of victims of crime in the 
criminal justice process is a continuing priority for the 
Government of Canada. As the Law Commission 
emphasizes, victims and survivors have unique needs 
characterized by their victimization, their gender, their 
relationship with the offender and with their community, 
and their own personal characteristics. 
 
Victims are not a homogenous group, and they do not 
speak with one voice in identifying needs and approaches. 
While there are many common strategies that can help 
victims . . . [to] participate in the criminal justice system, 
no template for services and “rights” or national standards 
will meet all the various needs of victims of crime. A range 
of approaches and flexibility in justice system responses is 
required, but all must be grounded in dignity, courtesy and 
respect. 

 
And just a few minutes ago I read into the record some of what 
the general public thinks some of the responses should be. In 
terms of taking responsibility . . . Actually you know what? I’d 
like to read into the record “Protections for Victims in the 
Criminal Justice Process.” And in this particular paper, the 
federal government, I’d like to read: 
 

The federal government has worked with the provinces and 
territories to make many victim-related reforms to the law 
in recent years. This section considers existing protections 
for victims in light of the Law Commission’s 
recommendations, and describes initiatives that are aimed 
at improving the experiences of victims in the criminal 
justice . . . [system]. 
 
Victims currently benefit from a number of protective 
measures within the criminal justice process. For example, 
the process of providing testimony has been made easier, 
victims’ safety is considered in bail decisions, and victims 
are allowed to submit victim impact statements at the time 
of sentencing. Other measures that consider the victim’s 
needs within the criminal process include providing them 
with better information about this process, and sensitizing 
the judiciary about the needs of victims. 

And I think that last piece, “sensitizing the judiciary about the 
needs of victims” is really important, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to draw your attention to a paper written by Holly 
Johnson on Limits of the Criminal Justice Response: Trends in 
Police and Court Proceedings of Sexual Assaults. On page, 
again, 613 of her paper, she says: 
 

Sexual assault is the most gendered of crimes. Only 3 
percent of those charged by police with sexual assault 
offences in Canada in 2007 were women, yet 86 percent of 
those victimized were women and girls. 

 
So although it happens to both men and women, you put that 
gender lens on and it has a larger impact on women and girls. 
And she goes on to write it is no . . . And that’s from, and data 
from . . . So that number that I just presented where 86 per cent 
of those victimized were women and girls, that is referenced. 
That’s: 
 

Data for this article were retrieved from Statistics Canada’s 
Uniform Crime Reporting Survey, which incorporates data 
provided by all police departments across the country on 
an annual basis since 1962. Aggregate trends on sexual 
assault are available back to 1983, and data on rape and 
indecent assault back to 1977. The more detailed Revised 
UCR Survey contains complete information about victims, 
accused persons, and incidents for 2007 only. 

 
So Ms. Johnson goes on to talk about trends in sexual assault 
that: 
 

The stigma, shame, and blame associated with sexual 
violence have cast a shroud of silence over women’s 
experiences and affect their willingness to report to police 
or to disclose to other public agencies. 

 
And this was interesting to me, Mr. Speaker. This is not my 
area of expertise but interesting. She points out that: 
 

The most reliable information available to chart the 
prevalence of sexual assault among women in the 
population is obtained when researchers bypass police and 
other agencies and interview random samples of women 
directly. 

 
So that’s interesting when we talk about how we gather 
statistics. So sometimes you might look at one body of statistics 
and they are not necessarily what you should use. 
 
I can refer actually back to my experience on the Traffic Safety 
Committee and thinking about impaired driving rates, people 
actually charged and convicted compared to death, impaired 
driving death rates. Police convictions are not always the best 
method for getting a good handle on that because obviously, 
from jurisdiction to jurisdiction, enforcement varies. Police 
ability to actually catch people, it depends on the jurisdiction, 
Mr. Speaker. So statistics, sometimes you might look at a 
number and think that’s a shocking number, but there are other 
ways of measuring it that give you a more accurate picture, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Her point here is — and as I said, found this quite interesting — 



1222 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2016 

that academics say that: 
 

The most reliable information available to chart the 
prevalence of a sexual assault among women in the 
population is obtained [by researchers] when researchers 
bypass police and other agencies and interview random 
samples of women directly. 
 

She goes on to write that: 
 

These victimization surveys are based on a methodology 
developed in the 1970s to interview samples of the 
population about their experiences and perceptions of 
crime without having to rely on victims or witnesses 
reporting to police. However, these early surveys skirted 
around the issue of sexual violence based on an assumption 
that it was inappropriate to ask women about such private 
experiences. Early versions of the National Crime 
Victimization Survey conducted annually by the [this is 
the] US Bureau of Justice Statistics did not ask respondents 
directly about rape or attempted rape but screened them 
into questions about rape only if they said they were 
attacked or threatened. The first such large-scale survey in 
Canada, the 1982 Canadian Urban Victimization Survey, 
was somewhat more direct and included a screening 
question that specified that an attack included rape and 
molesting. Precise definitions were not provided leaving it 
up to respondents to determine whether their experiences 
fit within these categories. [And then] In the 1980s, 
feminist researchers began to conduct independent surveys 
of rape and intimate partner violence, the results of which 
raised questions about the reliability and validity of 
estimates of rape produced by government surveys. One of 
the most influential was the Sexual Experiences Survey 
developed by US researcher, Mary Koss, which 
incorporates detailed questions about rape and attempted 
rape as well as unwanted sexual experiences. When 
applied to college women, more than one-quarter disclosed 
experiences of rape or attempted rape, which was 
significantly higher than the rate of 0.12 percent estimated 
by the NCVS. [And the NCVS is the . . . I’ve mentioned 
earlier.] Later replicated with Canadian colleges and 
universities, the Sexual Experiences Survey produced 
similar results. Canadian researchers Michael Smith and 
Melanie Randall and Lori Haskell were among the first in 
this country to develop innovative methods of interviewing 
women about partner violence and sexual violence. This 
work led to doubts about the validity of estimates produced 
by [the] Canadian government [in] victimization surveys. 
 

[15:45] 
 
The work of Koss, Diana Russell, and others was 
influential in persuading the Bureau of Justice Statistics to 
rethink their method of measuring sexual violence and 
intimate partner violence on the NCVS. In 1992, this 
survey underwent a significant redesign. Questions about 
sexual violence were expanded and question wording 
improved to ask more directly about experiences of rape, 
attempted rape, and other unwanted sexual experiences 
involving threats or harm. Rates produced by this 
expanded method jumped three to four times what they had 
been in previous years. Influenced by these events, 

Statistics Canada determined that a survey dedicated 
entirely to women’s experiences of violence would yield 
the most comprehensive information. The agency fielded 
the national Violence Against Women Survey in 1993 [so 
still a ways back, Mr. Speaker], funded by the federal 
department of health and welfare and developed through 
extensive consultation with community groups, advocates, 
service providers, and researchers. Its unique methodology 
took account of safety concerns and incorporated a broad 
range of questions on sexual harassment, sexual assault, 
and intimate partner violence in recognition of the 
interconnections among these acts. Similar surveys 
followed in several other countries, and aspects of this 
approach have been incorporated into Statistics Canada’s 
ongoing crime victimization survey. [And the researcher 
points out that] . . . the breadth of questions on sexual 
violence is much more limited in scope compared to the 
specialized survey. 

 
She points out the victimization . . . So again this is . . . Holly 
Johnson points out that: 
 

Victimization surveys produce more reliable estimates of 
the prevalence of sexual assault compared to police 
statistics [and we’ve talked about that]; however, they are 
conducted only periodically and thus are an imperfect 
measure of trends over time. Victimization surveys have 
been conducted in Canada in 1993, 1999, and 2004 and all 
estimate that the incidence of sexual assault has affected 
about 3 percent of women in the previous twelve-month 
period. 

 
But again, making that contrast with reported assaults, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

By contrast, police recorded a drop in the rate of sexual 
assault since 1993. Over the longer term, police recorded a 
small but steady rise in rates of rape and indecent assault 
on females prior to law reform in 1983, followed by a 
sharp increase following implementation of the new law of 
sexual assault. By 1993 the rate of sexual assault reached a 
peak of 121 per 100,000 of the population, and by 2007 
had dropped to 65 per 100,000. 

 
Holly Johnson, the researcher, or the author of this paper, points 
out that: 
 

It is not clear whether this trend reflects a real rise and fall 
in the occurrence of sexual assaults in the population, 
changes in the way police respond to the assaults reported 
to them, or a rise and fall in women’s confidence in the 
criminal justice system reflected by their reporting 
behaviour. Some researchers attribute the rise prior to 1993 
to an increased willingness of sexually assaulted women to 
report to the police to a result of law reform and other 
social changes that occurred simultaneously, such as an 
expansion of services, growth in specialized sexual assaults 
units and training for police, and development of Sexual 
Assault Nurse Examiner programs in hospital-based sexual 
assault care centres. [And Holly Johnson points out that] It 
is difficult to test this claim empirically since so few 
women report to the police and victimization surveys are 
conducted too infrequently to establish with certainty 



November 8, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1223 

whether reporting behaviour has influenced this trend. Yet, 
in all three victimization surveys between 1993 and 2004, 
fewer than 10 percent of sexual assaults were reported to 
police. If improvements to the justice system response to 
. . . sexual assaults prior to 1993, it is feasible that negative 
experience with the legal process since that time may have 
reduced women’s confidence that they will be treated with 
dignity, fairness, and compassion, resulting in a decline in 
willingness to engage with the criminal justice system. 

 
And so writes Holly Johnson in her paper, “Limits of a 
Criminal Justice Response: Trends in Police and Court . . . 
[Proceedings] . . . Sexual Assault.” 
 
So I actually . . . I think her conclusion of this paper is quite 
important, Mr. Speaker. She writes that: 
 

Twenty-five years ago, law makers and equality-seeking 
groups were optimistic that, by reforming sexual assault 
laws that were prejudicial towards women, rape myths and 
biases could be eliminated, women would be encouraged 
to come forward, and rates of attrition would be reduced. It 
is clear that rape law reform and the efforts of grassroots 
feminist organizations to raise awareness and challenge 
widespread discriminatory stereotypes have not resulted in 
improvements to women’s willingness to come forward, or 
in the response of the criminal justice system towards 
women who report. This analysis suggests that while law 
reform can eliminate the formal expression of rape myths, 
on its own it cannot alter the harmful attitudes and 
behaviour that continue to influence the reactions of 
women, perpetrators, and bystanders, police screening 
practices, court processes, jurors’ decisions, conviction 
rates, and sentencing practices. Far from emphasizing the 
assaultive nature of the crime, police practices unfound 
large numbers of complaints and classify almost all 
remaining cases as level I. The effect has been to portray 
sexual assault complaints as vexatious and frivolous. 
[Interestingly enough, that’s the language used in this 
particular bill, Mr. Speaker, in Bill No. 15.] Until a 
commitment is made to address the prejudices in the 
response to sexual violence [Ms. Johnson writes], women’s 
experiences will continue to be trivialized, male-centred 
definitions of women’s sexuality will be reinforced, violent 
men will not be held accountable, and women’s rights to 
sexual integrity, equality, and justice will continue to be 
denied. 

 
So on that provision around . . . So we have a justice in Alberta, 
again who was before the Canadian Judicial Council. 
 
And this particular bill is talking about the Provincial Court and 
the Judicial Council here in Saskatchewan being able to dismiss 
frivolous or vexatious complaints against judges and allow the 
Judicial Council to have one member respond to a complaint 
rather than the whole council. 
 
So I think in terms of questions, the one thing that the minister 
didn’t do in his second reading speech is talk about 
consultation. With whom did he speak about making these 
changes? And undoubtedly the Minister of Justice, he is a good 
man, and I have no doubt that he would do . . . I like to think 
and believe that due diligence would take place, Mr. Speaker. 

But in his comments, his reference to with whom he would 
have consulted is completely absent. And it’s always important 
to think about where the changes are coming from and why 
they’re coming forward and who they will impact and how they 
will impact them. 
 
And I was just pointing to this one particular issue around the 
justice in Alberta because complaints do arise and the 
respective bodies need to deal with those issues when they do. 
And I’m not sure if . . . This obviously makes this a little bit 
easier, it sounds like, to dismiss frivolous or vexatious 
complaints against judges. And again perhaps those complaints 
do happen, but we need to ensure that all the right processes are 
in place. 
 
So our critic who is responsible for this bill and will be 
responsible for committee will undoubtedly do her work in 
asking the minister all kinds of questions around who brought, 
who suggested the changes. Who was pushing for them? Was it 
just a simple review of the legislation? Those are all important 
things to think about. 
 
And in light of some of the literature around . . . well just in one 
particular area of the legal system around sexual assault, I think 
that there . . . We need to think about all the ways in which we 
deal with those potential complaints, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So I have more than . . . I have focused a little bit on one narrow 
aspect of the bill, but I know that I have colleagues who will 
also enter the debate on Bill No. 15, The Provincial Court 
Amendment Act, 2016, and with that I would like to move to 
adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 15, The 
Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 
Bill No. 16 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 16 — The 
Adoption Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur 
l’adoption be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — I thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and it’s my particular honour to rise in the Assembly today to 
speak to this bill. 
 
The whole story of adoption is one that touches every family I 
think. If you think and ask yourself, who do I know who’s been 
adopted? I know I have friends. My cousins when I was 
growing up were adopted. And for me, Mr. Speaker, I mean it 
has an additional interest because I actually did give up a child 
for adoption 26 years ago on November 1st. And so I want to 
talk a little bit about that experience today particularly in light 



1224 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2016 

of some of the changes that are being proposed here with the 
Act. 
 
But I’ll speak to the Act directly at this point. And I just want to 
talk about some of the changes that the minister is proposing. In 
some of the changes, they relate to inter-country adoptions, and 
there’s some serious issues. There’s an international agreement 
on adoptions because of the trafficking in children that occurs 
from time to time. And we know that so many parents who 
cannot have children of their own are very desperate to have 
children. And so obviously there are a lot of children in other 
countries who don’t have parents and you’d think that would 
make a perfect fit from time to time, but unfortunately there are 
people who traffic in that. 
 
And the Hague Convention on Protection of Children and 
Co-operation in Respect of Intercountry Adoption only applies 
to the countries for whom we have signatories, and not every 
country is a signatory to the Hague Convention. And I looked 
on the map. A lot of Africa is actually not a signatory to the 
Hague Convention, and we know that through the AIDS 
[acquired immune deficiency syndrome] epidemic in Africa, 
there are many, many children who could be exploited. And 
they’re not a member of the Hague Convention. 
 
So those changes are being made particularly in section 27.1. 
And the original clause is section 28, that’s in the existing Act. 
So I just want to comment a little bit on some of those changes 
and how that’s going to affect the agencies here in 
Saskatchewan when a child from another country is being 
adopted, and particularly a child that’s not from a country that’s 
a signatory to the Hague Convention. 
 
So that’s in section 28 and 27. Right now section 27 sets out the 
process for international adoptions, and there has to be approval 
if you’re a parent, a resident here who wants to adopt a child 
who’s not a resident of Canada. You have to go the director of 
adoption services in Saskatchewan, and you have to file a 
written report that includes information about the people that 
are applying, the reasons for the adoption, the ability of them to 
undertake an intercountry adoption, and the characteristics of 
the children that they’d be qualified to care on, and so on and so 
forth. 
 
Now in this case there’s a new section being added, and that’s I 
think probably the singly most important part of this bill. And 
that’s under 27.1. It’s a new section. Under the explanatory 
notes we have an explanation here. We already — and as I 
indicated — we already have rules for if the child is from a 
country that’s a signatory to the Convention, but if they’re not, 
then the CIC [Citizenship and Immigration Canada], the citizen 
and immigration Canada, are going to ask the director for 
adoption services or the ministry about our position on the 
placement. And so there should be a “Letter of No Objection,” 
but the ministry has to exercise due diligence to review that 
documentation. 
 
So what the proposal here is that section 27.1(1) and (2) will 
“lay the foundation to strengthen the minister’s position when 
considering such cases.” So it’s a fairly lengthy clause with six 
or seven subclauses in it, but what it does is it sets out the 
process that the minister, through the adoption services people, 
will have to go through to ensure that the child’s rights are 

protected, the parents of the child’s rights are protected, and that 
the adoptive parents are protected as well. 
 
And I was able to find some information on the Internet about 
some of these criminal actions on the part of people that are, 
you know, in the business for money to deal with these 
adoptions. And it’s an article from the Adoptive Families 
Association of BC, and I’ll just read you one story here that 
happened when a mother describes her experience adopting her 
daughter in Cambodia. And this is a quote: 
 
[16:00] 
 

“Galindo took from me $3500 in new US $100 bills. This 
was supposedly my ‘donation’ to the orphanage, to keep 
the children clothed and fed and cared for. Looking at the 
deplorable conditions of the orphan centre gave me the 
first feeling that something was not as it should be. If Ms. 
Galindo was indeed donating $3500 from each American 
couple who adopted a child, then the orphanage should 
have been in much better condition than it was. American 
dollars go a long way in Cambodia, and it was very evident 
that this orphanage was not benefiting from the $3500 
donation required of each parent. 
 
My new daughter, Pheary, was waiting for me at the 
orphan centre, sitting next to a woman I assumed was her 
orphanage caretaker. Mr. Visoth said something to Ms. 
Galindo, whereupon she told me that the woman with my 
daughter was not a caretaker but her birth mother. I was 
numb, in total . . . [belief.] Those words, ‘She is your 
daughter’s birth mother,’ were just the beginning of a 
nightmare for . . . [my] family. 
 
I immediately expressed concern, and told Lauryn that 
Pheary’s paperwork indicated that she was abandoned and 
her parents were ‘unknown.’ How then could her birth 
mother be here with her at the orphanage? At the 
orphanage I learned that Pheary’s sisters and brothers were 
there, along with her father . . . Being at that time the 
mother of a three year old daughter, I told Lauryn that I 
could never remove a child from her family. No matter 
how much I wanted . . . a family of my own, I would never 
build it at the expense of another mother and child. I was 
crying. I was very distraught. Pheary was crying. Pheary 
was frightened. I asked Lauryn why I was taking this child 
when it was obvious she already had a family? 
 
Lauryn was irritated with me. She said I should take 
Pheary back to the hotel and we could talk about it more 
the next day. She said that if I did not take Pheary back to 
the hotel I might precipitate some negative consequences 
for Pheary and the adoption program. I was constantly 
reminded that if my actions caused any of the Cambodian 
officials to lose face I might jeopardize the entire adoption 
program and cause trouble for many other families. I 
reluctantly agreed to take Pheary back to the hotel, though 
I was very upset and concerned . . . By this time, Lauryn 
had told me that if I did not adopt Pheary, she might die or 
meet a worse fate (implying a brothel) . . .” 

 
The Galindo cases and this Galindo, there was a number of 
charges. She was actually charged . . . facilitated over 800 



November 8, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1225 

adoptions. She took $9.2 million in fees. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this is an example of how, just one small 
example of how international adoptions can go wrong. So I 
think the changes being made here are going to give the 
minister and the officials the ability to make sure that all the 
processes are followed properly and that these children are 
going to be appropriately adopted, basically. 
 
Another thing that I just came across in the news is the change 
in Nova Scotia. This was on November 7th, on CBC news, and 
it indicates that Nova Scotia is soon to be one of few provinces 
with closed adoption records. And the reason I bring this up is 
it’s a recent story. And this is certainly not, I don’t think, Mr. 
Speaker, a change that would be acceptable in Saskatchewan. 
And I really hope that we don’t see these changes brought 
forward here in Saskatchewan. The only other provinces is New 
Brunswick, PEI [Prince Edward Island], and Quebec that would 
not allow birth mothers and adult adopted children to get 
information about one another. 
 
And that really goes back to my experience back in 1990 when 
I found out I was unexpectedly expecting and I wanted to find 
an adoption process that would work for me. So there was two 
options I had at the time. This was back 26 years ago. You 
could do a closed adoption where you would not be able to get 
information about where your child was placed, and then there 
was the ability to, only one place to do an open adoption at that 
time and that was with Catholic Family Services. Or I don’t 
know if it was Catholic Family Services, but it was a 
faith-based organization that would place you with families. 
 
And I wasn’t entirely comfortable with either one of those, but I 
was 28 years old so I kind of had a few wits about me at the 
time, although I wasn’t happy about being in the situation I was 
in. And to me the option of a closed adoption completely would 
close the door for me being able give up a child. I mean to not 
know where your child went or where it would even . . . you 
know, whether you could find them when they were adults was 
something that I just couldn’t contemplate. And so I worry 
about other women who were in the same situation, and that 
definitely for me would have been a barrier. 
 
So this law that’s being changed in Nova Scotia — it was just 
posted yesterday, on November 7th — is particularly 
concerning. And I think my choice ultimately was a private 
adoption because I wanted to be able to know where this child 
was being placed, and that was very important to me. 
 
And I think, you know, there’s a lot of maybe myths or 
misunderstandings about birth parents, birth mothers, and 
making those decisions. So for example, one of the changes 
that’s being made here in this bill is to change the number of 
days where you can change your mind after you give up a child 
for adoption. And currently . . . I want to find the actual clause. 
Here it is. It’s currently in section 7 of the bill, is “revocation of 
consent or transfer of guardianship.” So the current bill right 
now says that you can change your mind “at any time within 14 
days after the day on which the consent to adoption or transfer 
of guardianship was signed.” 
 
I think this is probably the second most important change to the 
bill. I just have to find it. There’s one other change too that I 

want to speak to. Oh yes, so now it’s being changed and it’s 
being extended to 21 days. So this is clause 7(2)(a) which says: 
 

. . . a consent to adoption or transfer of guardianship of the 
child may be revoked by the person who made it by 
delivering to the director a written notice of revocation: 
 
(a) at any time within 14 days after the day on which the 
consent to adoption or transfer of guardianship was signed; 
and 
 
(b) after the expiry of the period in clause (a), at any time 
prior to the child being placed for adoption pursuant to 
section 14. 

 
Now I know everyone’s experience is different, Mr. Speaker. I 
mean that’s very clear. Back in ’88-89 the government reduced 
the revocation period from 30 days to 14 days and the ministry 
indicated the rationale was that “a longer period of time would 
possibly unnecessarily put a child’s future in doubt.” Because 
you can imagine, if you’ve been with a baby for the first 14 
days and then all of a sudden the birth mother changes her 
mind: 
 

The focus has since shifted to the needs . . . [for] the child 
to remain connected to its birth family and for birth 
parents to have sufficient time to consider this very 
important decision. 

 
Well I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, I had nine months to consider 
this very important decision. And certainly the arrival of my 
first-born son changed a lot for me, but it never wavered me 
from my conviction that my belief at that point in my life was 
that I couldn’t provide for a child. And although I knew I was 
healthy enough to deliver a healthy child, that I wouldn’t have 
the ability . . . I was unemployed and I was, you know, I wasn’t 
just in a position to be able to provide for a child in the way that 
I would want to be able to do that. But I knew, I knew that 
adoption was an option for me, and so as I went through the 
process, obviously by the time the nine months rolls along, I 
had thought about it long and hard. 
 
So I’m a bit not sure whether this extension to 30 days is going 
to be necessary, and I don’t know what sort of statistics the 
ministry would have in terms of 14 days versus 30, you know. 
And certainly I think the one thing I wasn’t ready for . . . You 
prepare your mind, you know, and you know when you’re 
leaving the hospital, you can imagine that and you go through it 
in your head. So there’s a certain mental preparation. 
 
The one thing I was not prepared for was signing the adoption 
papers. I hadn’t thought about it. I hadn’t prepared my mind. 
And as I was coming in to talk to the bill, I was thinking, one 
thing that would have really helped me is sort of a guide to sort 
of walk you through that. And I don’t know if they do that for 
birth moms often. I feel that birth mothers are sort of shoved 
aside and all the focus is on the child and the adoptive parents. 
And certainly their lives are being turned upside down by the 
arrival of this child. 
 
Fortunately for me again, I was able to find a couple. The mom 
couldn’t have children because of scarring in her tubes through 
chlamydia — I mean it’s an undiagnosed STI [sexually 



1226 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2016 

transmitted infection] — and so she was not able to have 
children, desperately wanted them. And so I met her privately 
and she was actually there for the birth, which for me was a 
very important thing for the child to have his actual adoptive 
mom present. 
 
So in all aspects of my experience it was very, very positive, 
except for that one thing — that was not being ready to sign off, 
you know, when you put your name forever saying goodbye to 
this child. 
 
So what I did know, because I did it privately and the adoptive 
mother agreed, it was that I would actually have . . . She would 
write me a letter every year. And she honoured that, Mr. 
Speaker, and so every year I would get a photo and a letter, and 
hear about what my birth son was up to. And then when he 
turned 18, through the magic of Facebook, I actually sent him a 
birthday message, and so it was really a positive thing. And he’s 
now 26. He’s a musician performing in Winnipeg. He’s in a 
band. He travels all over Winnipeg, and I actually saw his band 
perform in Saskatchewan. So these are all the good things. 
 
And I wish I could be more of an advocate for that option for 
women when they’re faced with the decision when an 
unexpected or unwanted pregnancy is there. It’s an option that 
is often not talked about, and I think a lot of people choose to 
keep a child because they just don’t see any other way out. So 
I’m just putting a little plug in for it here in the House today 
but, you know, I think if people are listening and know people 
that are struggling with that decision . . . I mean, as a birth 
mother, you know, I could probably go on at length about all 
the things that, from my experience, that were important at that 
time. 
 
For the adoptive parents as well though, I mean they really 
appreciated . . . And I’m going back to the 14-day period. I 
knew, you know, that that was it. But what I did do — and I 
remember this clearly — is I just wanted to know how he was. 
So I phoned them and just said, I want you to know right now 
I’m not changing my mind. Because they must have been 
worried about that. That would be a real fear for them. I said 
I’m not changing my mind, but I just want to know how he’s 
doing. And she was happy to talk to me and it was all good. 
Yes, and I hope actually I may be visiting in Winnipeg in a 
couple of weeks and, you know, we’ll be able to connect again. 
 
So the 14-day period, 30-day period, I think birth moms pretty 
much know by the time . . . And I mean obviously when the 
child is born, especially if it’s your first one, you have no idea 
what is waiting for you after the child is born, and what all the 
feelings you’re going to have and the emotions. But I think, you 
know, I had prepared. I had had good supports all the way 
through, so there was no question of me changing my mind in 
the 14-day period. And I’m not sure if a 30-day period 
would’ve been harder for me because, you know, you have to 
move on, too. And that’s something everybody tells you is 
move on, move on. But you know, you have to be able to grieve 
that process as well because you’ve lost somebody in a very 
real way. 
 
So I’m up in the air. I can’t decide. But I think the finality is 
important for everybody and particularly for the child. I mean, I 
know the parents would probably be stressed out as well. So it’s 

not clear to me, and obviously we’ve been flipping back and 
forth on this, you know, over the years. 
 
The minister indicated that: 
 

. . . only Saskatchewan and Prince Edward Island have a 
14-day revocation period. Alberta allows for revocation 
only up to 10 days after signing. Nova Scotia does not 
permit revocation unless the court rules it’s in the best 
interest of the child. 
 

No revocation at all. And of course we see Nova Scotia also 
saying, closed adoptions. You can’t even find the child, or the 
child can’t find the adoptive parent afterwards. So it seems kind 
of draconian. 
 
British Columbia, revocation is a 30-day period of the child’s 
birth, and “New Brunswick and the Northwest Territories and 
Nunavut provide birth parents with 30 days after signing to 
revoke their decision.” 
 
So you can see there’s quite a hodgepodge of provisions across 
Canada. I haven’t taken time to actually investigate what’s 
going on in other countries as well. 
 
So I think this is something that I’m not sure the science is 
there. I hope that the ministry has taken time to talk to birth 
moms, because I think quite often they’re left out of the 
equation and sort of forgotten and shoved off to the side in 
many ways. Not intentionally and not with bad feelings but, you 
know, obviously there’s a newborn and a new family that’s 
being created. 
 
And in my case it was almost remarkable, because they had 
actually privately adopted another little girl two years before 
my son was born. And so there was actually an actual family 
that they had created through their openness and their 
willingness to talk about adoption publicly, in a public fashion, 
so that she talked to my cousin; my cousin told me. I mean, it 
was luck in so many ways. But she did tell me after he was born 
she received calls from across the province in terms of, how did 
one individual actually gain two children through private 
adoptions? 
 
There are other changes that are being proposed here, Mr. 
Speaker, and I guess the one that we need to talk to now is — 
obviously in my case this was a newborn child — there are 
children that are adopted that are older. And again, there’s the 
question of an arbitrary line being placed here. 
 
At this point right now the judge has the discretion to talk . . . if 
the child is any age. Obviously the child would have to be able 
to converse, but at this point there’s no age limit on whether the 
judge can talk to the child and interview them before they grant 
an adoption. So you know, maybe a five-year-old child might 
have something that they want to say about their situation. 
 
What the minister is saying is that because they don’t have any 
provisions with the child’s age and they don’t identify what 
information should be obtained from the child or who should 
file the report, the changes will define age parameters for a 
child and enable the establishment in regulations of guidelines 
for completion of the interview of the child. 



November 8, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1227 

[16:15] 
 
She goes on to talk about the age-of-seven barrier that’s being 
placed on this, and what she’s relying on is current development 
theory, which: 
 

. . . supports a concept that a child under the age of seven 
does not fully understand abstract concepts or the 
long-term effects of their decisions. Caseworkers preparing 
children for adoption do talk to them about their thoughts 
on adoption and the family with whom they are to be 
placed. 
 

And this is placed on the file. 
 
Now this is . . . The minister’s rationale is that she actually 
consulted with stakeholders providing feedback on the 
legislative proposals that the age of seven would be an 
appropriate one for optional reports to be ordered by the court. 
And she said there’s an average of about 35 children in 
Saskatchewan every year at the age of seven or older that are 
adopted. 
 
So again I’m not sure about an arbitrary line, Mr. Speaker. I 
mean, a six-year-old may be more expressive and aware and 
conceptually developed than an eight-year-old. So it’s always 
hard when you put arbitrary lines on these things. I mean case 
workers are trained. They understand the situation, and up until 
this time, have been able to make those reports. And the judge 
as well as, a trained judge, would be able to converse with 
children. 
 
I know one of my friends who, he’s a lawyer in Saskatoon, but 
he was, as a young child was . . . at three years old, saw his 
mother being murdered. And he was the youngest child witness 
in a murder trial in Canada at the time. Just three years old, but 
he knew enough to be able to describe to the court from his 
perspective what he had seen. 
 
And so I’m not . . . You know, again the minister’s relying on 
current development theory, but I’m concerned that every time 
you draw a line in the sand, that children who are six and a half 
who know a lot, Mr. Speaker . . . And particularly I think if 
they’ve had tough little lives to that point and may have a good 
relationship with their home family . . . so the question is, 
where is the appropriateness of drawing a line? 
 
Maybe it would be better to put something like this in the 
regulations and allow some flexibility. But this is an arbitrary 
line that’s being drawn here, and the minister has given her 
reasons for that. 
 
The particular clause that this will deal with is clause 16(14)(a), 
which is now being repealed. And then there’s a new clause 
being substituted saying: 
 

. . . if a child is seven years of age or older, require that: 
 
the child be brought before the court and interview the 
child; or 
 
another person interview the child in accordance with 
regulations and report the findings of the interview in the 

court. 
 
So in this case, Mr. Speaker, the line has been drawn here. This 
is the choice that’s being made by the government. And I’m not 
sure that it would really reflect reality for a lot children and the 
caseworkers who know these kids and are working with them to 
find the homes that they’re being placed in. The minister didn’t 
indicate how many children under the age of seven are adopted 
each year, so I’m not sure whether the 35 children age seven 
and older is a large number of adoptions or not. 
 
The other thing that we find in this Act is some changes to 
assisted adoptions. And I think this is a case where Social 
Services I believe gets involved, and I just want to find the 
correct clause . . . there we are. It’s section 9(1). So in the 
current Act, section 9(1) . . . Oh, I’ve got to get to the right tab. 
Section 9(1) is called “Assisted adoption of Crown wards.” 
 
And just as an aside, they will no longer be referred to as 
Crown wards. They are now going to be referred to as 
permanent wards. So these are children who are in the custody 
of the state and they are permanently wards of the state, I would 
assume through being orphaned or some sort of child 
apprehension order, and I’m no expert in that. We have social 
workers here who would know a lot more about that. 
 
At any rate, these children are a permanent ward of the state, or 
a Crown ward, and what happens is that, I believe if there’s 
people willing to adopt them but are financially in a situation 
where they need assistance, then the minister can provide 
financial assistance. So currently the clause says: 
 

The minister may provide financial assistance by way of 
grant or other similar means in accordance with the 
regulations to any person who adopts a Crown ward where, 
in the opinion of the minister, financial assistance is 
required by reason of: 
 

(a) the special needs of the Crown ward; or 
 
(b) the special circumstances of the adoption of the 
Crown ward. 

 
And it goes on to say, where financial assistance is provided the 
minister may review the assistance from time to time, and vary 
it. 
 
Now in the . . . What section is that? Nine in the explanatory 
notes . . . I’m just trying to find the explanation: 
 

The current provision does not allow the Minister to 
continue Assisted Adoption benefit payments to 
subsequent legal guardians if the adoptive parents both 
pass away. In such cases, supports should follow the 
adoptee. The amendment will allow the benefits to 
continue to the subsequent guardian subject to the 
regulations . . . 
 
This amended provision will also allow the Minister to 
enter into payment agreements directly with a youth 
between ages 18-21 if the youth is engaged in an 
educational or vocational plan . . . Note that current 
regulations allow the Minister to extend assisted adoption 



1228 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2016 

payments between ages 18-21, but payments can only be 
made to the adoptive parents via their agreement with the 
Minister. The provision to allow agreement-making with 
the youth will recognize the youth’s independence from the 
family unit, and will also allow the Minister to continue to 
support a transition plan if the adoptive parents pass away 
after the youth turns 18. 

 
So the new bill, the new section reads as follows. This is: 
 

Subsection 9(1) is repealed and the following 
substituted: 
 

“(1) The minister may provide financial assistance with 
respect to a permanent ward by way of grant or other 
similar means in accordance with the regulations if, in 
the opinion of the minister, financial assistance is 
required by reason of: 
 

(a) the special needs of the permanent ward; or 
 
(b) the special circumstances of the adoption of the 
permanent ward”. 

 
And that is the changes in that clause, Mr. Speaker. So as you 
can see, it gives a little more flexibility for the Crown ward and 
the people that are responsible legally for these children that 
have been adopted. So I think in that sense it makes a lot of . . . 
that that particular change is an appropriate one and will assist 
both the ministry and the people working with these children to 
make sure that they are going to be properly looked after. 
 
I just wanted to share with you before I close today, Mr. 
Speaker, an article that talks about the “10 truths about 
adoption.” And this is again from the experience of the family 
who receives the baby. A new life, a new family is being 
created. And this is from a woman who’s been through it all. 
Her name is Jackie Gillard. 
 
And the first thing she talks about is November is Adoption 
Awareness Month. So we’re right in the middle of it right now, 
and I believe there was a member’s statement brought up about 
it earlier. But this is Adoption Awareness Month, and for her, 
she says, “Adoption awareness means different things to 
different people but, for me, it means constantly learning and 
growing in my understanding of all aspects of adoption.” 
 
So first thing she’s learned, 10 truths. Here’s number 1: 
 

Adoption is not only about the adoptive parents. I’ve had 
to expand my interpretation of adoption to include the 
losses that both my daughter and other adoptees — and 
their birth families — have endured. I have learned to be 
empathetic to the wider adoption community’s opinions, 
even when they aren’t the same as my own. 

 
And I think every adoption is as different as every child is 
different and every family’s different. So I appreciate this 
mother’s acknowledgement that it is a loss to the child and the 
birth families. And it’s not just a loss to the birth mother. I 
mean, there’s the birth father, there’s . . . My mom was kind of 
heartbroken, I believe, when I made the decision to do this 
because you know how much grandparents love grandbabies, 

and she knew she would probably never meet this child. So 
that’s an important part of, you know, the loss I think and the 
grief that happens on the birth side, the birth family’s side. 
 

Adoption [she says, the next one] requires a parent to 
check her ego at the door. Yes, all parenting necessitates 
that, but adoptive parenting can often mean sharing your 
child with the memories of a birth family, the physical 
presence of one, or most difficult, the longing for the 
presence or memories of a birth family never met. 

 
I think for any one of us who’ve grown up knowing someone 
who has been adopted, there’s always that conversation. You 
know, do you ever think about your parents? Do you wonder 
what they look like? And I know I met one guy, a friend of 
mine years ago. I said, what do you think, because I had gone 
through this experience. And I said, what’s your view as an 
adopted person? He said, when I was little, I scanned every 
lineup in the grocery and wondered if that woman was my birth 
mom. Like he wondered his whole life, and I mean that’s 
obviously a natural curiosity. So those kinds of things I think 
would be different for, you know a family raising a child who’s 
not genetically of their family. 
 
The third thing she talks about, and this is an interesting aspect, 
“Post-adoption depression is real . . . [as] postpartum 
depression.” And again I think people would think, well that’s a 
genetic, hormonal thing that families would go through and 
mothers would go through. But she said it can happen in the 
same case. All of a sudden you’ve got this screaming, crying 
baby. And you haven’t slept and you’re sleep deprived and 
work isn’t going the way you planned. And I think we get these 
images in our head of what a baby . . . you know, the wonderful 
having a baby, and then all of a sudden it’s like, oh boy, this 
isn’t what I expected. A friend of mine just posted on Facebook 
the other day. She said, is there an unspoken law that, you 
know, your kids don’t throw up until after you’ve gone to bed? 
And I mean that’s, you know . . . [inaudible] . . . a lot of parents 
can really relate to that. 
 
So that experience is real. And she said, fourth point she said is: 
 

As a writer, words are . . . important to me, but positive 
adoption language is imperative. The words we choose 
have deeper meaning, not just for adoptees, but for all 
people in the adoption community. 

 
And I can speak to this, Mr. Speaker, because there isn’t a lot of 
language for me to describe my relationship with that child. 
And I use the word “birth child,” but I don’t even know if that’s 
the proper terminology. It’s easy to say, you know, the adoptive 
parents, the adoptive child, but for the birth parents there isn’t 
really a word to describe your relationship, you know. And you 
can use a phrase like “the child I gave up for adoption,” which 
is one that I often use. But I wish there was a word in our 
language that I could just say that individual is to me, this. And 
birth child probably gets close, but there is a need to draw the 
relationship of the birth mother, particularly in the ones where 
you give up the child immediately upon their birth. I think, you 
know, birth mom, birth dad, those words are fine, but birth 
child, I’m not sure if that’s the right word. 
 
The next thing she says, number 5: “A community of support 



November 8, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1229 

and education is essential.” And so this woman is very active, is 
involved in different social media discussion groups, but I think 
sharing stories . . . and she talks about it within the adoptive 
community. Again I think it’s very important for birth moms 
and birth dads too, for that matter, to be able to seek out people 
who have gone through similar experiences. 
 
I don’t know very many people who have given up children for 
adoption. It was always sort of a void for me to be able to find 
people just to check that side of the experience. And maybe we 
don’t talk about it enough, and I think maybe that’s another 
reason why adoption isn’t really seen as an option for a lot of 
women who are deciding what to do when they end up in my 
situation. So I think there are definitely places for support in the 
community for all sides of it. 
 
“Adoption never leaves my mind.” That’s number 6. “We 
didn’t . . . have “the talk” . . . with our daughter and then forget 
about the fact that she was adopted.” And I do really appreciate 
the fact that when I gave up my son, that adoptive mom, who 
loved him to pieces but always told him that he was adopted. 
And he knew that growing up, and that was important to me as 
well. 
 
“Embracing your child’s birth family [and then she says] — 
physically (if possible) or emotionally — and their birth culture 
(if it’s different from your own).” 
 
And we know there’s been a lot of studies about the impacts of 
cross-cultural adoptions. Certainly the Sixties Scoop was one of 
those situations that’s maybe a dark page in our history. And 
I’m not sure that any of those parents or kids were ever, sort of, 
that was taken into account in terms of the birth culture being 
different from the adoptive culture. So that’s really an important 
part as well. I know some families where the birth mother is 
actively involved in the adoptive family. I’m sure those issues 
can arise, but I think there’s also positive attributes to that as 
well. 
 
And she goes on with a couple more things: “Love does not 
conquer all.” “Open, honest and supportive discussions about 
adoption,” and all the unsolicited advice that adoptive parents 
get. And I can imagine there is no shortage of that because as a 
parent I certainly got a lot of unsolicited advice as well. 
 
So I think this is a very important part of our society and our 
culture. I think it’s one that isn’t talked about enough. And it’s 
certainly been my honour to be able to raise my story a little bit 
in the House here today and to speak to some of these changes 
that are being proposed in The Adoption Act, but to also speak 
in general to the culture of adoption and its role in our society. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, at this point, I would like to move that we 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 16, An Act to amend The Adoption 
Act, 1998. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate . . . or Saskatoon 
Nutana, sorry, has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 16, The 
Adoption Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
move that this House be now adjourned. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that the House adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:30.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1201 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1201 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1201 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1201 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1201 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1202 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1202 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1202 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1202 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1202 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1202 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1203 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1203 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1203 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1204 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1204 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1204 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 A. E. Peacock Tornadoes Win Semifinal 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1204 
 Strength of Our Women Gala and Awards 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1205 
 Preeceville Emergency Room Reopens 
  Dennis ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1205 
 BreakOut West and the Western Canadian Music Awards 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1205 
 Hospital Donation Honours Dylon Piper 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1205 
 Working Together to Meet End-of-Life Needs 
  Nerlien ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1206 
 Royal Canadian Humane Association Bravery Awards 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1206 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Public Accounts Committee Meeting and Details of Land Transaction 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1206 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1206 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1208 
 SaskPower Rate Increase 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1208 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1209 
 Measures to Protect Against Bovine Tuberculosis 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1209 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1209 
 Construction of a Road to Wollaston Lake 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1210 
  Marit ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1210 
 Donations to Political Parties 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1210 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1210 
POINT OF ORDER 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1211 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1211 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1211 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 5 — The Electronic Information and Documents Amendment Act, 2016 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1211 
  Harrison (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) ........................................................................ 1213 



 

 Bill No. 9 — The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 2016 
 Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’exécution des jugements canadiens 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1214 
  Harrison (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) ........................................................................ 1216 
 Bill No. 15 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2016 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1216 
 Bill No. 16 — The Adoption Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’adoption 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1223 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


