






















































Hansard: November 09, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 39A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 9, 2016, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (Ind.) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10; Independent (Ind.) — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1231 
 November 9, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 
and through you to all members of this Assembly, I’d like to 
welcome Ms. Bevra Fee, has come in today from the Shell Lake 
area, lives at Fur Lake just outside of Shell Lake. 
 
She’s in doing some work. She’s a manager with the northern 
lakes economic development committee in the Spiritwood area 
and in the region up there, Mr. Speaker. She’s done a whole lot 
of great work with a number of different communities all 
throughout our constituency, the constituency of Meadow Lake, 
Mr. Speaker. And I think she’s in town today for some meetings 
with regards to the Main Street program. So all members please 
join me in welcoming Ms. Bevra Fee to her Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave for an 
extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise first today to 
introduce guests seated in the east gallery. With us today are 60 
students from the grade 10 social studies class at Sheldon 
Williams Collegiate here in Regina. With them today are 
teachers Ms. McKillop and Mr. Paskiman, as well as 
educational assistant Ms. Lorrielynn Austman-Olynik. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that in the short time that I’ve been in this 
Assembly, I believe this is the third time that Ms. McKillop has 
brought a class here, and I want to just thank her today for 
doing that. I think it’s very important that we have young 
people informed and engaged about our political process and 
about politics in general. 
 
And I know, or I suspect, today that she and Mr. Paskiman and 
many teachers around classrooms in Canada for sure, and North 
America and perhaps around the world, are dealing with some 
difficult questions from students. And I know that parents are as 
well. So I just want to thank you sincerely for the work that you 
do in answering those questions, ensuring that our students have 
good information, know how to think critically, and answer 
some of those difficult questions. 
 
So with that I would like to invite all members of this Assembly 

to thank this group for being with us today and welcome them 
to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
While I’m on my feet, I’d also like to introduce two friends also 
seated in the east gallery. With us today are Matt Lensen and 
Russell Green. Matt works for the SFL, the Saskatchewan 
Federation of Labour, and he teaches OH & S, occupational 
health and safety, in high schools. Russell is a recent graduate 
of U of S [University of Saskatchewan], and I understand he 
graduated at the top of his class and hopes to, or plans to be 
pursuing a law degree in the near future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these two young men are role models. They’re 
activists. They’re volunteers, and people that I am proud to 
know and to call friends, Mr. Speaker. And I want to let them 
know today that they and members of the LGBTQ+ [lesbian, 
gay, bisexual, transgender, queer and/or questioning plus] 
community have friends and allies in this Assembly, and we 
will continue to work with you and to fight for human rights. 
And I thank you for your work sincerely. I invite all members to 
join with me to welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you and to all members of this Legislative Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce two individuals seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, 
Leanne Chung and Bo Batbaatar, who are both here today. 
They’re both students — I almost got that right; sorry, Bo — 
they are both students from the University of Regina. Leanne is 
studying politics, philosophy, and economics, and Bo is 
studying accounting. 
 
They are both strong community leaders, young New 
Democrats. I know Bo was very active in my campaign as well 
as our candidate for Regina University, and Leanne was quite 
active in our campaign for Regina Coronation Park. So I’d ask 
all members to join me in welcoming them to their Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege 
again to present a petition to reverse the cuts to the Lighthouse 
program. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that in April 
2014 the Minister of Social Services said that the Lighthouse in 
Saskatoon would “. . . take pressure off of existing detox 
facilities, hospitals, and police cells, while keeping people safe, 
especially in our brutally cold winters.” That same day, Mr. 
Speaker, the petitioners point out that the Minister of Health 
said, “We want to ensure that individuals with mental health 
and addictions issues have a safe place to stay,” Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as well, this government over this same time has 
repeatedly indicated that the Lighthouse stabilization unit keeps 
individuals out of hospitals, hospital emergency rooms, and jail 
cells. I think that that has borne itself out in Saskatoon, Mr. 
Speaker, where they’ve seen record over capacity in Saskatoon 
Health Region hospitals. Obviously the cuts to the Lighthouse 



1232 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2016 

aren’t the whole problem, but they certainly don’t help the 
issue, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately reverse 
their cuts to funding that allows extremely vulnerable 
people to access the services of the Lighthouse 
stabilization unit in Saskatoon, and revisit their imposition 
of a strict and narrow definition of homelessness in 
November of 2015 which forced the Lighthouse to cut 
back its hours of essential services in February of 2016, 
and take immediate steps to ensure that homeless people in 
Saskatchewan have emergency shelter, clothing, and food 
available to them before more lives are lost. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens of 
Saskatoon and Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from the citizens who are proposed to 
the federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from many 
centres: Spiritwood, Mildred, Meeting Lake, Chitek Lake, 
Hafford, Mayfair, Rabbit Lake, North Battleford, Shellbrook, 
Canwood, Holbein, Leoville, Shell Lake, Leask, Medstead, 
Glaslyn, Glenbush, and La Ronge. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
again today to present a petition to stop the redirection of 
funding of the northern teacher education program, NORTEP. 
And, Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads as follows, that: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan call on the Saskatchewan Party government 
to immediately restore their five-year agreement to fund 
the NORTEP program and to continue supporting and 
funding NORTEP and NORPAC programs in La Ronge 
and northern Saskatchewan. 

 
And it is signed by people from all throughout the lands, Mr. 
Speaker. We have pages and pages of petition. And these four 
or five pages that I’m presenting today, the people are primarily 
from Regina, Loon Lake, and other communities. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition regarding wetlands in Saskatchewan. Wetlands serve a 

very vital function in our ecosystem. They take the form of 
marshes, bogs, fens, swamps, and open water. Wetlands are 
home to wildlife, including waterfowl. They clean the water 
running off of agricultural fields. They protect us from flooding 
and drought, and they are playgrounds where families can 
explore and play. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Duck hunting. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — And go duck hunting. In the worst cases, such 
as some areas on the prairies, as much as 90 per cent of our 
wetlands have disappeared. As they continue to disappear, so 
too do the many benefits they provide. Sound wetland policy 
will allow Saskatchewan to provide sustainable development 
for all sectors of business in the province. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the Government of Saskatchewan to: 
 
Increase funding to do the proper inventory work, putting 
Saskatchewan in a better position to manage the water 
resource; 
 
Speed up the evaluation of high-risk watersheds where 
there is significant damage annually from flooding. This 
evaluation must include a recognition of drainage works 
that could be closed or restored that will alleviate some of 
the issues downstream with respect to flooding and nutrient 
loading; and 
 
Create a sound and transparent mitigation process that 
adequately addresses sustainable development. The 
sequence should first focus on avoiding environmental 
harm whenever possible, before a secondary focus on 
minimizing the harm with compensation being sought only 
when the development is deemed essential and the first two 
stages cannot be met. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed today by individuals 
from Wadena, Nipawin, North Battleford, and Prince Albert. I 
so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition in support of Wakamow Valley Authority. And we 
know that as a result of the passage of The Wakamow Valley 
Authority Amendment Act, 2016 on June 30th, the Wakamow 
Valley Authority lost its statutory funding of $127,000 from the 
Saskatchewan government in addition to its $30,000 of annual 
supplemental funding. The loss of this annual funding 
negatively affected the ability of Wakamow to maintain its 
lands and repair its facilities and provide services to Moose Jaw 
and surrounding communities. This funding cut resulted in the 
layoff of one-third of the park staff which included two summer 
students and two regular employees. 
 
On June 21st, 2016 the provincial government, including the 
two members from Moose Jaw, voted in favour of this bill 
resulting in cuts to Wakamow and subsequent job losses. 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 



November 9, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1233 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to immediately repeal The Wakamow Valley Authority 
Amendment Act, 2016 and reinstate statutory funding to the 
Wakamow Valley Authority. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from the city 
of Moose Jaw. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present a petition today condemning the Sask Party’s cuts to the 
SAID [Saskatchewan assured income for disability] program. 
After nearly a decade of wasting the economic boom and 
blowing through the savings, the government is now forcing the 
province’s most vulnerable people to pay for the Sask Party’s 
mismanagement. 
 
The Sask Party’s latest cold-hearted cut will take money away 
from people who are unable to work due to a disability; that 
many of these people being hurt by the Sask Party cut live with 
serious illnesses such as multiple sclerosis, cancer, autism, and 
among other illnesses; and that contrary to the Minister of 
Social Services’ claims, the government underfunds clients in 
regards to shelter allowance, and that shelter allowance should 
be reflective of the current rental costs. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to stop their plan to cut 
the SAID funding and immediately restore funding for 
those living with a disability; that shelter allowance is 
reflective of the current rental costs; and that the 
Saskatchewan Party government implement the 
recommendations of the advisory group on poverty 
reduction. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing this petition are from 
Prince Albert, Battleford, and North Battleford. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition regarding child care centres in Saskatchewan. Those 
who signed this petition wish to draw our attention to the 
following: many of our licensed non-profit child care centres 
pay commercial property taxes, and this is not done in Alberta, 
Manitoba, Ontario, BC [British Columbia], and New 
Brunswick. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Child care is essential to the economy, yet most centres struggle 

to simply balance their budgets. This issue threatens both the 
number of child care spaces as well as the quality. Quality child 
care has an enormous positive impact on a child’s future 
outcomes and yields economic benefit. Mr. Speaker, I’ll read 
the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan recognize that 
licensed non-profit child care centres provide programs 
that are foundational to a healthy society by including them 
in the Saskatchewan education Act and exempt all licensed 
non-profit child care centres in Saskatchewan from 
property tax through changes to the appropriate legislation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, citizens signing this petition that I present today 
are from Lanigan, Drake, Guernsey, Jansen, and Assiniboia. I 
do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m rising today to 
present a petition calling on the government to reverse the cuts 
to the Aboriginal court worker program. The Government of 
Saskatchewan cut the budget for the Aboriginal court worker 
program in the 2016-2017 provincial budget. Those on this side 
of the House know that Aboriginal court workers play an 
important role helping Aboriginal people in child apprehension 
and criminal cases. Aboriginal peoples are disproportionately 
represented in Saskatchewan’s correctional centres, and 
Aboriginal court workers successfully help to make our 
communities safer through reduced recidivism rates. I’d like to 
read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan reverse its 
short-sighted and counterproductive cuts to the Aboriginal 
court worker program. 

 
I have pages and pages of this petition to submit today. And 
those signing the petition today are from Buffalo Narrows, 
Regina, and Rosetown. I do so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Events Held by Community Associations 
Benefit Neighbourhoods 

 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, today I would like to recognize 
some of the events that the community associations in my 
constituency have held over the past few months. 
 
The Heritage Community Association held its annual Harvest 
Moon Festival on September 24th. I was happy to volunteer 
with dozens of other community members, and although 
inclement weather forced the event to be moved inside, the 
event was a wonderful and successful display of song, dance, 
and family fun. 
 
I was also happy to help both the Eastview and the Al Ritchie 



1234 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2016 

Community associations with their annual community 
clean-ups this summer. With the Al Ritchie Community 
Association, I had a great time helping my neighbours clear the 
community’s alleys. Amongst the litter, we also discovered a 
few treasures, and one group even managed to find an old 
Corner Gas prop. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Eastview, we shared a lot of laughs while 
helping our neighbours clean the community. We also were 
treated to some homemade cinnamon buns from a neighbour of 
the community centre. 
 
Whether it is pulling together and getting our hands dirty to 
help neighbours or throwing a grand celebration for all 
members of the neighbourhood, these community associations 
do great work year-round. The board members, staff, and 
volunteers all value community spirit and sharing their skills 
and abilities with others. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in celebrating the 
Eastview, Al Ritchie, and Heritage Community associations and 
the hard and valuable work they perform to keep their 
communities connected. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 
 

Grand Opening Ceremony for Day Program Facility 
 
Mr. Cox: — Mr. Speaker, on November 3rd I, along with the 
Minister of Social Services and the member from Cut 
Knife-Turtleford, was pleased to attend the Battlefords Trade 
and Education Centre grand opening ceremony for their brand 
new day program facility. 
 
BTEC [Battlefords Trade and Education Centre] does 
outstanding work providing programming and supports for 66 
individuals experiencing disabilities in the North Battleford 
area. The facility is full of features that will enrich experiences 
of each and every person involved including an art room, a 
book store, a multi-purpose room, a personal-care area, a 
medical room, and more. Features like this will keep 
participants happy and healthy throughout the day and also 
demonstrate the true passion and care that BTEC and its staff 
have for the participants of their program. 
 
Our government knows that all people can make the best of 
their abilities and lead fulfilling lives when the right supports 
are in place. That is why our government has provided over 
$4.45 million to this new facility. And I, along with my 
colleague from Cut Knife-Turtleford, are proud to have been of 
assistance with securing some of the funding when costs 
escalated above the original estimates. We also provide BTEC 
with over $1 million each year to cover operating expenses. 
 
Our government is committed to making Saskatchewan a more 
welcoming, inclusive, and accessible province for all people. I 
thank BTEC for supporting this vision and congratulate them on 
their beautiful new day care program facility. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Community Named National Historic Site 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After making a 
strong case to the federal government, Montgomery Place 
Community Association president Barb Biddle learned this 
summer her community was named a national historic site. To 
be considered for this ministerial designation, a place, person, 
or event must have had a nationally significant impact on 
Canadian history or must illustrate a nationally important aspect 
of Canadian history. This is certainly Montgomery Place, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The community was determined to be of historical significance 
for a number of reasons. First, it’s an excellent and intact 
illustration of a Veterans’ Land Act community established 
following the Second World War. It’s also of significance 
because it retains many key elements of its original design, 
including layout, lot size, setbacks, street names, green space, 
and recognizable housing plans, which contribute to the sense 
of history required of a historic district. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, it is a tight-knit community which is 
very aware of its origins and still today makes every effort to 
honour and celebrate the original inhabitants and their wartime 
sacrifices. With its street and place names honouring the 
leaders, battles, and equipment of the Second World War, two 
memorials, and the annual outdoor Remembrance Day service 
attracting large crowds, it has emerged over time as a place of 
remembrance. 
 
In September, it was my pleasure to be at a celebration marking 
the 70th anniversary of Montgomery Place as well as the new 
heritage designation. I want to congratulate the community on 
both this milestone and on this significant designation, and 
thank Barb Biddle and the many others — including folks like 
Leslie Newman, Jim Earle, and Don Leier, to name just a few 
— whom over the years have ensured the community continues 
to honour its past and give meaning to its present. Thank you 
for all that you do. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 
 

United Way Telethon Surpasses Fundraising Goal 
 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to stand 
and inform the members of this Assembly that the Estevan 
United Way has hosted another successful telethon fundraiser. 
Being the 40th year of this fundraiser, there was great 
enthusiasm that this would be the year they broke the $8 million 
lifetime fundraising goal, and they did. To accomplish this, they 
set a goal of $325,000. Mr. Speaker, they exceeded that this 
year by raising a total of $372,394. 
 
I had the privilege of attending the opening ceremony of this 
year’s telethon where I saw in person the countless number of 
volunteers that make this event possible. Mr. Speaker, this is yet 
another example of how the people of this province are quick to 
open their hearts and their wallets to help those in need. 
 
This year’s telethon success is going to have tremendous impact 
in the community of Estevan and surrounding areas by helping 
the 15 member agencies. And, Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all 
members of this Assembly join me in congratulating the 



November 9, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1235 

Estevan United Way on a hugely successful telethon and in 
thanking all the people, businesses, and organizations who 
donated and volunteered to make this event a success. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 

Local Couple Celebrates 70th Wedding Anniversary 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to congratulate two constituents of Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood on reaching an impressive milestone. Mr. 
Speaker, today Gordon and Myrtle Weiss are celebrating their 
70th wedding anniversary. 
 
Gordon was born in Regina and grew up on a farm near Girvin, 
and Myrtle was born and raised in Bladworth. The couple first 
met in 1943, Mr. Speaker, but Gordon left for France shortly 
after they met. In France he fought on the front lines of the 
Second World War with the 2nd Canadian Infantry Division 8th 
Reconnaissance Regiment. 
 
After the war, Mr. Speaker, Gordon returned home to 
Saskatchewan in February of 1946. Once he was home, he 
looked up Myrtle, who was working in Saskatoon. The couple 
was reunited and quickly fell in love. By September of 1946, 
they were engaged, and on this day 70 years ago they were wed 
in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, through seven decades of love, Gordon and 
Myrtle raised a son, Jim, a daughter, Rhonda, and they have 
seen their family grow to include five grandchildren and six 
great-grandchildren. I ask all members to join me in 
congratulating Gordon and Myrtle Weiss on 70 years of 
marriage and in wishing them many more loving years together. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moosomin. 
 

Saskatchewan Apprenticeship and Trade 
Certification Awards 

 
Mr. Bonk: — Mr. Speaker, on October 21st, I had the pleasure 
of attending the 16th annual Saskatchewan Apprenticeship and 
Trade Certification Awards. More than 400 people, including 
technical training providers, employers, apprentices, and 
journeypersons attended the event held here in Regina. This 
year 34 journeypersons received the Outstanding New 
Journeyperson Award, which is presented to those who have 
achieved the highest mark in the interprovincial 
journeyperson’s exam in their respective trades. 
 
There are a range of awards given to some of the best 
tradespeople and apprentices in the world. Some of these 
awards are awards for the highest mark across all trades, the 
highest mark achieved by a female in a traditionally male trade, 
the highest mark achieved by a person of Aboriginal ancestry, 
and the gold medal winners from the Skills Canada 
Saskatchewan competition. Sponsors, industry partners, and 
trade leaders were there to help deliver awards, showcase 
trades, and promote careers. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these award recipients are exceptional role models 
for the skilled trades. They are dedicated, hard-working 
individuals who deserve recognition. 
 
The Apprenticeship Awards bring together people to celebrate 
those who have helped build one of the best apprenticeship and 
certification systems in the country. It is one of the most 
established apprenticeship awards events in Canada, and I ask 
all members to recognize the Saskatchewan Apprenticeship and 
Trade Certification Commission for organizing and hosting this 
event year after year. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm River. 
 

Reopening of Colonsay Potash Mine 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to 
stand in this Assembly today and inform members of this House 
that the Mosaic is planning on reopening the Colonsay potash 
mine on the 5th of December. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has been hit hard by the low 
commodity prices that have been dominating world markets 
over the last few years. But time and time again, we see that 
Saskatchewan people and businesses are resilient. We are 
pleased that those workers who were laid off in July when the 
mine went idle can return to their job soon, although some of 
the workers were able to find other employment in the 
meantime. But according to a report in the Saskatoon 
StarPhoenix today, almost all the workers employed at the mine 
previously will be returning to the mine. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has worked hard to make sure 
that Saskatchewan is a great place to invest and grow 
businesses. Although we are not immune to global commodity 
prices, we have a strong and resilient economy. Mr. Speaker, it 
is great news that the Colonsay mine will be reopening. We 
wish all those workers the best as they prepare to return to 
work. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Public Accounts Committee and Auditor’s Report 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the fight for answers here 
in this Assembly goes on day after day in the GTH [Global 
Transportation Hub] land scandal of the Sask Party. The 
Premier refuses day after day to provide answers to basic 
questions, so today we’ll try the Deputy Premier. 
 
At yesterday’s Public Accounts meeting we saw a coordinated 
effort that came right out of the Premier’s office. Mr. Speaker, 
the full cabinet is involved in this land scandal. Twice, twice 
they saw the deal, and twice yesterday they blocked calling 
witnesses that are key to this deal from testifying to that 
committee. So can the Deputy Premier stand in his place, the 
people’s legislature, and explain why the Sask Party is doing all 
they can to block the committee from doing their work and 
from holding an open and transparent investigation into the 
GTH land scandal? It’s indefensible. 
 



1236 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2016 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. What happened yesterday at Public Accounts was that 
the auditor confirmed the findings of her report emphatically. 
And in addition to that, she refuted directly the theories, the 
conspiracy theories of the opposition and others with regard to 
this matter directly. She concluded and reinforced her 
conclusion, Mr. Speaker, that there was no wrongdoing, there 
was no fraud, and there was no conflict of interest. That was the 
take-away from yesterday’s meeting of the Public Accounts 
Committee. The auditor completely reinforced the findings of 
her report and refuted the conspiracy theories of the opposition. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that’s not the take-away 
from yesterday’s meeting, and Saskatchewan people deserve 
answers in this deal that’s wasted millions of dollars. Everyone 
knows that that wasn’t a forensic audit. And even in the 
statement that’s referenced, even the statement that’s referenced 
by the minister here today it’s very clear that that doesn’t 
include the entire Sask Party cabinet or senior officials of 
government, Mr. Speaker. It exonerates no one. Plain and 
simple, blocking witnesses from the committee is indefensible 
and it’s weak. And of course the question was to the Deputy 
Premier. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Last week I asked the Premier if he would get this legislature 
the former minister’s phone records. The minister of course has 
been plagued by scandal, so I think that all the people in this 
Assembly and that all the people in Saskatchewan would like to 
see those records. The Premier said, quote, on the floor of this 
Assembly, “The phone records, all the documents were made 
available to the Provincial Auditor.” But Mr. Speaker, yesterday 
the Provincial Auditor said she was not given those phone 
records, the very phone records that the Premier stood on the 
floor of this Assembly and said were made available. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, will the Deputy Premier put all of this to . . . 
And I don’t want an answer from that minister who hasn’t 
provided an answer day after day. This is a question to the 
Deputy Premier. Will the Deputy Premier commit today to put 
some of this to rest and to table those phone records to this 
Assembly? If he’s got nothing to hide, this should be no 
problem. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, we know that the Leader 
of the Opposition is getting desperate. We know that, Mr. 
Speaker. Let me just address directly a couple of the items that 
he raised — the issue of the forensic audit which he raised, and 
also the issue of the phone records — not in my words, Mr. 
Speaker, but those of the auditor, those of the auditor. They 
claim to respect the work that the auditor’s done. In fact I think 
the member from Nutana reinforced that yesterday. But every 
day they’re standing up and questioning the conclusion of the 
auditor. 

So let me just address this with respect to the forensic audit. 
Quote, quote from the auditor yesterday: frankly, if we did a 
forensic audit, there would have been a lot of matters that we 
included in our report that would have not been provided to this 
committee. We may not have looked at governance structures of 
the organization, may not have looked at processes for 
reviewing appraisals. So the focus of our work would have been 
completely different. 
 
So her conclusion is that she did more work in the audit that she 
selected to do, Mr. Speaker. With regard to the, with regard to 
the phone . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The member for 
Nutana continuously interrupts from her seat, Mr. Speaker. 
These are the words of the Provincial Auditor to whom she was 
asking questions yesterday. 
 
Here’s the answer to the phone records: “. . . and we 
corroborated it with interview evidence, and through that we 
didn’t see a need to pursue phone records.” These are the words 
of the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker. The members opposite 
claim to support the conclusion of the auditor and the work of 
the auditor. Just because they don’t like the answer, Mr. 
Speaker, doesn’t mean they shouldn’t accept it. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor’s 
document exonerated no one and was very scathing. Day after 
day our leader asks questions of the Premier, day after day, 
serious questions about the scandal that cost the people of 
Saskatchewan millions and millions of dollars. And then day 
after day, the Sask Party members go through a three-step 
process of denial. Step one: the Premier refuses to answer those 
questions. Step two: he sloughs off the serious questions to 
someone else who’s assigned to pop up and repeat the talking 
points. And step three, Mr. Speaker: everyone over there over-
dutifully applauds. And everyone knows the routine, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So to the current Minister of Government Relations or 
somebody speaking on her behalf . . . has been part of the 
scandal from the beginning. So whoever is speaking on her 
behalf, can you ask her why she’s so proud of this scandal that 
cost our province so many millions of dollars? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, what happened yesterday 
was every one of the fantasy conspiracy theories advanced by 
the members opposite, every one of them, was systematically 
refuted by the Provincial Auditor. The Provincial Auditor 
reinforced the conclusions of her audit: that there was no 
wrongdoing, that there was no fraud, and there was no conflict 
of interest. 
 
The members opposite claim, claim to support the Provincial 
Auditor, yet they stand up day after day after day and advance 
fantasy conspiracy theories, fantasy conspiracy theories that are 
completely at contrary to the work that she did and to her 
report. I would say again, Mr. Speaker, just because you don’t 
like the conclusion of the Provincial Auditor doesn’t mean you 
shouldn’t accept it. 



November 9, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1237 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, wash, rinse, and repeat. They’re 
acting so proud of themselves, Mr. Speaker, but they know they 
have nothing to be proud of when it comes to this scandal. 
 
The Minister of Government Relations was part of this process 
and has been behind this scandal since before it was first 
discussed at cabinet. So she’s never stood up to explain why she 
is so proud of this scandal that has cost our province millions 
and millions of dollars. Will someone do that for her today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Day after day they come in and they 
smear drive-by smears of members of this Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker, of honourable members who have served this province 
with distinction, Mr. Speaker, day after day. This matter was 
canvassed by the Provincial Auditor, frankly at their request. 
The Public Accounts Committee of which they chaired made 
the request of the Provincial Auditor to look into this matter on 
the behalf of the Public Accounts Committee and this 
legislature more generally. 
 
The Provincial Auditor took that mandate very seriously. She 
addressed the matter. She said there were no roadblocks. There 
was very real and significant co-operation. She had access to all 
of the information that she needed in order to make a 
determination on the matter. She did so, Mr. Speaker. She made 
a number of recommendations which we take seriously and 
which we accept. 
 
Her conclusion on all of the fantasy conspiracy theories 
advanced by the members opposite was that they were wrong, 
that they’re wrong. She refuted every single one of them in 
detail and directly yesterday, Mr. Speaker. And again just 
because the members opposite do not like the conclusion that 
the auditor came to, doesn’t mean that they should not accept it. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that minister and the rest 
of the Sask Party government better get used to this because this 
is going to go for a long time, Mr. Speaker. This is going to go 
on for a long time. Mr. Speaker, surely someone over there is 
starting to feel a bit guilty about listening to their staff in the 
backroom instead of listening to their constituents and paying 
attention to their own conscience. So anyone in cabinet or the 
backbench, except for the Minister of the Economy, stand up 
and explain to us why they voted for this scandal. Anyone. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Day after day they bring fantasy 
conspiracy theories they make. They have invective-laced 
questions. They smear members of the Assembly. The fact is, 
Mr. Speaker, the auditor addressed every single one of these 
matters with the full co-operation of the government. With the 
full co-operation of those involved in the transaction at the 
direction of the Assembly though the Public Accounts 
Committee. 

That’s how the process works, Mr. Speaker. The auditor did a 
thorough job. She in fact went into detail yesterday at the 
provincial . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . It’s a process audit. 
The Provincial Auditor addressed this directly yesterday and 
again, because the member from Nutana doesn’t like the answer 
from the Provincial Auditor, which was in fact that she had a 
more thorough audit done because of the process that she chose. 
A more thorough process because . . . [inaudible interjections] 
. . . Her words. Her words. 
 
She did a more thorough audit than what the members opposite 
are asking for. And her conclusion, Mr. Speaker? There was no 
wrongdoing, there was no fraud, and there was no conflict of 
interest. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, once again the people of 
Saskatchewan are millions of dollars out of money here. 
Millions of dollars wasted, Mr. Speaker. That’s the bottom line 
here. So once again, I’m trying to give them a chance here. 
Every day they sit here. Every day they read the headlines. Mr. 
Speaker, again, this is a very important offer. Does anyone in 
cabinet or the backbench want to stand up today and admit that 
they don’t support the scandal? The truth will set them free. 
Will one of you get up and speak the truth? Any one of you? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — This is just surreal, Mr. Speaker. The 
Provincial Auditor was given a task by the Public Accounts 
Committee. The Provincial Auditor was given a mandate by the 
Public Accounts Committee, of which members opposite chair 
that committee. The Provincial Auditor did, in her own words, a 
very thorough job of looking into the matter. She had all of the 
resources she required to look into the matter. She chose, she 
chose the mechanism under which she proceeded, which was 
more thorough, by her own testimony, than that which the 
members opposite suggest. 
 
She came to a conclusion, Mr. Speaker, after doing all of that 
work on our behalf collectively as legislators. Her conclusion 
was that there was no wrongdoing, that there was no fraud, and 
there was no conflict of interest. And the members opposite, 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite don’t like that conclusion. 
They don’t like that conclusion. 
 
And they claim, they stand up and claim, the member from 
Nutana claims that the Provincial Auditor did a great job, she 
did an awesome job . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, and 
she’s heckling from her seat saying, yes, of course she did. Well 
then why won’t you accept the conclusion? Why won’t you 
accept the conclusion which said there was no wrongdoing, 
there was no fraud, and there was no conflict of interest? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Answers to Written Questions  
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, he may be distracted by a 
change of heart on the GTH land scandal, but the Minister of 



1238 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2016 

Justice has been struggling to answer straightforward questions 
about some of the bills he’s brought forward to the House. He 
was wrong on the changes to The Coroners Act and he wasn’t 
ready to explain why he was ready to force our Crowns to pay 
federal income tax with The Interpretation Act. 
 
The minister is a respected lawyer but I had to wonder if he’s 
too busy these days to do his research. So last week, I asked 
some straightforward written questions about the research that 
went into these bills. Imagine my surprise when, yesterday, I 
was told that they won’t be answering these questions for 
months — months, Mr. Speaker, until we can get simple 
answers about the research behind these bills that remove 
oversight when people die in custody and remove protections 
from our Crowns. Why can’t the minister answer these 
questions today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, Mr. Speaker, certainly the members 
opposite are entitled to ask those questions, Mr. Speaker, and 
we are entitled to get the time required in order to answer those 
questions, Mr. Speaker. They will be answered in due course, 
Mr. Speaker, so that we can give a full and complete answer to 
the questions that have been asked. And those answers will be 
tabled in this House, Mr. Speaker. But we do deserve time to be 
able to provide full and complete answers to those questions, 
which we will, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, with all due respect, there’s no 
excuse for delaying these answers and there’s no excuse for that 
minister ducking responsibility for not doing his homework. 
Mr. Speaker, they had more than a week to simply answer how 
much they researched these bills. The minister has the entire 
machinery of the Ministry of Justice at his disposal. The people 
of Saskatchewan deserve answers. They deserve to know that 
these important bills were not drawn up on the back of a napkin 
in room 110. 
 
I know this minister has been left with a lot to handle because 
the Premier is unwilling to spread responsibility to more than a 
few members of his caucus. But nonetheless, will the minister 
commit to getting answers to these simple questions today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well certainly, Mr. Speaker, we’ll 
commit to get the answers, Mr. Speaker. But I think it’s 
appropriate that the Ministry of Justice, given all the work that 
we’re doing, given the very large number of questions that get 
asked by the opposition of all members of this House, Mr. 
Speaker, all members of cabinet, there’s a significant number of 
questions to answer, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s appropriate to 
give my officials the appropriate amount of time to give a full 
and complete answer to the questions that are tabled, Mr. 
Speaker, and we will table those answers with the House when 
those answers are complete. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

Donations to Political Parties 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I asked the Attorney 
General to explain his government’s pay-for-play operation 
with a Sask Party lobbyist. And what was his justification? 
Everything’s fine. Nothing to see here. It’s all posted to the 
lobbyist registry. 
 
I think he missed the point. This Sask Party lobbyist’s new 
employer has given his party nearly $27,000 since he stopped 
working for them. The Sask Party members are feathering their 
nests with pay-to-play fees collected from big corporations and 
big law firms, and these funds help to pay the Premier’s big 
partisan bonus. 
 
Will our Attorney General agree with me that our province’s 
electoral finance laws are well past their expiry date and it’s 
time to get big money out of Saskatchewan politics? 
 
The Speaker: — I cautioned the member yesterday and today 
on verbiage used in this Assembly. I would ask that he use 
extreme caution, and not the verbiage that he just used, in future 
questions. 
 
I recognize the Minister of Justice and Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I don’t 
think I missed the point of the question at all. We have a 
lobbying legislation in this province, Mr. Speaker, and with the 
assistance of the opposition through an all-party report, we 
brought legislation forward to make the operation of executive 
government, Mr. Speaker, more transparent to the people of this 
province so that people in this province will know who are 
lobbying their elected officials, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:15] 
 
And I’ll repeat the point that I made yesterday, Mr. Speaker. 
The corporations that are making donations, Mr. Speaker, have 
significant interests in this province by way of employees, 
employees who pay taxes, Mr. Speaker, and employees and 
companies that are making significant economic . . . have 
significant economic activity, Mr. Speaker, all supporting our 
economy, Mr. Speaker. And the employees of those companies 
deserve to have voice through their corporations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we make no apologies for this, Mr. Speaker. We’ll continue 
to ensure that the lobbying legislation is fulsome, Mr. Speaker, 
so that the people of this province know exactly who’s lobbying 
the people in this side of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, every time politicians got caught 
with pay-to-play, they all try to explain it away by saying it’s all 
fine; no laws were broken. But, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party 
didn’t break the laws because here in Saskatchewan the laws are 
broken. 
 



November 9, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1239 

It’s simple. The jobs of the lobbyists are to ask the government 
to change the laws and to help out their clients. The problem 
starts when that lobbying comes with tens of thousands of 
dollars being handed to the Sask Party and tens of thousands of 
dollars going into a fund to top up the Premier’s salary . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 

Delivery of Mental Health Services 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, with Sask Party cuts, the RQHR 
[Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region] was forced to cut 20 staff 
who worked to provide in-patient mental health services. This 
government says mental health is a priority. But first, we saw 
inaction as their own mental health report sat on a shelf, and 
now cuts. 
 
To be clear, their own report says they needed to increase 
access to services, but instead they cut. The minister claims this 
won’t impact service, but family members of people struggling 
to get mental health support disagree. They are saying they need 
better answers, family members need better answers, remote 
and rural communities need better answers, and everyone with a 
mental illness deserves better answers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does this minister have any better answers, or does 
he still want to tell families that cuts in health don’t matter and 
that the care that they are getting is good enough? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We take the 
issue of mental health very seriously, as we do the entire 
spectrum of health care, Mr. Speaker. The quotes that the 
member opposite was referring to when I mentioned in the 
legislature in the past was actually, was not my quote. It was the 
quote of the CEO [chief executive officer] of the Regina 
Qu’Appelle Health Region in regards to the recent staffing 
changes in the mental health unit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we take any layoff seriously. We know the health 
region, before they made these decisions, they took this very 
seriously. And the quote that the member’s referring to is from 
Keith Dewar, the CEO of Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region, in 
a news release dated September the 16th. And it said: “During 
this process, the region will not be reducing services, closing 
beds or halting programs relating to this initiative.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, again we take this matter very seriously. This was 
an issue of some scheduling changes, and I’d be happy to 
follow up on that in a subsequent question. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, is the minister seriously arguing 
that making cuts doesn’t impact services? Twenty front-line 
workers, Mr. Speaker. We understand that the Sask Party is 
desperately cutting this year. But somehow, at the same time 
that 20 health care providers were laid off, money was found to 
hire another manager. There will be “additional management 

support to focus on attendance management in addition to assist 
the management team in better understanding and managing 
sick time and overtime.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are hiring a manager to manage a problem 
that they are creating with poor management. This is absolutely 
backwards. They got rid of front-line staff and then added 
management to help deal with the overtime when they don’t 
have enough front-line staff. Instead of hiring front-line workers 
to help front-line workers help patients, they’re hiring another 
manager to help mismanage. How does this help people get the 
mental health services they need? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, what I was referring to in 
this matter is the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region tells us that 
what they were doing was making changes to shifts. They have 
staff working eight-hour shifts instead of 12-hour shifts, and 
they expect that that will reduce overtime. Mr. Speaker, they 
did a similar situation in home care, and they found that it 
resulted in substantial more efficiencies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the general premise of the question on how 
serious we take mental health issues, Mr. Speaker: very much 
so. In the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region, we’ve increased 
funding overall by 57 per cent. We’ve increased funding to 
mental health. Mr. Speaker, I think the recent tragedies in the 
North speak to how important mental health is. Mr. Speaker, we 
have a number of members of the Executive Council that are up 
there today as we speak. And, Mr. Speaker, again I see my time 
has elapsed, but I will follow up in a subsequent question. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Funding for Hospitals 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House we 
have talked about mice in the Cancer Centre, cockroaches in 
RUH [Royal University Hospital], and now it’s bedbugs in 
Victoria Hospital in Prince Albert. The Sask Party should stop 
tolerating its vermin. The Minister of Health may try to weasel 
his way out of the responsibility like his colleague in Education 
and blame it on the regions. But the buck stops with the 
minister, or should I say the mice, cockroaches, and bedbugs 
stop at the minister. 
 
Victoria Hospital is bursting at the seams. ER [emergency 
room] waits are dangerously long and getting longer. And now 
on top of all of that, they have bedbugs to deal with. Mr. 
Speaker, when will the Minister of Health take his job seriously 
and ensure that the Prince Albert residents have the health care 
they deserve? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
was advised yesterday of the incident of the bedbugs in Prince 
Albert that the member refers to. And I’ve been advised today 
that through good work and diligent work of the staff, while 
these situations arise from time to time, I believe the situation 



1240 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2016 

has been cleared up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it just speaks to a bigger question though, Mr. 
Speaker. First of all, I guess the member could probably do a 
little bit of research before she asks a question in the House. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we’ve made health care funding a priority: 
over 50 per cent increase in health care funding since we 
formed government. We’ve recruited medical professionals: 
650 more doctors, over 3,000 more nurses, hundreds more 
long-term care workers, Mr. Speaker. You know, Mr. Speaker, 
the tone of the questions over there just defies logic. Far more 
funding, far more resources than when they were in 
government. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, possibly the member that asked that question 
could learn she’s no longer a rookie in this House. She can 
actually ask her own questions. She doesn’t have to read it just 
because it’s been written. Thanks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — I find it really interesting that the Sask Party 
is now interested in Prince Albert. For the longest time we’ve 
been saying we need to fix the Prince Albert hospital. We’ve 
highlighted time and again that our hospital services the North, 
and it makes sense that the province funds a hospital in Prince 
Albert. But the Sask Party has demanded that the city picks up 
some of the tab. 
 
Yesterday we heard the Premier say the government is 
considering treating the hospital as a “. . . tertiary hospital like 
Regina or Saskatoon because it doesn’t just serve Prince Albert 
and the immediate area; it serves the North.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is interesting. I swear the Premier took those 
words right out of my mouth. But with the Sask Party’s track 
record, it’s easy to question if this will actually happen. Is the 
Sask Party finally committing to fund a hospital in Prince 
Albert? And when will we see this money? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the question, 
Mr. Speaker, exactly where the status is, in 2014-15, $2 million 
was provided for planning of a renewal or a rebuild. That work 
continues, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But to the overall premise of the question, questioning where 
the Sask Party’s at with capital projects and health care — 
really, Mr. Speaker? We look at our record versus the record of 
the members opposite. Mr. Speaker, new hospital, North 
Battleford. Mr. Speaker, a new hospital in Moose Jaw. Thirteen 
long-term care facilities around this province. Mr. Speaker, 
many, many capital projects. Mr. Speaker, their legacy? 
Fifty-two hospital closures. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Government House Leader on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 

The Speaker: — We may hear your point of order. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Just in this Assembly not 48 hours ago, you reminded all the 
members in here to use decorum and to treat other members 
with respect and the privilege that is earned to us by being 
voted into this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. And I heard the Leader 
of the Opposition again say “scandal-plagued member” as well 
as “scandal-plagued minister,” which was also specifically told 
by you, Mr. Speaker, to this House not to be referenced to.  
 
And further to that, the member from Saskatoon Centre used 
“feather their nest,” which I appreciate you warning them about, 
Mr. Speaker. But I’m wondering if I can get a ruling on them 
not using the term of “scandal-plagued member” again. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the first . . . First 
of all, I think the Government House Leader just asked on two 
points of order combined into one, but I will try and break them 
down for you. With respect to “scandal-plagued minister” that 
the Government House Leader said was used, the Leader of the 
Opposition, I believe, used the words “minister who is plagued 
by scandal.” That’s a fact, Mr. Speaker. Your ruling asked us 
not to change the titles of ministers, which is not what we did in 
this instance. Therefore we did not breach your ruling, Mr. 
Speaker. So I would ask you find that that particular point was 
not well made. 
 
With respect to “feather one’s nest,” I understand you’ve 
already made a censure on that. But I will state that if you look 
at the definition of “feather one’s nest,” you’ll see that there’s 
no criminal intent there whatsoever, which still falls within your 
ruling, Mr. Speaker. Therefore we didn’t feel that that was an 
inappropriate language to use. However I do understand you’ve 
already made a censure, so I’ll leave you with that. 
 
The Speaker: — On the first point of order raised by the 
Government House Leader, I’ll have to review Hansard and the 
video to see what the Leader of the Opposition said or didn’t 
say. 
 
With the second point of order, I caution, even past caution . . . 
The members, the opposition should know that questioning 
criminal behaviour of other hon. members will not be 
acceptable in my Assembly. So that member has been warned. 
And I did cut his question off early when that was raised again, 
and I would expect that behaviour to stop. I’ll reserve judgment 
for the first point of order to a later date. 
 
Why is the Leader of the Opposition on his feet? 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Requesting leave to introduce a guest. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Leader of the 



November 9, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1241 

Opposition. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, I notice that seated in the west gallery, my dad 
Craik Wotherspoon walked into the Assembly to observe 
proceedings here today and is maybe keeping an eye on me here 
today and seeing how things are going. It’s my pleasure to 
welcome him. He keeps track of provincial affairs very closely, 
and I know he’s been keeping track of the debate in the last 
number of weeks, and for years. But it’s my pleasure to 
welcome certainly my hunting partner, my good friend, my 
fishing partner to this Assembly. He spent his life as a teacher 
and a school principal all throughout Regina, I guess Raymore 
as well for a few years, and certainly taught us and displayed 
values to us that have served us well within our own lives. 
 
He’s a crooked shot, Mr. Speaker, as a hunter. I may see that on 
display here this weekend, on Saturday possibly. But he’s a 
good guy, Mr. Speaker. And he’s not a pretty man. He’s a 
pretty good guy, but he’s not a pretty man. And in part I think 
that’s probably that Weyburn nose job that he got when he was 
rather young with Dave “Tiger” Williams, Mr. Speaker. So 
anyways, it’s my pleasure to welcome my dad to his Assembly 
and certainly thank him for everything within my family’s life, 
within my own life, and looking forward to hunting with him on 
Saturday, I hope. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 146 through 171. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled the 
responses to questions 146 to 171. 
 
[14:30] 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 13 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 13 — The Cancer 
Agency Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to enter 
debate on Bill No. 13, The Cancer Agency Amendment Act, 
2016. My remarks will be relatively short here on this particular 
bill. And as the members opposite, the House Leader knows, 
these will be the final remarks before this bill goes to 

committee, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s a fairly straightforward and simple bill, Bill No. 13. I will 
give you a few examples. It basically throughout the bill 
amends the term “cancer care” to “cancer control.” And the 
reason this is, is because: 
 

Throughout the world the term cancer control is used to 
describe the broad range of services used to prevent 
cancer; improve the early detection, and reduce the 
incidence of cancer; improve cancer patients’ treatment 
outcomes; and support cancer research. 
 
[So in order] To be consistent with the standard definition 
used throughout the world, it is proposed that the definition 
used in the Act and regulations be changed from cancer 
care services to cancer control services. 

 
Mr. Speaker, there are several references in the bill moving 
from “cancer care” to “cancer control.” 
 
Another change, Mr. Speaker, is adding the term “palliation” to 
the mandate of the agency. So I’ll just . . . That particular 
provision right now states that: 
 

9(2) For the purposes of this Act and The Regional Health 
Services Act, the agency is responsible for providing: 
 

(a) services respecting: 
 

(ii) the provision and delivery of treatment or 
rehabilitation services to individuals; 
 
(iv) the prevention and screening of individuals for 
cancers. 

 
So it is proposed, Mr. Speaker, that palliation services be added 
to the Act to encompass the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency’s 
role and work in ensuring and providing palliative care services 
for cancer patients. 
 
There is one other piece that I want to go into a little bit more 
length. And just referring to the minister’s second reading 
comments here, Mr. Speaker, what this bill will be doing is 
allowing the Ministry of Health to disclose a patient’s cancer 
diagnosis to the agency, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So he goes on to say, when he made his second reading speech 
on May 30th: 
 

The Cancer Agency Amendment Act will provide statutory 
authority for the agency to request and collect information 
from other organizations, to report to various registries, 
and to enter into agreements. The proposed amendments 
also provide consistent definitions of cancer services and 
reflect the current government structure in naming 
conventions. 
 
In cases where the administrative authority of the Cancer 
Agency is not already consistent with that of its sister 
organizations, the regional health authorities, this Act will 
allow for better alignment with provisions of The Regional 
Health Services Act. 



1242 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2016 

And he goes on to say that: 
 

. . . the proposed amendments will ensure the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency has the statutory authority it 
needs to request, collect, and disclose information in order 
to effectively meet its responsibility for providing cancer 
control services. 

 
When this bill does make its way to committee, Mr. Speaker, I 
think that there will be some questions. So those are the 
minister’s words describing what the bill is about. 
 
He goes on in his second reading speech to say that he wants: 
 

. . . to assure all members that the Office of the Information 
and Privacy Commissioner will be consulted about the 
agency’s ability to collect information and disclose it for 
specific purposes, and to specific organizations that will be 
prescribed through the regulations. 

 
So I just would like to flag that. It’ll be an opportunity in 
committee to get a little bit further information on this, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I might suggest too that it would be good to speak with the 
Information and Privacy Commissioner before a bill comes 
forward to make a change, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know in my role, just briefly on the Human Services 
Committee, looking into organ donation rate increases, the 
Information and Privacy Commissioner presented to the 
committee and said, actually it would be helpful to be . . . 
instead of catching things once they’re already done, Mr. 
Speaker, to be proactive and to make those changes and catch 
any unintended consequences for the Information and Privacy 
Commissioner to see any red flags beforehand. So my 
suggestion would’ve been perhaps the government should have 
consulted with the Information and Privacy Commissioner 
beforehand, but I will look forward to that discussion when we 
have an opportunity to discuss this in the committee. 
 
I do want to just draw your attention to the former minister’s 
comments. He actually points out — and this is an unfortunate 
and true story, Mr. Speaker — that “. . . the number of new 
cancer cases diagnosed in Saskatchewan is projected to increase 
54 per cent by 2036.” And obviously the Saskatchewan Cancer 
Agency does very good work, and community organizations. 
There’s many people who are working on not just treatment and 
support for cancer patients and families, Mr. Speaker, but the 
prevention piece. 
 
But I want to draw your attention to the fact that there are ways 
that governments have an opportunity to take a lead when it 
comes to prevention services and ensuring that our citizenry is 
as healthy as can be, Mr. Speaker. And I remember a couple 
years ago in committee actually, in one of the policy field 
committees having an opportunity, a back and forth with the 
then Health minister about tanning bed legislation. And the 
minister was very . . . well not just reluctant, refused to go 
there, wouldn’t really answer questions, Mr. Speaker, around 
when I was pressing him on the need for a tanning bed ban for 
those under 18, and refused to go there for quite some time, Mr. 
Speaker. I was very glad last year when the government finally 

moved on that. 
 
Non-melanoma cancer, skin cancer, I believe, is the highest 
diagnosed type of cancer here. Melanoma is one issue for sure, 
Mr. Speaker, but non-melanoma cancers where the treatment 
actually . . . It’s not cancerous. But non-melanoma cancers are 
awful, and the treatment, Mohs treatment — it’s called M-o-h-s, 
if you’re wondering, Mr. Speaker — is not a pleasant treatment 
at all. 
 
So preventing . . . Early prevention, all the statistics, all the data 
points to needing to prevent exposure to things like tanning 
beds and ensuring people know how to prevent skin cancer in 
other ways like hats and sunscreen and long sleeves — those 
kinds of things. But the government was reluctant to move in 
that direction and could’ve moved quicker. 
 
I’m also going to point you to a November 24th — almost a 
year ago, Mr. Speaker — a news release by the Canadian 
Cancer Society and the Heart and Stroke Foundation. Just 
would like to read you a quote here, Mr. Speaker: 
 

“Saskatchewan has the highest youth smoking rate in 
Canada, which is nearly double the national average,” says 
Donna Pasiechnik from the Canadian Cancer Society. 
“This is completely unacceptable. Unless we begin to 
seriously address this issue now, smoking-related illnesses 
will overwhelm our society and the health care system.”  

 
Mr. Speaker, these two organizations point to this government’s 
refusal to . . . They got an F on this report card, Mr. Speaker, for 
its refusal to ban flavoured tobacco for example, Mr. Speaker, 
and a D for inaction on outdoor smoking such as on restaurants 
and bar patios, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Having been a server in a restaurant many, many years ago — a 
lifetime ago now actually, not far off from the age of my oldest 
daughter now, which is strange to me — but I was a server in 
the then smoke-filled bars. And I don’t know why it’s okay to 
say that we can’t smoke in an enclosed area but if you’re a . . . 
So as a waitress or a server in any of these establishments, it 
was really unpleasant and awful to be in a smoke-filled 
environment. And I was no longer a server when the indoor 
smoking ban came into effect. But to not ban it on patios makes 
absolutely no sense. 
 
I think the minister in some of his media had commented about 
those outside of the patio or are walking by the patio, there’ll 
still be smoke around. But there could have been a good move, 
or and still can be a good move made by this government to 
seriously consider banning smoking in public spaces like patios 
at bars and restaurants where it’s already banned indoors, Mr. 
Speaker. And that would be a good occupational health and 
safety opportunity as well, Mr. Speaker, in terms of preventing 
future illnesses including cancer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So with respect to Bill No. 13, The Cancer Agency Amendment 
Act, 2016, I look forward to have the opportunity to ask the new 
minister and his officials questions once we get to committee. 
So with that, I will conclude my remarks. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the member that Bill No. 13, The Cancer Agency 



November 9, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1243 

Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill 13 be sent to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — The bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 40 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 40 — The 
Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 
sur l’interprétation be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure . . . 
Well it is always an honour to enter the debate in bills on the 
floor of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, in our capacity as 
members of the Legislative Assembly. But I can’t say it is, that 
I’m happy about this, to be embarking upon this debate at this 
particular time after we have a government who committed to 
not going down the path of privatization, or further down the 
path of privatization of our Crowns, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So once again I’m going to ask you to bear with me. I don’t 
have my laptop and my iPhone today as resources but I do have 
many, many pieces of paper that I’m going to draw on here, 
many different articles and sources here. 
 
So I’d like to tell you, Mr. Speaker, first a little bit about what 
this bill does. This bill creates a new definition of privatization 
that allows the government to wind down, dissolve, or sell up to 
49 per cent of the shares of a Crown corporation without 
holding a referendum. 
 
So that’s the big piece of the Act, Mr. Speaker. Just a little 
smaller piece, it also includes gender-neutral language for the 
monarch of Canada so that references to the Queen or King will 
be consistent in all pieces of legislation when the Prince of 
Wales becomes King Charles III, Mr. Speaker. So that latter 
point is interesting but of not much consequence, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I just want to point out, I’ve said this in the Assembly before, 
I’m a social worker, not a lawyer, Mr. Speaker. But in 
conversations with my colleagues who are lawyers in this 
House . . . My colleague from Saskatoon Nutana, Mr. Speaker, 
we were discussing what an interpretation Act does. She had 
pointed out that across the Commonwealth, Mr. Speaker, in 
Canada and several other jurisdictions she examined, there’s 
nowhere else where interpretation Acts have to have laid out the 

term “privatization.” She has looked — and the member from 
Nutana is quite a fine researcher, Mr. Speaker — and has not 
been able to find this. 
 
Interpretation Acts are generally bills, are bills that define 
simple basic terms. And my conversations with my colleague 
from Nutana, she has a strong belief that this is a misuse and a 
very unusual use of The Interpretation Act, Mr. Speaker. Again, 
looking across Canada and other Commonwealth countries, this 
is highly unusual. 
 
I just would like to point you to the minister’s comments who 
introduced this bill, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’ll quote here: 
 

Mr. Speaker, this bill clarifies the term: 
 

‘privatize’ means, with respect to a Crown corporation, 
the transfer to the private sector of all or substantially all 
of the assets of the Crown corporation, the controlling 
interest . . . or the operational control of the Crown 
corporation . . . [by a variety of listed methods]. 

 
He goes on to say, “Mr. Deputy Speaker, it will not include a 
winding up and dissolution of a Crown corporation or other 
restructuring of the Crown corporation.” So, Mr. Speaker, he 
also says that this bill “. . . will also provide the ability to use 
the regulations to add additional methods of transfer of control 
that will constitute privatization, if appropriate.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, again, if the government doesn’t have the 
intention to privatize, there was no need to bring this forward. 
This is unusual, as my colleague in her adjourned debate talked 
about the wild thing, creating something new and different and 
unknown, creating the potential for creating a . . . we don’t 
know what. Say for example, a SaskTel that is 51 per cent 
owned by the people of Saskatchewan and 49 per cent owned 
by any number of other entities, what that will mean and what 
that’ll mean for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
But I want to take you back to 2003, the election in 2003, Mr. 
Speaker, where the then leader of the Sask Party had made 
some remarks around privatization and said that he would have 
to entertain any offers around Crown corporations. So there was 
the strong feeling that this is a government who would be 
willing to put Crowns at risk, Mr. Speaker, Crowns that serve 
Saskatchewan people well. 
 
So that’s what Mr. Hermanson had said in 2003 and it did not 
bode well for the Sask Party at that time. I understand there was 
an election party, that they were quite confident that they were 
going to win, and the spectre of privatization of our Crowns 
was something that the people of Saskatchewan weren’t 
interested in entertaining today, and I don’t believe they’re 
interested in entertaining it either . . . or they weren’t interested 
in 2003 and I don’t believe they’re interested in 2016. 
 
[14:45] 
 
So I would like to take you to some of the Premier’s remarks 
. . . Well let’s talk about the Sask Party platform actually, Mr. 
Speaker. So in 2003 we had the then leader of the Sask Party 
talking about privatizing the Crowns, saying eerily similar 
things, that there’s no plan to privatize but we’d have to 



1244 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2016 

entertain an offer, which I think are comments we’ve heard 
from the Premier and others on that side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker, similar language anyway. 
 
So in the Sask Party platform in 2007, they’ve I think learned 
their lesson . . . Well actually I’m going to take you to 2004, 
sorry, when the Sask Party actually cemented its support for the 
Crown protection Act, Mr. Speaker. So in 2004, in November 
2004, here in this legislature, Mr. Speaker, with the support 
from all political parties, passed The Crown Corporations 
Public Ownership Act which would require a thorough study of 
any proposed privatization including an analysis of the costs 
and benefits. A full report would then be tabled in the 
legislature and a legislative committee would debate the 
proposed sale which could only come into effect after a general 
election. 
 
The legislation applies to SaskPower, SaskEnergy, SaskTel, 
SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance], TransGas, STC 
[Saskatchewan Transportation Company], SaskWater, 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority, and the 
Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation. So back in 2004, after the 
election campaign of 2003 where people were very concerned 
about privatization, this government, the then opposition in 
2004, said they weren’t interested in privatizing and signed on 
to the Crown protection Act. 
 
So fast forward to 2007 and the Sask Party platform, Mr. 
Speaker. So they, in their 2007 platform, point out that . . . On 
page 29 of that platform: 
 

The Saskatchewan Party will ensure Crown Corporations 
continue to provide Saskatchewan people with the highest 
quality utilities at the lowest cost, while directing Crown 
dividends towards priorities like health care, highways and 
education. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it sounds like they get it, like those are the things 
that Crowns do for us here in Saskatchewan. They also go on in 
that same platform on page 29, saying that: 
 

A Saskatchewan Party government will also strengthen 
Crown investment in our communities and post-secondary 
institutions to build an innovative economy, while helping 
Saskatchewan Go Green through initiatives by SaskPower, 
SaskEnergy and SGI to help Saskatchewan people make 
smart environmental choices in their homes and when they 
drive. 

 
Well we’ve actually seen some of those energy initiatives not 
really come to fruition, Mr. Speaker, but the point is around our 
Crown corporations. This is a party in 2007, and then a 
government . . . a party who became a government, who said 
they were not interested in privatizing our main Crowns. 
 
And then we’ll go to 2011, the platform in 2011, Mr. Speaker. 
On page 37 of that platform, the Sask Party says they will: 
 

Continue to support the Crown Corporations Public 
Ownership Act. 
Ensure Saskatchewan’s Crown utility corporations remain 
publicly owned and focused on delivering high quality 
service to Saskatchewan people at the lowest cost. 

So again, in 2011, Mr. Speaker, they got it. They got it. So then 
we fast-forward to 2016, an election in 2016 when the 
government took it to the people of Saskatchewan the desire to 
sell 40 public liquor stores. That was part of their agenda, Mr. 
Speaker. That was the only Crown they talked about selling. 
Even raising the spectre of privatization was branded as . . . 
Anybody who talked about the Sask Party’s agenda of 
privatization was labelled a bogeyman, Mr. Speaker, or 
fearmongers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But we see this . . . We have another piece of legislation before 
us where the government again took to the people of 
Saskatchewan the privatization of 40 liquor stores — that was 
all — and now we see all the rest of Saskatchewan liquor stores 
being removed from protection as well, Mr. Speaker. So we 
have a government who in their platform was committed to not 
privatizing, with the exception of the 40 liquor stores, but have 
already moved on another agenda. And it wasn’t long after that 
election campaign that the spectre of SaskTel potentially being 
on the chopping block came up as well. 
 
I’m going to actually take you to an interesting article that 
Planet S wrote. That’s a local newspaper in Saskatoon, Mr. 
Speaker, and its companion paper in Regina, the Prairie Dog. 
And they have an article that they wrote, reporter Evan Radford 
wrote it: “In Brad’s . . . Words: A recap of our premier’s 
statements on SaskTel privatization.” So in this article, it’s 
basically an accounting of all the things that Premier Wall . . . 
pardon me, the Premier has said on this account, so on the 
record, and all the things that the Premier has committed to 
around not privatizing. 
 
So in May 2010 in an article in The Globe and Mail with 
journalist Gordon Pitts, the Premier does a one-on-one 
interview and Pitts asks Wall why he is resisting privatizing 
Crowns. And Wall references the 2003 gaffe which I’ve just 
briefly talked about by then party leader Hermanson. And this is 
what the Premier said in that 2010 May article: 
 

It’s a practical lesson from the election of 2003 (which his 
party narrowly lost) when we sacrificed the chance to 
implement the rest of this growth agenda. I was the Crown 
corporation critic and I helped write the policy, so mea 
culpa. We sacrificed the chance to make some long-term 
changes in the psyche and environment in the province for 
this one issue. 

 
Some on the right say SaskTel doesn’t have a future as a 
standalone indie. Well, it just had its biggest year. Part of it 
is a growing economy and part of it is an attachment 
people have to their Crowns. In the case of SaskTel, it is 
competing with other telcos, and this (attachment) has 
stood them in good stead. I’m not saying Saskatchewan is 
an island with respect to government-owned enterprise, but 
there are unique elements that say to me: ‘We still have 
other things to do, we made a commitment and we plan to 
keep it.’ 

 
So that’s what the Premier said in May of 2010 in a Globe and 
Mail article. I’ll continue to cite the Planet S article by Evan 
Radford where he talks about seven months later to the 
Leader-Post reporter Angela Hall, who used to be here, Mr. 
Speaker, the legislative reporter here at the Saskatchewan 



November 9, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1245 

legislature, did a year-end interview with the Premier and she 
asked him about hidden privatization agenda. And the article 
goes: 
 

“The fact is we have put significant investment into the 
Crown sector. We put significant general revenue dollars 
into SaskTel over the three years to help them expand 
connectivity in the province, to help them expand the 
mobility network,” Wall said. 

 
So again I think that sounds like a Premier who understands that 
getting services into other parts of the province are important, 
expanding connectivity and expanding the mobility network. So 
as this article points out, there’s little else that comes from the 
Premier until the 2016 election cycle, which started on March 
8th when, as you’ll remember, that’s when we all hit the 
hustings, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On March 15th, the former leader of the NDP [New Democratic 
Party] raised the prospect of Wall’s hidden privatization agenda 
for the province’s Crowns, and that was reported in the CBC 
[Canadian Broadcasting Corporation]. And so the Premier was 
pressed on the issue, and he says: 
 

“There’s something we signed on to called the Crown 
Corporation Protection Act, or to that effect. Basically, it 
protects Crowns from being privatized,” he said. “If 
elected, we will make one change to that: that’s to the 
liquor retailing in the province. And we’ve already 
announced that.” 
 
“With respect to the major Crowns, we will not be 
changing it if we’re re-elected again.” 

 
So that’s what the Premier said just a few short months ago 
prior to election, Mr. Speaker. He said, yes we are going to 
make one change and that will be removing 40 liquor stores 
from the Crowns, 40 publicly owned liquor stores from . . . 
that’s what we will be privatizing. He didn’t talk about 
removing them all from . . . He didn’t talk about removing 
SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority] from the 
Crown protection Act, Mr. Speaker. And he certainly didn’t talk 
about any other Crown being removed from that Act. 
 
So before the Throne Speech in the spring, Mr. Speaker . . . I’ll 
go on again. I just want to remind folks at home that I’m citing 
a Planet S article. So before the end of the legislature, before 
entering the legislature for the government’s Throne Speech, 
the Premier had “. . . told reporters that ‘competition has gotten 
tough’ for SaskTel, due to a May 2nd deal that saw Bell Canada 
buy Manitoba Telecom Services, according to Leader-Post 
reporter David Fraser.” 
 
And Wall — pardon me — the Premier says: 
 

Maybe that’s a discussion Saskatchewan people want to 
have . . . We wouldn’t be able to be in a position of 
welcoming private investment into SaskTel even if that 
was thought to be the right thing, because we didn’t 
campaign on it. 
 
If it was something Saskatchewan people, we thought, 
really wanted to at least talk about, there is the idea of a 

provincial referendum [the Premier said]. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, again the Premier understands, this 
government understands they did not campaign on privatizing 
anything other than those 40 liquor stores, Mr. Speaker. Yet we 
have a bill before us that opens up the door to that very thing. 
 
So the Minister of Health, who was then the minister 
responsible for SaskTel . . . Just a little point of fact, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s interesting. The current Minister of Health was the 
former minister for SaskTel, and now the new Minister for 
SaskTel is the former minister of Health. Just a little tidbit for 
you, Mr. Speaker. So the minister then responsible for SaskTel 
called for a risk assessment on May 4th to gauge SaskTel’s 
vulnerability in light of the MTS [Manitoba Telecom Services] 
sale, and the Premier then said of that assessment: “It’s worth 
asking the question, and we ought not to ask it secretly; we 
ought to have a public discussion.” 
 
And then on June 20th when SaskTel released that risk 
assessment, the Premier said any plan to sell the telecom will 
involve everyone in the province. And this is from David 
Fraser, the Leader-Post reporter, again quoting the Premier: 
 

“If there’s going to be any privatization of SaskTel, the 
shareholders should have a say” . . . noting such a matter 
could only be decided in an election campaign or a 
provincial referendum. 

 
Mr. Speaker, but via this Act, Mr. Speaker, this interpretation 
Act, the government is doing an end run around those 
statements, Mr. Speaker. He’s doesn’t think that . . . He just had 
an election campaign, didn’t mention it in an election campaign. 
Perhaps he’s discovered that on a provincial referendum — is it 
two-thirds that’s necessary? — it’s not a simple majority, Mr. 
Speaker. It is not a simple majority that’s required on a 
referendum on privatizing a Crown, Mr. Speaker.  
 
So perhaps the Premier realized after he spoke about the 
possibility of a referendum that getting a simple majority, or 
getting to the two-thirds required number would be too difficult 
to do. So this is a government who has decided to do an end run 
around an election and a referendum, Mr. Speaker, with 
semantics and language and doing something that no other 
government in the Commonwealth has done by adding the term 
“privatization” to their interpretation Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So back to the Planet S article here, Mr. Speaker. On August 
23rd, the day of the cabinet shuffle, the Premier assigned the 
former Health minister the SaskTel portfolio, and he teased out 
the idea of a bid for SaskTel. 
 
The Premier said: 
 

We may get an offer . . . If we get an offer and we think 
it’s one that generates a significant amount of money for 
the province, maybe enough to eliminate our operating 
debt, if it takes care of the jobs question in Regina, if it 
provides the opportunity for better coverage, we’re at least 
going to take it to the people. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, again I think with this Act before us, the 
Premier has realized that he would be hard pressed to get to his 



1246 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2016 

two-thirds majority, Mr. Speaker. The people of Saskatchewan 
know the benefits of the Crowns to our province, Mr. Speaker. 
They know about the jobs, well-paying, family-supporting, 
taxpaying jobs. They know about services extended to rural and 
remote communities. They know about the dividends that our 
Crowns pay to the General Revenue Fund to ensure that we 
have health and education and highways and all those 
wonderful things we need here in this province. 
 
So I think the Premier probably realized, in consultation with 
his Justice officials, that getting to the referendum with the need 
for two-thirds majority, not a simple majority of 50 plus one, 
would be difficult. 
 
[15:00] 
 
So following on the Premier’s comments when he talked about 
the potential for a bid for SaskTel, the Premier posted this 
statement on his Facebook page on August 26, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Regarding any potential sale of SaskTel, there first has to 
be an offer, and one of significance — there is none 
currently, [Mr. Speaker]. 
 
Second, as I’ve said, only a very significant offer that 
would include things like protecting jobs in Saskatchewan, 
keeping rates low, improving rural coverage and allowing 
us to do something lasting, like eliminating debt should 
receive any further consideration, [Mr. Speaker.] 
 
By eliminating the debt, Saskatchewan would save roughly 
twice the amount in interest payments each year as what 
SaskTel currently averages in an annual dividend to 
government/shareholders. 
 
Were SaskTel to receive such an offer, we do not have a 
mandate to accept it . . . to sell. That is not what we 
campaigned on. But neither would we have the right to say 
no without checking with the shareholders of SaskTel — 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
That’s why I have said that a province-wide referendum 
would be the only way to deal with such an offer. The 
people would have to decide, not the government. That is 
consistent with election commitments we have made. 
 
SaskTel’s future became a focus with the proposed sale of 
MTS to Bell, as the sale would make SaskTel the only 
regional telecom left in Canada. 
 
The government commissioned a third-party report on 
SaskTel’s competitiveness, which found “there is a risk 
that SaskTel’s net income will be unable to support the 
level of dividends that have been returned to the province 
in recent years.” 
 

He goes on to say: 
 

It is simply difficult for a small regional telecom to keep 
up with the necessary infrastructure investments and 
pressures from large carriers in a highly competitive 
market.  
 

SaskTel is a well-run company, a good employer, and part 
of our history as a province. For now, there is no offer and 
nothing would take place without your say [the Premier 
said]. 

 
So that’s what the Premier had to say about privatization, Mr. 
Speaker, up until just this fall. I think that there’s some 
interesting things in those comments that he does note, that in 
fact SaskTel is a well-run company, a good employer, and a big 
part of our history of our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I think many of his comments there are telegraphing that 
privatization is in fact something that this government is 
interested in. This has been a Premier who — in the time that 
I’ve been in this House; over seven years now, Mr. Speaker — 
he’s awfully fond of those trial balloons, or putting things out 
and dialing them back a little bit. And that is what I’m arguing 
is happening here, with doing an end run around a referendum 
and an election campaign, Mr. Speaker, and by just adding the 
word “privatization” to The Interpretation Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to talk a little bit about a former premier actually as 
well, Mr. Blakeney, who served well in this House, Mr. 
Speaker. A civil servant, a lawyer, a Rhodes Scholar — I think 
someone for whom I had a great deal of respect, Mr. Speaker.  
 
But . . . If you’ll just bear with me, Mr. Speaker. Actually, you 
know what, I just want to correct my comments here. A 
referendum, the requirement for a referendum, Mr. Speaker, is 
in fact 60 per cent. So I have a feeling that the Premier realized 
he couldn’t reach the 60 per cent required and has decided again 
to do an end run on a referendum and an election. 
 
So I’m going to draw your attention to “The History of 
Saskatchewan Crown Corporations,” written by Allan 
Blakeney. I’m going to read a rather long passage into the 
record, Mr. Speaker, and I think it’s well worth reading, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So page 31 of “The History of Saskatchewan Crown 
Corporations”: 
 

In talking about Saskatchewan Crown corporations, I do 
not propose to talk about the ideology of Crown 
corporations, either the ideology that says Crown 
corporations are good and therefore we should keep the 
existing Crowns and have more, or alternatively, the 
ideology that says Crown corporations are bad, therefore 
we should sell SaskEnergy or SGI or whatever. 
 
I believe that human affairs are complex. I believe that 
they are best dealt with by applying one’s mind to the 
circumstances at hand, and arriving at what is the best 
course of action for the people whose interests we seek to 
represent. Thus, I think that, when deciding whether 
Saskatchewan needs more Crown corporations or fewer, 
one should ask for whose benefit the Crown corporations 
were organized; who they benefit now and in the future; 
and who would benefit if they were dismantled; and assess 
the situation case by case. 
 
I do not favour the thinking which starts from an 
ideological straightjacket, one which says that government 



November 9, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1247 

enterprise is bad, therefore Crown corporations should be 
disposed of or, conversely, government enterprise is 
inherently good, therefore the existing Crown corporations 
should be retained and others should be established. I do 
not believe the Crown corporations are inherently good or 
inherently bad. They are a tool. They are a tool whereby 
people acting through their government seek to achieve 
social objectives or economic objectives or both. 
 
I believe that this is how the great bulk of Saskatchewan 
Crown corporations came into being. Many Crown 
corporations were brought into being by Conservative 
governments, Liberal governments, and NDP governments. 
Many of them have been disposed of by Conservative 
governments, Liberal governments, and NDP governments. 
In most cases, this was done because it was thought to 
make sense if one was acting for the benefit of the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
In the past, governments of all political hues have, to use a 
facetious phrase, “laid aside their principles and done what 
was right,” and I hope we can continue to do this. 
Accordingly, I reject out of hand the ideological, 
broad-brush approach to Crown corporations, past, present, 
or future. 
 
I want to say that I also reject the false argument that some 
people use when they are talking about Crown 
corporations. They say that Crown corporations have 
served the people of Saskatchewan well in the past; but 
things have now changed; and, therefore, Crown 
corporations should be disposed of. They say this without 
in any way attempting to establish just why the changes, 
which undoubtedly have come about, in this decade as they 
have in every other decade, dictate the sale of Crown 
corporations now, when changes in past times did not. The 
mere fact of change is an argument for nothing. If I may 
use a paradoxical statement, change is a constant. It is only 
if a particular change dictates a particular course of action 
that we should take note of change. 
 
I am in some ways one of the many Saskatchewan citizens 
who’ve received services from many public enterprises 
throughout our lifetimes. 
 
I have worked in this city as a public servant and as a 
lawyer engaged in the private practice of law. [The first 
time I ever owned a house] The first house I ever owned 
was one that I built, along with others, on the 31 Block 
Montague Street. When I woke up in the morning, I noted 
that the house was nice and warm. I liked the natural gas 
provided by the then Saskatchewan Power Corporation. I 
got out of bed and struggled to the bathroom and used the 
plumbing facilities provided by the City of Regina and the 
water facilities provided by the City of Regina and the hot 
water provided by SaskPower’s natural gas. 
 
I was conscious of the fact that my house had been paid for 
largely by a mortgage provided through the Central 
Mortgage and Housing Corporation, and the property and 
fire insurance on the house was provided by Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance and I drove a car that was insured 
by Saskatchewan Government Insurance. I drove out of my 

driveway onto a street which was provided by the City of 
Regina and maintained and snowplowed by the City of 
Regina. I was a member of Sherwood Co-op and usually 
bought my gasoline at the Sherwood Co-op Association, 
obtained from Consumer’s Co-op Refinery Limited. My 
children went off to the nearby school provided by the 
Regina Public School Board, and I went for some time to a 
job with the Government of Saskatchewan, and for some 
time with a private law firm in downtown Regina. My 
children were born, or three of them were, in hospitals 
owned by the City of Regina and the Government of 
Saskatchewan. One of the children was born at our home 
because of circumstances created when people, following 
ideology almost blindly, opposed a particular government 
enterprise — the introduction of medical-care insurance, 
what they called state medicine and what we now call 
medicare. They were wrong. On the basis of what was the 
best for the people, this was a proper extension of state 
activity, a proper use of a new Crown corporation. 
 
I am unlikely to be convinced that only the public sector, 
or only the private sector, can provide goods and services. I 
believe that there is a role for the private sector. After all, I 
was engaged in the private practice of law. I believe that 
there is a role for the public sector. I believe that there is a 
role for the cooperative sector. What we are talking about 
is the appropriate role for each of these sectors, as well as a 
private non-profit sector. The appropriate role will change 
with time and circumstances. The appropriate role will not 
be ascertained by large dollops of ideology. It will be 
ascertained by finding out what goods and services we 
need as individuals and as a community and how we can 
best provide them for ourselves. 

 
So that was written by Mr. Blakeney, former Premier Blakeney, 
“The History of Saskatchewan Crown Corporations.” 
 
And again, I don’t think ideology should trump doing what 
works and what is right for people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So we can talk about the good things that our Crowns provide 
for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We can talk about 
the jobs: 4,000 jobs across the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m just going to pull those numbers. Mr. Speaker, 
across the province of Saskatchewan, 4,000 full-time jobs . . . 
or, pardon me, full-time employees and 624 part-time 
employees, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s interesting. SaskTel, I don’t know if members opposite 
know this; I actually hadn’t realized it. SaskTel was established 
in 1908. It is a grand old lady, Mr. Speaker. That is 108 years of 
serving the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Four thousand jobs in cities like Regina, Saskatoon, Moose 
Jaw, Swift Current, Yorkton, Weyburn, Estevan, Prince Albert, 
and North Battleford, Mr. Speaker. So jobs across this province, 
again jobs that pay families’ bills, Mr. Speaker, allowing 
families to contribute via taxes but also to purchase goods and 
services in communities and raise their children, support their 
parents — good-paying jobs that help support families in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 



1248 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2016 

Jobs is just one part of it though, Mr. Speaker. We can look at 
SaskTel rates, Mr. Speaker. Just looking at some rates, the one 
thing SaskTel does with the major telcos and . . . So we do have 
obviously competition here in Saskatchewan, but SaskTel was 
established for the people of Saskatchewan to service the people 
of Saskatchewan. It’s different than other kinds of businesses. 
Crowns are not like your average business, Mr. Speaker. 
They’re created by the people and they are to serve the people 
of the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So looking at costs, when we look at cellphone costs 
comparing, in Saskatchewan, to Rogers, Telus, SaskTel, and 
Bell, so cellphone costs with unlimiting text and nationwide 
calling, two ten gigabytes of data and voicemail, Rogers is 90, 
Telus is 80, SaskTel . . . Sorry. Rogers is 90, Bell is 90, Telus is 
80, and SaskTel is 75. And I would argue that SaskTel at that 
price helps keep the others down as well. 
 
With home Internet, Rogers is 74.99, Shaw is $93, Access is 
69.95, and SaskTel is 79.95. So SaskTel is close to the bottom 
but not the lowest. But again by virtue of a Crown being there 
not just to maximize profits but to help support the people of 
Saskatchewan, they help keep, they can help keep rates low, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Home Internet comparison: SaskTel comes in at 59.95; Access 
is a little lower at 44.95; Shaw is at 73; and Rogers is at 64. So 
in the scheme of things, SaskTel is either below or the 
second-lowest fee, Mr. Speaker, for those particular services. 
So having a Crown that isn’t just there to maximize profits can 
help . . . A tool of public policy is something like the lowest 
cost utility bundle, Mr. Speaker, the ability to find ways of 
supporting your citizenry by, through public policy, addressing 
things like cost of living, which is a big reality for people. I hear 
that actually frequently in my constituency of Saskatoon 
Riversdale, that people do struggle to pay bills. 
 
I’d like to tell you about some of the awards that SaskTel has 
won. As the Premier had noted, it is a great employer and does 
some very good things in the province. So in 2016 alone, 
SaskTel is ranked first by J.D. Power and Associates for 
wireline customer satisfaction studies for TV and Internet in the 
west region for the fourth consecutive year. SaskTel is tied for 
the first-place ranking by J.D. Power and Associates for overall 
network quality for the West for the second consecutive year. 
SaskTel is ranked first by J.D. Power and Associates for 
Canadian wireless purchase experience satisfaction. SaskTel is 
ranked third by J.D. Power and Associates for Canadian 
wireless customer care. SaskTel was named by Mediacorp 
Canada Inc. as one of Canada’s greenest employers for the 
eighth consecutive year. SaskTel in 2016 again, Mr. Speaker, 
was named by Mediacorp Canada as one of Canada’s best 
diversity employers for the sixth consecutive year. Again this 
year SaskTel was named by Mediacorp Canada as one of 
Saskatchewan’s top employers for the 10th consecutive year. 
SaskTel was named by Mediacorp again as one of Canada’s top 
employers for young people for the fourth consecutive year. 
 
So this is a company that does good work for the people of 
Saskatchewan but also treats its employees in obviously a very 
fair and, well a good manner, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I come from the area of work-family balance. Before I was 

elected to this House, I used to work in a little unit of 
government called the work and family unit. And one of the 
things we talked about as that organization was work-family 
balance and how to support work-family balance and issues of 
recruitment and retention and absenteeism rates and employee 
loyalty — all those kinds of things. Better supporting your 
employees means you have better results for your company, Mr. 
Speaker, and it’s clear that SaskTel is doing that. 
 
[15:15] 
 
So we’ve talked about the jobs, the 4,000 jobs, full-time jobs. 
We’ve talked about the various communities, the services 
across the province as well, Mr. Speaker. Or we’ve talked about 
the lower rates and services across the province in places where 
they might be. The Premier acknowledged expanding 
connectivity and wireless services. Those are two really 
important things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another thing that Crowns do that is very different than private 
corporations, Mr. Speaker, is paying dividends to the General 
Revenue Fund. Like private companies pay dividends to their 
shareholders, the people of Saskatchewan are the shareholders 
of Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. And just looking at all 
Crown corporations in the last decade here in Saskatchewan, 
total Crown dividends in the last decade paid to the people of 
Saskatchewan via the General Revenue Fund were $3.117 
billion, Mr. Speaker. Just for SaskTel alone, $800 million in 
dividends in the last decade from SaskTel, Mr. Speaker. So our 
Crowns are . . . So Mr. Blakeney’s point about not just looking 
at ideology, looking at whether or not a Crown’s purpose in the 
evolution of things is wound up or not, I think it’s important to 
realize that this is not the case at all, Mr. Speaker, that our 
Crowns continue to serve the people of Saskatchewan well. 
 
My colleague from Saskatoon Nutana is a very good researcher, 
Mr. Speaker, and she found some good articles that I’d like to 
. . . a good paper I’d like to point you regarding minority 
shareholder rights. So one of the things in this particular Act, 
The Interpretation Act, again as I had said, this government is 
adding the term “privatization,” defining the term 
“privatization” for the people of Saskatchewan. This is 
something, Mr. Speaker, that no other jurisdiction in Canada or 
the Commonwealth has ever done, Mr. Speaker, and, according 
to my colleague from Saskatoon Nutana, is a gross misuse of 
The Interpretation Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to me that the Minister of Justice is 
injecting himself into this conversation. He is saying that 
perhaps we should have defined that when we had the chance. 
But his definition of “privatization” in fact I think will be 
harmful and hurtful to the people of Saskatchewan. And I will 
go on with my debate here, Mr. Speaker, explaining why this 
could be a problem for us. 
 
Crown corporations have a very different purpose, Mr. Speaker, 
than do private enterprises, whether it is . . . So this government 
is proposing that you can sell up to 49 per cent of a company to 
outside interests and it can still remain a Crown corporation. 
Well that’s semantics, Mr. Speaker. But a Crown corporation 
has a very different purpose than a private enterprise. A private 
enterprise’s goal is to maximize profits, full stop, Mr. Speaker. 
A Crown corporation obviously wants to do well on the 



November 9, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1249 

business side of things and do well and succeed. They want to 
succeed, but they have other tools available to them to help 
keep prices low for their consumers, to help ensure services are 
spread to places in a geographically large province like 
Saskatchewan, with actually fairly sparse in places, Mr. 
Speaker. I would argue that there are many corporations, whose 
bottom line or whose goal is to maximize profits, will not see 
the goal of providing Internet service in the North or in rural 
communities as efficient for maximizing profits. 
 
So a Crown corporation has the ability, Mr. Speaker, as a tool 
of the people, to ensure that rates stay low, that people across 
the province have equity of services, Mr. Speaker, that those 
dividends go back to the people of Saskatchewan and not to 
individual shareholders. 
 
So an article that the member from Saskatoon Nutana found, I 
think again that point that . . . So I actually would . . . I’ll read 
some of this particular article into the record. So minority 
shareholders, which this government is proposing to define 
privatization and opening up the ability for all kinds of 
individuals or entities to own half of our Crowns, Mr. Speaker, 
or less than half actually, minority shareholders still have an 
impact, Mr. Speaker. It might be less than 50 per cent but there 
are rules in place to ensure that those minority shareholders’ 
interests are protected, Mr. Speaker. And I would argue those 
shareholders, I would argue those shareholders’ interests, Mr. 
Speaker, are very different than the whole collective 
shareholder of the province of Saskatchewan, the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So “Minority Shareholder Rights.” This was published on 
August 16th, 2011: 
 

Corporations operate on a system of majority rule and this 
necessitates the codification of minority shareholder rights 
to ensure that the interests of the minority are protected and 
not overlooked by the majority. A shareholder holding a 
substantial amount of shares within a corporation has 
tremendous power to orchestrate corporate activity, 
potentially at the expense of minority shareholders. 
 
Pursuant to the Canada Business Corporations Act and the 
Ontario Business Corporations Act minority shareholders 
have certain rights that protect them from the actions and 
decisions of majority shareholders [which in the case of 
this would be the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker] 
within the corporation. This means that if you control . . . 

 
The Minister of Justice is not very fond of my line of discussion 
here, and I look forward to perhaps talking with him after, 
outside of the House, about this. Mr. Speaker, he can explain to 
me, the people . . . He can explain to the people of 
Saskatchewan how those people, how those 49 per cent 
shareholders are going to not have an impact on the decisions of 
the larger body, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’m going to read back to that place, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Pursuant to the Canada Business Corporations Act and the 
Ontario Business Corporations Act minority shareholders 
have certain rights that protect them from the actions and 
decisions of majority shareholders within the corporation. 

This means that if you control a majority of shares in a 
corporation you will be required to consider the interests of 
not only the corporation, but the interests of minority 
shareholders before making certain fundamental corporate 
decisions. This article will identify some of the rights from 
which minority shareholders benefit. 
 
Votes by Special Resolution 
 
A special resolution is defined under the CBCA as a 
resolution passed by a majority of not less than two-thirds 
of the votes cast by the shareholders who voted in respect 
of that resolution or signed by all the shareholders entitled 
to vote. It is an effective way for minority shareholders to 
have a profound impact on corporate decision-making. 

 
Moving down here: 
 

The rights of minority shareholders are also protected 
under the CBCA and OBCA in cases where a corporation 
intends to sell, lease or exchange all or substantially all of 
its property outside of the ordinary course of business. In 
this type of a situation a special resolution must be 
obtained in order to carry out such a sale, lease or 
exchange. Furthermore, each [of the] shareholder of the 
corporation has the right to cast a vote in respect of the 
proposed transaction regardless of whether the shares of 
each shareholder normally carry the right to vote. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the bottom line is, even if you’re not a majority 
shareholder, your job as a minority shareholder — the entity or 
whomever it is who would own 49 per cent of one of our 
Crowns — does not have the same goal, does not have the same 
end goal as that of a Crown that is there to serve the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. A very different, a very, very 
different approach, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think the Minister of Justice is feeling a little sensitive about 
bringing forward this, being forced to do an end run on a 
referendum, Mr. Speaker, in an election. I think he is perhaps 
overworked. The number of things that he has on his file today 
dictates that perhaps he is feeling a little bit sensitive about 
decisions that he is being, or bills that he’s forced to push 
forward, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Mr. 
Speaker, the Minister of Justice is wondering what I’m reading: 
Nelligan O’Brien Payne, “Minority Shareholder Rights,” 
published August 16th, 2011, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I think one of the things that this government is not very 
good at doing is seeing the unintended consequences of its 
actions, Mr. Speaker. And I think we’ve seen that on full 
display here in this Assembly. 
 
I will point to the fact that 49 per cent, Mr. Speaker, is an 
interesting choice to choose to define privatization. And there 
are all kinds of definitions of privatization one can find when 
they search it, Mr. Speaker, but 49 per cent is an interesting 
choice. 
 
So with respect, the income tax of Canada, section 149, 
anything greater than 10 per cent, greater than 10 percent . . . So 
that Income Tax Act 149 says, a Crown corporation is exempt 
from corporate income tax provided not less than 90 per cent of 



1250 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2016 

the shares is held by a government or province. If more than 10 
per cent is sold, federal and provincial income tax becomes 
payable, in essence suggesting that a significant portion of the 
Crown corporation is now held by outside, non-government 
interests, i.e. that the Crown has been privatized. Mr. Speaker, 
that is what that says in essence. 
 
So what would this result in, Mr. Speaker? This would result in 
15 per cent of SaskTel’s profits or taxable income being paid to 
the federal government. That would be a windfall for Ottawa at 
the expense of residents of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. So even 
if only 11 per cent of the entity was sold, we don’t even have to 
get up to the 49 per cent mark for it to be a problem for the 
people of Saskatchewan to have those profits heading out the 
door, Mr. Speaker. Eleven per cent. 
 
And it’s interesting. It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that the 
Finance minister is heckling now, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s interesting to me that the Minister of Finance, the Minister 
of Finance, Mr. Speaker, who is . . . Mr. Speaker, the Minister 
of Finance, it’s interesting. Well he’s heckling the Minister of 
Justice, which is interesting. It would be interesting to be 
around their cabinet table, Mr. Speaker, if they’re heckling at 
each other in the House. 
 
The Minister of Finance has said that he doesn’t want to go 
down the rabbit hole. He used that term, the rabbit hole, when 
that was raised in the House, Mr. Speaker, the rabbit hole of 
privatization. Well the interesting thing, Mr. Speaker, when you 
think about making changes to any piece of legislation, you 
should be considering the consequences that you know and then 
talking to people about the unintended consequences, and 
clearly . . . 
 
So the Minister of Finance says, oh there’s no offer. We’re not 
even looking at that. Well this particular bill, The Interpretation 
Act, opens that up as a possibility, Mr. Speaker. So of course 
you should be looking at what happens if an offer comes, Mr. 
Speaker. If an offer . . . Well you should be anticipating those 
unintended consequences. And I’ll actually in a few moments 
talk a little bit about some unintended consequences of 
privatization that this government has embarked upon, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I think these guys haven’t been this interested in one of my 
speeches in a little while, Mr. Speaker. These members 
opposite, these hon. members have not been so interested in 
anything I’ve had to say for a little while, so I’m glad that I’ve 
got their attention, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So again with respect to unintended consequences, when you 
introduce a piece of legislation you should be anticipating what 
could come of it. Not like, oh if an offer happens, well we’ll 
address that when that happens. Well you know very well, you 
know very well that under the Income Tax Act that that could be 
a very real problem for you, Mr. Speaker. So I would like to 
talk a little bit about what happens, Mr. Speaker, when a 
government privatizes a Crown entity and doesn’t think about 
the consequences of what could happen, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
going to take them, cast their mind back actually to just a few 
years ago. And this is I think a good example of the government 
selling a Crown, undervaluing it, undervaluing it and having a 
huge impact on the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

So I will take you back to, it was, I was actually a new MLA 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly]. Mr. Speaker, in 2010, 
this government decided to privatize SCN [Saskatchewan 
Communications Network]. So 2010, Mr. Speaker, this 
government decides in the budget that they’re going to privatize 
the Saskatchewan Communications Network. So Saskatchewan 
Communications Network was a public broadcaster, and the 
only remaining public broadcaster at the time who actually was 
one of the key pillars of the film industry here in Saskatchewan. 
The public broadcaster did a number of things. It was about 
creating local content. 
 
And actually the former minister of Culture asked the other 
night in heckling what our favourite SCN show was. Actually 
Wapos Bay was my favourite, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Wapos Bay, 
Anand Ramayya, and some other folks. So SCN provided good 
local content, good local content, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . That would be Wapos Bay there to the member 
from whomever over there is heckling, Mr. Speaker, if you 
didn’t, if you didn’t hear that clearly. 
 
[15:30] 
 
But SCN was not just about public broadcasting and ensuring 
educational and good quality local content. It was also a tool for 
the film industry, Mr. Speaker. It was a local broadcaster that 
70 per cent in 2000 . . . I just want to make sure I have these 
numbers right. In 2009, in 2009 they ensured 70 per cent of 
their broadcast budget would go to local productions, Mr. 
Speaker. So aside from the local content, that pride of place, 
that pride of place, Mr. Speaker, seeing your own community 
and your own people on TV, it was a trigger for other broadcast 
licences, the first in. SCN was often the first in for local 
production companies. So SCN would get a licence and that 
would trigger other broadcasters getting in on the action too. 
That’s how you build, that’s how you build funding sometimes 
for projects, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They didn’t anticipate the impact that would have for 
privatizing SCN on the Canada Media Fund, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s a fund that funds development of content here in Canada, 
Mr. Speaker. The government hadn’t thought any of those 
things through. I believe, so casting our mind back here, so I’m 
going cite from Patricia Elliott’s article called “Selling the 
Saskatchewan Communications Network.” And she points out 
that in March 2010 in the provincial budget, with no public 
prior consultation or forewarning . . . So here’s the piece around 
consultation and knowing what the heck you’re doing, Mr. 
Speaker. Talking to people, Mr. Speaker, it’s a really good 
thing to do. So with no prior public consultation or forewarning, 
the government unexpectedly announced its intention to sell 
SCN’s broadcast arm to the private sector. They stated, Mr. 
Speaker, “SCN’s viewership is quite low and we feel there is no 
longer a role for government in the broadcast business,” Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I’ll point to some, actually interesting . . . That same year a 
survey in 2009 revealed in fact that: 
 

. . . a steadily growing viewership and a healthy level of 
public support: 53 per cent of respondents felt their tax 
contribution toward educational broadcasting was 
satisfactory, while 28 per cent said it was too little, for a 



November 9, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1251 

combined 81 per cent in favour of tax-supported 
educational broadcasting. 

 
Mr. Speaker, and still this government went ahead with their 
plan, Mr. Speaker. And what did this plan mean? And I’ll talk a 
little bit more about the broader effects on the film industry in a 
moment. But this is a government who was looking for some 
quick savings, which again, it had been hard. This was shortly 
after the economic collapse, Mr. Speaker, and the government 
had some financial issues at that time, much like we’re facing 
right now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So in 2010, very quickly actually, from time to budget to, I 
believe it was the end of June, Mr. Speaker — I was the Culture 
critic at the time, and I might have that timeline slightly wrong 
— but it was just within a matter of months, Mr. Speaker, they 
sold SCN for $350,000, which interestingly enough just in the 
previous annual report for SCN, its assets were valued at $4 
million, Mr. Speaker. So they sold SCN for $350,000 to a 
company from Ontario, a treasury board Crown that had $4 
million in assets, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think Bluepoint got itself a pretty fine deal. And the people of 
Saskatchewan all the while lost a tool in the film industry that 
helped contribute to growing film production, and also lost the 
opportunity for public broadcasting, Mr. Speaker. Some good 
quality local content, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I would like to tell you a little bit more about what that sale 
meant and what transpired a little bit further. So in June, 
Bluepoint purchased SCN, a private company owned by Bruce 
G. Claasen, again for $350,000. “A condition of that sale was 
Bluepoint’s commitment to spend $1.75 million per year on 
local program production, and that the period between 6 a.m. 
and 3 p.m. remain dedicated to commercial-free children’s and 
educational programming.” So those were stipulations of the 
sale, Mr. Speaker. 
 
“In December, the CRTC approved the sale and authorized 
on-air advertising, previously prohibited during non-educational 
programs.” This is the interesting part of this, Mr. Speaker: 
“Just two years later, citing financial [circumstances or] duress 
. . .” And again I just want to give Patricia Elliott credit for this 
article, Mr. Speaker. Two years following that sale of our public 
broadcaster to an Ontario corporate company for far less than it 
was valued, $4 million in assets for $350,000, Mr. Speaker, so 
two years after that, Claasen sold SCN to Rogers Broadcasting 
for $3 million. Mr. Speaker, it kind of sounds like the GTH land 
deal. Yes, like they’re not dissimilar, does it? Sold to: 
 

. . . Rogers Broadcasting for $3 million, a price more than 
8.5 times higher than what he had paid for the channel. 

 
In its application to the CRTC, Rogers asked to be relieved 
of the $1.75 million commitment to local programming, 
and to use the SCN signal to broadcast its Toronto-based 
CityTV station. In June, 2012, the CRTC approved the 
sale; instead of $1.75 million annually, Rogers was ordered 
to spend 23 per cent of gross revenues purchasing from 
local TV producers, and to commit to an additional $1 
million toward local productions by 2018. 

 
And I haven’t followed up on that. I haven’t been the Culture 

critic for some time, Mr. Speaker, but I’d be interested in 
knowing a little bit more about where that’s at, Mr. Speaker. 
 

As well, the station was ordered to retain commercial-free 
educational broadcasting between 6 a.m. and 3 p.m. With 
these commitments, the company received permission to 
transform SCN into CityTV.  

 
In two years, Mr. Speaker, for a company that was serving the 
people of Saskatchewan, a treasury Crown that was serving the 
people of Saskatchewan, sold for a fire sale price and without a 
minister or without a government who’d given it thought what 
it meant, Mr. Speaker, and what it meant in particular to the 
film industry. 
 
So SCN was one of the key pillars in the film industry. As with 
all public policy, Mr. Speaker, there’s never a single silver 
bullet. There’s never one thing that makes anything work really 
well. I firmly believe that with public policy it’s always a 
multi-pronged approach. There is not one thing. There are 
things that can improve things. There are the odd actions that 
can improve things more than others. But usually it’s a 
combination of factors and a combination of things working 
together that make for the best public policy, Mr. Speaker. And 
SCN was just one of the tools in terms of building a film 
industry here in Saskatchewan. It was also the film tax credits 
as well as the sound stage, a cutting-edge, purpose-built sound 
stage here in Regina, actually just a stone’s throw away from 
here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So cutting SCN, Mr. Speaker, was a huge blow to the film 
industry at a time when the film industry, who had seen huge 
increases over the course of several years, Mr. Speaker, who 
had seen its peak year, and then the financial collapse happened, 
Mr. Speaker. The Canadian dollar went up, which was a 
challenge for all film industries across the country, Mr. 
Speaker. So the film industry was struggling, but there were 
people, we had created several . . . There were hundreds of 
people working in the film industry and many, many more 
touched by the film industry. 
 
We have restaurants . . . I was out for supper last year, Mr. 
Speaker, at a restaurant in Regina with someone, and the owner 
of the business didn’t know that I was a MLA. And they were 
having a conversation about the film industry and the restaurant 
owner had said that since the collapse of the film industry 
because of this government’s decisions, his business had 
dropped substantially, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it’s restaurants. It’s clothing stores. It’s lumberyards. It’s 
hotels. So it employed hundreds of people in the creative sector, 
allowed them the opportunity to pursue their love here in the 
province, Mr. Speaker. I have one of my dearest friends, her 
daughter’s at Ryerson right now taking film studies, and is quite 
devastated that there is nothing for her daughter to come back 
to, and to know that her daughter will always have to work 
away from Saskatchewan if she wants to work in her chosen 
profession, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So this is about short-sightedness around privatizing a Crown. 
We’ve seen this from the government before. So with respect to 
SCN, that was the first blow was privatizing a Crown for very 
little money, Mr. Speaker. They took the money. And I would 



1252 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2016 

ask, with a government who’s run — how many deficits now? 
— four deficits in record financial times, Mr. Speaker . . . So 
they’ve sold SCN . . . [inaudible interjections] . . . They’re all 
groaning over there, Mr. Speaker, but they only need to look at 
their own budget documents to see in 2009-10 they ran a deficit 
of $409,000; in 2010-11 a deficit of 13; and ’11-12, 105; and in 
’15-16, a $1.5 billion deficit. 
 
So this is a government who has run . . . And we don’t have a 
first quarter report, Mr. Speaker, from this government and we 
don’t know where this government is at. So this is a 
government who likes to take . . . Well right now I think they 
are figuratively looking through the couch cushions for money 
right now, and I think possibly literally looking through the 
couch cushions for money at this point as well, Mr. Speaker, 
trying to fill their mismanagement and scandal through getting 
money as quickly as possible. And in SCN I wondered what 
happened, where that investment, where that whole $350,000 
that they got for SCN went, Mr. Speaker. I would like to know 
that. 
 
So the film industry, Mr. Speaker, privatizing a treasury board 
Crown and then cutting the film employment tax credit 
completely knocked the legs out from a film industry that 
created jobs for people in Saskatchewan and spinoff jobs 
outside of the film industry as well. It created a pride of place. 
People loved seeing, not only the extras or people from the 
province appearing in films, but local landscapes serving as 
other landscapes, Mr. Speaker. Hey, I know that town or that 
city. That’s my city, even though it’s supposed to look like this 
other community. People like that pride of place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And ironically at a time where we’ve had the greatest job losses 
in this province in over a decade, Mr. Speaker, a film industry, 
especially with the Canadian dollar where it’s at, we could have 
been doing really wonderful things. Those jobs and that income 
and those taxes paid and those people contributing to our 
community could have benefited our economy a great deal, Mr. 
Speaker. And instead because this government likes to . . . is 
short-sighted, it doesn’t think about the long-term 
consequences, doesn’t think about unintended consequences, 
makes decisions that are harmful to the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the saddest days I’ve had in this House, Mr. Speaker, 
was as the Culture critic, taking my 90-second member 
statement and reading into . . . All I did, Mr. Speaker, was read 
the names of people who were leaving or had left Saskatchewan 
because of the cuts to the film tax credit, Mr. Speaker, 
award-winning . . . There were gaffers. There were production 
companies. There were no shortage of people, award-winning 
people, Mr. Speaker, people who had deep roots in the 
community. . . thinking of one, Mr. Speaker, 90 seconds, Mr. 
Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Mr. Speaker, the 
Minister of Finance is heckling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s fascinating to me that this is a government 
who could have record revenue, Mr. Speaker. They inherited a 
windfall, Mr. Speaker, and now that they have mismanaged, 
they . . . Record revenue, yet they’ve run four deficits, Mr. 
Speaker, in times of prosperity — four deficits. They haven’t 
saved a single dime, Mr. Speaker, for future citizens, Mr. 
Speaker. I think about my kids and their cohort and their kids to 

come, Mr. Speaker, and I worry for them. This is a government 
who took record revenues and blew it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the other thing, Mr. Speaker, short-sighted, making 
decisions that hurt people without thinking about the 
unintended consequences. So this interpretation Act, Mr. 
Speaker, although the Minister of Justice would have us believe 
that it’s an innocuous bill, Mr. Speaker, it’s for the benefit of 
people of Saskatchewan, we’ve got to define privatization. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, he’s opening up the door to, I would argue, 
something very similar to SCN where it’ll be quick bucks, Mr. 
Speaker, quick bucks turned around and people in 
Saskatchewan will not be well served. We will lose jobs, Mr. 
Speaker. There will be . . . people in rural and remote 
communities will not have the services that they need. Rates 
will go up, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So this government has done an end run around all the 
commitments they’ve made, Mr. Speaker. They have totally 
done an end run thinking that semantics will win the day, Mr. 
Speaker. Well I can tell you, on this side of the House, we will 
fight with the people of Saskatchewan, alongside people of 
Saskatchewan to ensure that this government does not privatize 
the Crowns that serve the people of Saskatchewan so well. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know I have colleagues who will 
also enter the debate around The Interpretation Act and I look 
forward to their speeches as well. And with that, I move to 
adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 
40, The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Carried. 
 
[15:45] 
 

Bill No. 37 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 37 — The 
Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise today to 
speak to Bill No. 37, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act. Mr. 
Speaker, this piece of legislation was introduced back in June, 
one of a few pieces of legislation, a few bills that were 
introduced around traffic safety. And although it doesn’t say 
explicitly, nor did the minister in his remarks that day on 
second reading, I suspect that some of this legislation, some of 
these recommendations that are finding their way into this bill, 
came at least in part out of the 2013 Special Committee on 
Traffic Safety, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That committee of course was struck in March of 2013, 



November 9, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1253 

appointed by order of the Assembly, and they were tasked with 
a number of duties. And I know that my colleagues on this side 
of the House, my colleague from Riversdale and my colleague 
from Cumberland, both spend a great deal of time on that 
committee and had some important — as well as members 
opposite — had some important conversations and input from 
people around the province. 
 
For those who aren’t aware or maybe have forgotten, the 
committee was tasked with matters related to improving traffic 
safety and reducing fatalities by examining the dominant factors 
that cause traffic collisions in the province, Mr. Speaker, factors 
such as impaired and distracted driving, excessive speed, 
intersection safety, wildlife collisions, as well as education and 
public awareness programs related to traffic safety, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So this was an interesting committee, I know. Again I’ve heard 
from my colleagues that they really felt it was important, the 
work that was done by this committee, and the conversations 
that were held with people around the province. They did quite 
an extensive tour in fact, Mr. Speaker. They were in Regina. 
They held public hearings in Regina, in Estevan, in Saskatoon, 
Prince Albert, Pelican Narrows, and La Ronge, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would suggest that this is, in a complimentary way, this is 
a pretty good way to go about introducing legislation — to do 
the consultation piece, to hear from people, to have a mandate. 
They also, in addition to the public hearings, had 35 written 
submissions. So doing that research ahead of prescribing bills to 
come before the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, I think is a pretty solid 
way to go about. 
 
And certainly they did hear from a lot of members in the 
community about a number of issues. Of course many kept their 
comments specific to the areas of causing fatalities as were 
listed. But also I’m sure as when you’re in conversation with 
people in the community, other areas that maybe you didn’t 
anticipate are brought up. Other issues are brought to the table. 
And I think that at least in one of the instances that we see here 
around . . . And I’ll get to that later, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we talk about motorcycle, and, I 
would also guess, the provisions around the use of 
three-wheeled vehicles, motorized vehicles, I suspect that those 
also came out of these discussions in that report. 
 
So as I mentioned previously, there are a couple of pieces of 
legislation, a couple of bills that were brought forward in the 
spring around traffic safety by the then minister, and an 
additional bill that was brought before the Assembly this fall, 
Mr. Speaker, which I’m going to spend a little bit of time 
reminding people and talking about. And that was the bill 
around improving — and I think we can say that — improving 
legislation and penalties around impaired and distracted driving, 
Mr. Speaker. And that certainly was a powerful day in this 
Assembly when we had parents and family members and loved 
ones of those who had lost their lives to the senseless, very 
senseless crime of drinking and driving, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I bring that up because there were some recommendations 
back in . . . out of the special committee in 2013 that . . . Some 
of the measures previously passed in this Legislative Assembly 

came out of that task force. But there was also a minority 
opinion put forth by my colleague from Riversdale and from 
Cumberland that suggested, with evidence, having heard the 
evidence, to go further. And in fact we saw some of those 
measures in that legislation pass this fall, specifically around 
stiffer penalties and short-term impoundments for people who 
were in what was described as the danger zone, that blood 
alcohol level of over .04 and up to .08. 
 
And I know that that was the recommendation in 2013. Having 
heard all of the evidence, they listened, they noted that in 
Alberta and BC when these measures were implemented, this 
legislation was passed, they saw a 46 and a 50 per cent 
reduction in fatalities related to impairment. So while they were 
very pleased to see those measures finally brought in in 2016, 
I’m sure that they and many others wish that those 
recommendations would have been followed three years ago 
when they were first noted in that minority opinion, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So it is important, the consultation piece, before engaging in 
that public consultation. I would like to see more of it, but I’m 
afraid we’re seeing less and less of it from this government, Mr. 
Speaker, and we’re seeing bills brought forth in front of this 
Assembly that they’re requesting time to do the research on 
when it’s already been presented. I would suggest that this is a 
much better way to go about bringing bills forward in this 
Assembly, to have the confidence of people, certainly in this 
Assembly, but outside this Assembly. 
 
So with that I’ll maybe move a little bit into some of the then 
minister’s remarks when he spoke to second reading on this bill, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the first changes — I’ve got a number of notes going on 
my desk here — that is proposed in this legislation is to allow 
SGI to cancel the licence or registration renewal, vehicle 
renewal, if someone who has large amounts of debt to SGI so 
that they have not . . . when they haven’t created a plan to pay it 
off. I know that SGI does engage in that practice, where if 
someone has a debt to them, they will try to make arrangements 
with that person in order that they might have some ability to 
pay that debt off, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I know that this is a practice . . . In my former life in the 
community as a social worker, I know that Crown corporations, 
for example, would work out payment plans. This was 
particularly important when women perhaps — in my case, I 
worked with women in a women’s shelter — they would leave 
their partner, and perhaps the debts had gone unpaid for a 
number of months. And they would be trying to set up a new 
residence on their own, away from the violence, and they would 
really be encumbered by large amounts of debt payable to 
Crown corporations, particularly often SGI and SaskPower, 
sometimes SaskTel as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So the ability to enter into those arrangements with a Crown 
corporation and be able to whittle that debt down in manageable 
payments while still being able to feed their children and pay 
their rent and pay tuition and all of those things was valuable. It 
was actually invaluable to their ability to get on with their lives. 
And so that is an additional reason that I am thankful for our 
Crown corporations and for that flexibility within their mandate 



1254 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2016 

to be able to engage, not only in the business side, but in the 
social side of their mandate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What this proposes is when the person who is indebted to SGI 
is not able to pay their bill, that they would have . . . And it does 
note that they would have some . . . I’ll just read the legislation 
here: “is indebted to the administrator in the amount of any fees 
. . .” which is a bit of a concern, Mr. Speaker — “of any fees.” 
It doesn’t note a large amount of fees, but “. . . any fees, 
administrative charges or interest fees payable pursuant to this 
Act.” 
 
So I would like, when we do move this bill to committee, to get 
some additional information about that. Exactly how much are 
we talking about before it trips this clause where someone 
might have their licence or their registration taken away? 
Certainly as my colleague from Douglas Park noted earlier, the 
right to drive is not a right; it’s a privilege. It also is true that 
someone’s ability to drive a vehicle and to get to work, for 
example, might reasonably impact their ability not only to get to 
work but ultimately to be able to pay that fine, which this 
measure is meant to address. So that would be a question that I 
will certainly be asking in committee. 
 
And the other question that I had in thinking about this and 
looking at this is how that notice would be made to that person 
who’s indebted to SGI. If you’re cancelling registration, 
particularly registration of the vehicle and someone doesn’t 
know that, potentially, you know, they are driving around in an 
unlicensed and therefore uninsured vehicle, which creates a few 
more problems. So I would have some questions about how 
exactly people will be notified of those changes or in this case 
when their licence or their registration has been revoked due to 
non-compliance with a debt payment plan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are also some changes proposed here around 
impoundment and exactly who’s responsible for paying those 
impoundment fees. I would be curious if this also flowed out of 
the special committee, the traffic safety special committee, 
when we’re talking impounded vehicles perhaps due to drinking 
and driving charges or other criminal charges. It seems that 
there is some confusion currently about who is able, who is 
responsible for paying those impoundment fees. So my 
understanding is that this legislation seeks to clarify that, that it 
makes clear that SGI may collect money for impoundment fees 
from the owner of an impounded vehicle where that’s clear. But 
I guess where it’s less clear, Mr. Speaker, is when the owner 
cannot be determined. So in that case they would be able to go 
after the last known driver of that vehicle. So you know, the 
circumstances under which the owner can’t be identified I guess 
would be something, doesn’t come quickly to mind the 
circumstances that might be at play there. But I think that that 
will be a question again for committee. 
 
Going back to the Traffic Safety Committee and some of those 
proposals, or some of the ideas and recommendations that 
didn’t flow directly from the mandate but came out of 
submissions, both public and written submissions, I suspect is 
what is at play with the next proposed change in this bill. And 
that is making new rules for passengers on motorcycles, stating 
that they must wear a helmet and eye protection, Mr. Speaker. 
And as my colleague from Douglas Park noted, I did think that 
it would already be the case that there were expectations that 

motorcycle drivers wear helmets, but eye protection, for sure. 
They must have their own footrests, Mr. Speaker, and they 
cannot sit in front of the driver. 
 
So certainly some of these recommendations are identifiable in 
a submission to that previously mentioned committee by Luc 
Fournier who was then representing the Motorcycle & Moped 
Industry Council. And some of those recommendations that he 
made back in 2013 are directly evident here in this bill. 
 
And that will be something again that . . . The reasons why, you 
know, those particular provisions and perhaps not others that 
were made found their way into this bill, I think that will be a 
question that I will have again when this bill moves to 
committee. 
 
[16:00] 
 
The next or the final substantive piece of this bill is prohibiting 
the driving of three-wheeled vehicles with small passengers. 
And we had a fairly long discussion the other evening about 
what exactly the three-wheeled vehicle is called. I think my 
colleague opposite was right. A Spyder is at least one of those 
three-wheeled vehicles — two wheels in the front, one wheel in 
the back. Not the reverse, as I remember from my childhood. 
 
But it sets out, prohibits driving that type of vehicle with small 
passengers under seven. So I think it’s a reasonable question to 
ask. As I mentioned, I’ve driven the older version of that 
vehicle but not the flipped-around Spyder version. But why 
exactly that ATV [all-terrain vehicle] and not others, like 
four-wheelers or side-by-sides or those type of things . . . So 
that would be a question that I would I think like to pose when 
this bill does go to committee. 
 
Also the age of seven, why seven was picked. You know, of 
course any age is going to seem arbitrary but what the balance 
of evidence was there in terms of why seven was better than 
eight or six or five. 
 
And again although I couldn’t explicitly find it in the report of 
the committee, I suspect that some of the discussion that 
happened in that committee might have brought up the issue of 
ATV safety for young people, particularly in this province. And 
I know probably everyone from every area of this province has 
a story of tragedy with young people getting seriously injured 
or losing their lives due to misuse or sometimes just routine use 
of ATVs and, in this case particularly, three-wheeled vehicles. 
So I’d be interested in delving a little further into how that 
particular decision to make those recommendations in this bill 
came about, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But as you might note from my comments, I will have some 
more that I want to ask when this bill does move to committee, 
and I look forward to that experience. I look forward to talking 
to my colleagues and members opposite about what they heard 
from members of the community when they were in the 
consultation phase around traffic safety. And with that I will 
conclude my remarks. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 



November 9, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1255 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 
that Bill No. 37, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2016 be 
now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall the bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I designate that 
Bill No. 37 be committed to the Standing Committee on Crown 
and Central Agencies. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The bill stands committed to the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 17 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 17 — The Power 
Corporation Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And as always, it’s my great honour to be able to rise in the 
Legislative Assembly here in Saskatchewan and enter into the 
debates on the bills that are being brought forward by this 
government. 
 
This particular bill, although short in nature, I think really 
exemplifies some of the very serious issues that this 
government is having in terms of money management and their 
ability to keep our Crowns in good shape, Mr. Speaker. And 
there’s not a lot of substantive change in this bill, but it’s the 
amount of money we’re talking about that is really of concern. 
 
The main change . . . There’s a number of household changes 
that are being brought up, adding the word “her,” so gender 
neutralizing it, and some very minor housekeeping changes. But 
in particular today I think it’s important to enter into debate the 
changes to clause 8 of The Power Corporation Act, and 
particularly the changes to clause 43, which is the borrowing 
limit for SaskPower Corporation. 
 
So just a few comments right off the hop on clause 8(1). Now 
that’s being amended, Mr. Speaker, to add a phrase, a very 
interesting phrase that is somewhat reminiscent of the way the 
cabinet is involved in the GTH. And what that section currently 
reads . . . I’m just going to pull up the original bill, or the 
current bill. 
 
Section 8(1)(j) currently reads . . . This is “The purposes and 

powers of the corporation shall be,” and it says, “to exercise any 
other powers that may be designated and prescribed by the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council, having regard to the efficient 
operation of the corporation’s business for the public good.” 
 
So right now the existing clause . . . And I think the member 
from Arm River is really listening intently because I know he 
wants to know more about SaskPower and how it’s being 
operated. So I really appreciate his attention as we go into this 
debate. 
 
So right now the corporation has powers that are designated by 
the Lieutenant Governor in Council. That’s what clause 8(1)(j) 
says, “. . . having regard to the efficient operation of the 
corporation’s business for the public good.” Okay. That makes 
sense. 
 
What this clause is now going to say is as follows: “to exercise 
any other powers that may be designated and prescribed by the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council,” which is exactly what it says 
right now, but it goes on it say, “and that the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council considers are necessary or desirable . . .” 
Those are the new words, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now when we say Lieutenant Governor in Council, we’re 
talking about cabinet. So right now the change that’s being 
inserted here is that cabinet is putting itself in the place of the 
management of SaskPower, and it is allowing itself to make and 
give the . . . exercise powers that are designated and prescribed 
and telling the corporation what it thinks is necessary or 
desirable. 
 
I want to share with you what the minister has to say about that 
clause and see what . . . That was the former minister of the 
Economy, who is now no longer in cabinet. But he said here . . . 
His comments were fairly brief, and he talked a lot about the 
borrowing of the corporation. But he really didn’t talk at all 
about why this change to the powers of cabinet are being 
inserted into the SaskPower Corporation’s ability to . . . the 
purposes and powers of the corporation. So all he says about 
them is that they’re primarily housekeeping and clarifying 
language. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that this clause goes a little 
bit further than that. And certainly I know that when we enter 
into committee, this is something that we’ll have to ask the 
current minister now, the Minister of Justice, about why this 
particular power for cabinet to insert itself into the purpose and 
powers of the corporation is being added. So there’s some very 
specific questions around that. 
 
I’m just going to share what the explanatory notes say here. It’s 
saying in the explanatory notes that were provided that it’s 
recommended “. . . that SaskPower’s authorized powers and 
purposes include those that are connected with or incidental to 
the purposes and powers set out in any other statute . . .” And it 
clarifies “. . . Cabinet’s existing power to designate additional 
powers that it considers SaskPower requires . . .” 
 
So what’s being said in the explanatory notes is that cabinet 
needs to be able to designate additional powers. And certainly I 
want to understand why the minister thinks it’s appropriate in 
this case, whether this is something that is the common practice 



1256 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2016 

for all Crown corporations or whether cabinet is seeking 
additional powers to direct the company. Because we know 
what happens when cabinet gets involved in Crown corporation 
activities: it’s sometimes not a very pretty sight, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
The other piece, and I think the very most significant piece that 
we’re talking about here today in this bill, is the additional 
borrowing capacity that SaskPower is being given. Now I think 
we’ve got to go back a little bit. This is another example of this 
government coming back to the drawing board when it . . . 
When this bill was already before us in 2013, and here again we 
have legislation that’s brought back because they didn’t get it 
right in 2013 or not sure. Again we’re going to have to ask the 
minister specific questions about that when we have the 
opportunity in committee. 
 
But in this case prior to 2013, the limit was 5 billion, and as far 
as I can tell, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that limit hadn’t been 
changed since the ’80s. So SaskPower had borrowing capacity 
up to $5 billion since the ’80s. And in 2013 we all went through 
this then. The borrowing capacity was increased. And what was 
it increased to? It was increased to $8 billion — from $5 billion 
to $8 billion in 2013. 2016 here we are again doing it again, but 
in this case it’s being increased from $8 billion to $10 billion. 
That’s concerning on a number of levels, I think, and people 
would agree. You know, we’ve seen a number of rate increases 
being requested by SaskPower. So who’s going to pay for this 
debt? Well obviously it’s the ratepayers and the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan. These guys have been racking up a lot of debt 
recently, and I think it’s something that we need to really be 
concerned about.  
 
If you look, for example, at the debt ratio for SaskPower, we’ve 
been told by the company for years that their goal is to keep the 
debt ratio between 65 per cent and 75 per cent, and that’s 
considered to be a generally accepted debt ratio for 
corporations, Mr. Speaker. Well let’s just take a little look at the 
history of the debt ratio. So that’s how much debt you’re in 
compared to what your assets are basically.  
 
How much has the debt ratio changed in the last 10 years? Well 
in 2007 the debt ratio was 59.7 per cent. In 2008 the debt ratio 
was 60.7 per cent. In 2009 the debt ratio went up to 61.4 per 
cent. In 2010 it went down a little bit to 59.7 per cent. 2011 a 
big jump to 63 per cent, so up over 3 per cent. In 2012 debt 
ratio jumped up 4.4 per cent, a big jump and one in the likes we 
hadn’t seen for quite some time. So now we’re looking at 67.4 
per cent. So we think that’s a lot. Well look what happened in 
2014. Debt ratio leaped up to 73.1 per cent, perilously close to 
the upper limit of 75. And so what are we talking about here? 
That’s like 5.6 per cent increase, a very significant interest in 
2014. Now did that go down at all in the last two years? Guess 
what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? It did not. In 2015, the debt ratio 
increased yet again to 74.5 per cent, and that is again another 
increase of 1.7 per cent. And in the 2015-16 annual report for 
SaskPower on page 75, SaskPower is now over the safe limit on 
its debt ratio. It’s at 75.7 per cent, and here we are, increasing 
their borrowing power up to $10 billion. This is not a good time 
for this corporation. 
 
It used to be we would get significant dividends from this 
particular Crown, and given the increase in debt, this 

government has indicated that there will be no, no more 
dividends from this Crown, that it just, it has too many debt 
obligations. 
 
And what else has happened? Well for the taxpayers and the 
ratepayers, we have seen four rate increases in the last four 
years: 2014 a 5.5 per cent rate increase; in 2015 a 5 per cent rate 
increase; in 2016, this year in July we saw yet another 5 per 
cent rate increase; and in 2017 January, SaskPower actually 
applied for a 5, another 5 per cent rate increase but were 
recently denied by the rate review panel who said that’s too 
much and only allowed a 3.5 per cent increase. 
 
[16:15] 
 
And that’s as yesterday you will recall in the House, Mr. 
Speaker, I asked questions about the industrial customers of 
SaskPower saying, we can’t do this. You just can’t keep adding 
on these rate increases. It is causing serious problems for 
Meadow Lake pulp mill. We had the Saskatchewan Chamber of 
Commerce expressing concern at the rate review panel. We had 
a number of other . . . I believe the Canadian Association of 
Petroleum Producers. So these rate increases aren’t just hurting 
people on low incomes. They aren’t just hurting the people who 
have lost their jobs, the 11,000 people who have lost their jobs 
here in Saskatchewan in the last year. This is hurting industrial 
consumers as well. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, one of the things you have to ask 
yourself is why is this going up so much. And this is really, 
really hard to tease out of SaskPower, but I believe, you know, 
all fingers are pointing right now to their carbon capture tax that 
they’ve imposed on all the ratepayers which was an extremely 
expensive experiment worth $1.5 billion of taxpayers’ money. 
And that’s a lot of money when you look at these rate increases, 
you know, 20, or sorry, 18.5 per cent increase. But that’s not the 
cumulative increase, of course, because those are built upon 
each other. So we are looking at well over 18 per cent in rate 
increases since the carbon capture sequestration carbon capture 
tax was imposed on Saskatchewan people, and I think this is 
something we need to be very, very concerned about.  
 
We’ve put SaskPower in a very difficult spot and now, as they 
identify on page 29 of their annual report from ’15-16, they’ve 
indicated this. And this is a very important piece, and I’ll quote: 
 

As well, challenges associated with climate change are 
heightening. Federal carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions 
regulations are in place that will eliminate one of our 
primary baseload electricity sources — conventional 
coal-fired generation. In addition, CO2 regulations 
governing natural gas generation emissions are expected in 
the future. 

 
Mr. Speaker, if you go through this annual report, you don’t see 
any projections or specific line items that deal with the federal 
carbon dioxide emission regulations. And again I think 
SaskPower is not being upfront with the ratepayers in its annual 
report if it isn’t directly addressing the costs associated with the 
federal carbon dioxide emissions regulations, the costs to 
transfer the primary baseload electricity sources, conventional 
coal-fired generation, either to the acceptable ICCS [integrated 
carbon capture and storage] technology or other types of 



November 9, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1257 

generation like natural gas. So where is this in their financial 
statements? Where is this in their annual report?  
 
And I think there has to be a much better explaining of the 
impact of these federal carbon dioxide emissions regulations. 
And one of the things that particularly concerns me, Mr. 
Speaker, is that these regulations have been in place for a 
number of years. They’ve been in place for . . . I forget which 
year they came in but it’s definitely several years now. The 
government knew in advance that these were coming, and yet 
there’s been no actual attention being paid to it other than this 
attempt to reduce emissions through the carbon capture and 
sequestration process. Now we know right there that that’s an 
extremely expensive way to move forward. It has been probably 
one of the direct causes of all these rate hikes in the last four 
years. 
 
And I’m just going to share with you . . . There is a little bit of a 
more of an explanation here in terms of these regulations on 
page 83. And what it says here is: 
 

Canada has developed regulatory requirements regarding 
greenhouse gas emissions for coal-fired generation. The 
new coal-fired electricity generation regulations 
implemented by Environment and Climate Change Canada 
require a reduction in net emissions to 420 tonnes of 
carbon dioxide per GWh of electricity to be met for new 
coal-fired electricity plants, as well as units that have 
reached the end of their useful life. The regulations state 
that units commissioned before 1975 will reach the end of 
their useful life on the earlier of December 31, 2019, or on 
December 31 of the 50th year after their commissioning 
date. Prior to this point being reached, the decision to retire 
the unit or retrofit it with carbon capture and storage 
equipment must be made. 

 
So we know that SaskPower has to make this decision before 
December 31st, 2019. The CEO of SaskPower has told us it will 
be made in 2017, but we are looking in the forecasting in this 
financial statement for the company, and we don’t see any 
indication in there in terms of what that spending will look like. 
What we do know is that SaskPower is now looking for an 
addition $2 billion in borrowing capacity since they came back 
to the government for additional capacity in 2013. 
 
So three years later, an additional $2 billion is being asked for 
in this bill over and above the additional 3 billion that, or 2 
billion that they got . . . Sorry, 3 billion that they got in 2013. 
So doubling their borrowing power in five years, well three 
years actually, Mr. Speaker, and yet no indication what that 
extra $10 billion is going to be used for specifically in relation 
to the coal-fired electricity generation regulations. 
 
Now they call them new. On page 83, they say these are “new 
coal-fired electricity generation regulations.” They’re not new, 
Mr. Speaker. They’ve been around for two or three years 
already. So this is not something that’s new to SaskPower, and I 
would suspect that SaskPower knew they were coming long 
before they actually were printed on the order paper, Mr. 
Speaker. So we have a company that’s not providing ratepayers, 
in my opinion, enough information regarding the seriousness of 
these regulations and what they intend to do about them. 
 

Now they go on to say in their annual report: 
 

By 2030, SaskPower will be required to retire or meet the 
regulations at Boundary Dam Power Station Units #4, #5 
and #6 and Poplar River Power Station Units #1 and #2. 
The ICCS facility at Boundary Dam Power Station Unit #3 
meets these regulations. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, you will see carbon capture now being 
described as ICCS which is . . . People are using the word 
integrated in front of the usual acronym. They go on to say 
here: 
 

An equivalency agreement between the Province of 
Saskatchewan and Government of Canada would provide 
some flexibility in how SaskPower’s remaining coal-firing 
units could be managed to meet expected emissions 
outcomes. 

 
Mr. Speaker, my question is, where are these equivalency 
agreements? We have been waiting for them and waiting for 
them and waiting for them. And what I’m told is that 
SaskPower has a problem because they cannot implement the 
equivalency agreements unless The Management and Reduction 
of Greenhouse Gases Act is finally implemented. 
 
Now we know this government passed that bill in 2010. Six 
years later it still sits there. It hasn’t been put in force, and yet 
our obligations under these federal regulations require this 
government to pass that bill. I believe that what’s going on in 
the ministry right now is probably bedlam and chaos because no 
one in the Ministry of the Environment can decide what to do. 
 
I’m told the original bill was poorly drafted. The drafters want 
to throw it out and start all over, but SaskPower has a real 
problem because they have to get these equivalency agreements 
in place. I have spoken to several Environment ministers, 
including the current recycled Environment minister, saying 
when are these regulations going to be in place? When is these 
equivalency agreements coming up? And I keep getting pushed 
back. All we hear is soon, soon, or we’re back at the drawing 
board. 
 
And if I understand correctly, Mr. Speaker, what’s happening at 
the ministry is that they are hamstrung by a government that 
isn’t willing to implement its own law. SaskPower is now 
hamstrung by the same unwillingness to put that law into place. 
This is putting SaskPower in a very, very awkward position, 
and it’s also putting, I think, the regulators and the legislators in 
a very awkward position. 
 
So either it’s a great bill and it should be implemented, or if it is 
that much of a mess, it should be scrapped and then a new bill 
should be put in place. But either way, this limbo is putting 
SaskPower in a very, very awkward position, and I believe it’s 
putting the Ministry of the Environment in a very, very 
awkward position. 
 
So these are some huge concerns when we see this kind of 
borrowing limit being increased, when we see rates going up 
like crazy, when we see one-and-a-half-billion-dollar 
experiments being hoisted on the people of Saskatchewan 
without any sort of ability or thought as to how these 



1258 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2016 

equivalency agreements are going to go forward in the future. 
 
I believe that SaskPower has been put in a very irreconcilable 
situation right now, and this government doesn’t have an 
answer. They don’t have an answer, Mr. Speaker. They are just 
not wanting to deal with it. It’s kind of like a three-year-old in 
that, you know, you want to go to the grocery store and get 
groceries for supper and go home, and the three-year-old starts 
stomping his feet saying, I don’t want to go home. I don’t want 
to go home. And that’s the kind of behaviour we see right now 
from the Ministry of the Environment, and this has been going 
on for six years and longer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s no surprise that these kinds of regulations are going to 
be enforced and implemented across the world. Although with 
the results of the election yesterday in the south of our border 
and promises by the president-elect to rip up all the agreements, 
including the Paris agreement, I think there’s certainly a 
number of questions that arise out of that and serious concerns, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another piece that I think we really, really need to take a look 
at, and I actually did this the other day, Mr. Speaker, is take a 
look at the 140 acres that SaskPower was suddenly felt the need 
to buy in November of 2013. And as you’ll recall, Mr. Speaker, 
this is at the same time that the GTH was desperately looking 
for a cash infusion so that they could pay Mr. Marquart $23 
million for lands that were appraised at $11 million. 
 
So where were they going to find the money? Well it was just 
really handy, Mr. Speaker, it was extremely handy that 
SaskPower all of a sudden decided they needed a logistics 
centre that would cost $24 million. They paid $170 million per 
acre at the GTH for a logistics centre, Mr. Speaker. And so all 
of a sudden, land that was bought by Highways in 2011 . . . 
Highways paid just over $10,000 an acre in 2011, and we have 
SaskPower rushing in on their white horse to save the day with 
the GTH, and they purchased 140 acres for $170,000 per acre, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I’m told it’s serviced, so if you go from $11,000 to 
$178,000 for serviced land, that’s rather interesting. So the 
question is, what exactly is it servicing? So I thought I would 
take a drive out there, Mr. Speaker, and I actually went out 
down Dewdney Avenue. And I had a nice look at the GTH the 
other night. I think it was Monday or Tuesday night. It was 
getting dark and, you know, it was not quite . . . I couldn’t see a 
whole lot. But when I drove where the SaskPower property 
was, you know what you can see, Mr. Speaker? Nothing. 
Crickets. There’s one power box and a road, and that’s all I 
could see in relation to the two parcels of land. One’s 20 acres 
on the right side of the road, and then there’s 120 acres on the 
south side of the road. 
 
So what do you think SaskPower is doing with this land? I 
mean they bought it in a hurry in 2013. I think if you look at 
their annual reports leading up to that, there wasn’t a long-term 
plan for a logistics centre of that sort. But what we have here on 
page 47 of SaskPower’s annual report from ’15-16 is the 
following . . . There’s this talking about properties and some of 
the work that’s being done. “Upgrading our portfolio” is what 
this paragraph is called. 
 

During the year, construction was completed on the Moose 
Jaw Maintenance Hub and started on the new Lloydminster 
Maintenance Centre. The Saskatoon Logistics Warehouse 
and Swift Current Maintenance Centre were officially 
opened for use, while renovations began on the Prince 
Albert Maintenance Centre and planning continued for 
SaskPower’s head office refurbishment. [But here we go, 
Mr. Speaker] The planning activities for the proposed 
logistics warehouse project were put on hold in early 2015 
pending further direction.” 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, what the heck is going on? They were in a 
rush to buy this land in 2013, spent $170,000 an acre for 140 
acres out at the Global Transportation Hub because all of a 
sudden SaskPower had to relocate its logistics centre. We see 
them doing work in Moose Jaw, Lloydminster, Saskatoon, 
Swift Current, Prince Albert, but what’s happening at the GTH 
west of Regina? I’ll say it again, “The planning activities for the 
proposed logistics warehouse project were put on hold in early 
2015 pending further . . . [discussion].” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to know what that discussion is. 
And I would also like to know what the discussion was in 2013 
when all of a sudden, when the Minister Responsible for 
SaskPower had a conversation with himself because he was also 
the Minister for the GTH. And he said, excuse me, Minister for 
SaskPower. Where do you think I could find $24 million? I 
need it for paying off Mr. Marquart who’s paid off Mr. 
Tappauf. And then the Minister for SaskPower said, you know 
what, Minister for GTH? I think I need a logistics centre. 
Hadn’t thought about it a whole lot before. But I’ve got all 
kinds of money to burn now that my spending limit’s been 
increased to $8 billion, so I think that would be a wise use of 
money and we really do need a logistics centre. And the 
Minister for GTH said to the Minister for SaskPower, well, self, 
thank you very much. That will come in very handy. 
 
[16:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s beyond belief. It is beyond belief. It is 
unusual, to say the very least, and certainly I’m hoping to have 
some good conversation around that with the minister when this 
bill is brought into committee very, very soon. 
 
Now where is all this money being spent? As I said, since 2013 
we’ve increased the spending from 5 billion to 8 billion. Here 
we are again, back in 2016 increasing it another $2 billion. 
Where is this money going? 
 
Well I think, rightfully so, there’s a lot of money being put into 
transmission and distribution infrastructure system-sustainment 
programs. For example, the wood pole remediation program is 
happening. There’s a lot of wood power poles in this province, 
Mr. Speaker, as you know. When rural Saskatchewan was 
electrified under the Tommy Douglas government, there was a 
lot of work that went into making sure that every farm had 
power. And I remember . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I love 
bringing up Tommy and I’m sure the member from Rochdale 
enjoys it as well, because the fact that SaskPower even exists 
was because of the vision of that particular premier for this 
province. 
 
So we have all these wood poles. The remediation program has 



November 9, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1259 

to happen and that’s a good use, I would say, of maintaining our 
power system. How much did they spend on that? In 2015-16 
they spent just over 100 million on transmission and 
distribution infrastructure sustainment programs, and then 
another 59 million. Now if you look at that 100 million, what 
did this CCS [carbon capture and storage] project cost us? 1.5 
billion. So we could have done that 15 times over. We could 
look after those transmission lines and poles 15 times over if we 
hadn’t been forced to spend $1.5 billion on their carbon capture 
tax, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another thing that I think is really concerning in this annual 
report is on page 55. There’s a description of the growth and the 
increased demands on the power system. We understand as 
industries continue their demands and as additional residential 
hookups are installed that there will be a need for more power. 
But, Mr. Speaker, I was speaking to a former minister for 
SaskPower who had indicated that part of 2007, SaskPower was 
on side, under its demand-side management program, to 
actually reduce people’s unnecessary use of power or power 
wastage. So demand-side management or whatever you want to 
call it, it’s not recycling. There’s another word for it that’s not 
coming to me. But conservation, energy conservation, you’d 
think that would be a goal of a Crown who is having trouble 
meeting the needs and the demands for growth. 
 
Do we see demand-side management mentioned at all anymore 
in their annual reports? On page 55 they talk about all the extra 
demands on our power system, on our grid. We have additional 
needs. We know there’s a new gas-fired power plant being 
created. Sadly we don’t see any additional wind despite the fact 
that they’ve announced that they’re going to try and reach 50 
per cent renewables in 2030. The only wind project that was 
even viable in the last couple years just got shut down because 
it was located in the wrong place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it’s a bit frustrating when we don’t see additional sustainable 
power sources, when we don’t see any indication about the need 
for demand-side management. And it’s frustrating, Mr. Speaker. 
I think SaskPower’s directions are hamstringing them, and we 
don’t see an ability for them to move forward on some of these 
initiatives. And that is concerning. 
 
I also want to turn to page 74. When we talk about 
expenditures, this is their investing activities, Mr. Speaker. And 
in this case, we look at what’s happening in 2016 on the 
Boundary dam ICCS demonstration project. They’re putting in 
another $32 million into that project. We have to ask why. I 
thought it was just finished and completed. It’s up and running; 
everything’s great, according to the government. But when 
we’re putting another 32 million — that’s $32 million, Mr. 
Speaker — into the Boundary dam ICCS demonstration project, 
where is that money going? What’s it being used for, and what 
return is there for the people in Saskatchewan . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — How many work orders is that? 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Yes, my colleague from Saskatoon Centre is 
wondering how many work orders is that, because we 
remember the phenomenal number of work orders that we’ve 
seen already on this Boundary dam ICCS, or the ICCS project 
itself. So this demonstration project, we want to know: why is 
there another $32 million being spent there when we don’t see a 

lot of revenue coming back in? 
 
Sadly, we cannot tease out of these financial statements what 
the actual cost of the CCS project are on an ongoing basis, Mr. 
Speaker. We are concerned. We understand that the amine 
solution — which is the important part of the successful 
washing of the exhaust from the power plant and removing the 
carbon from the exhaust — the amine solution I’m told is 
failing on a far more frequent basis than was originally 
anticipated. 
 
We know that the CCS project is still in litigation with a 
number of different companies that were sued for failure to 
perform in the work performances and that SaskPower is also 
being sued by some of these companies because the companies 
are saying they did perform. So there’s counter-lawsuits; we’re 
embroiled in that. God knows what the costs are for that. So 
again we have to really wonder what’s going on there and what 
sort of costs are related to that. 
 
I know there’s another quote in here about CCS, and I’m going 
to see if I can find it as I go along, so I haven’t quite left that 
topic just yet. But on page 74, we’re looking at the capital 
expenditures for SaskPower in the last five years. So you can 
see in 2011 capex [capital expense] was $625 million. In 2012 
it jumped up to 981. We know that’s when CCS started in 
earnest. 2013, all of a sudden we’re at $1.3 billion for capital 
expenditures. Again, CCS was in its full construction phase. 
2014, another $1.2 billion. 
 
So that was the glory days of the CCS construction. And in 
2015-16 we see capital expenditures have gone down, certainly 
back to 2012 levels. So, Mr. Speaker, you can’t help but assume 
that most of these capital expenditures are as a result of the 
CCS project. I know I want to come back to that once I find the 
page. I think it’s tagged here, but I’m just going to carry on in 
order of my tags, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On page 77, we have a reference to contractual obligations and 
the long-term debt. In one year, SaskPower plans to retire $357 
million in debt. So that’s in the next fiscal year, which is now 
March to March. In one to five years, they’re intending to retire 
$1.2 billion in debt. Or that’s just the principal and interest . . . 
sorry, that’s just maintaining; that’s not retiring it at all. That’s 
the debt they’re going to have. 
 
In more than five years, SaskPower intends to have, in terms of 
long-term debt, $8.3 billion. So we know that in the next five 
years there’s going to be $1.2 billion in debt. This Crown 
corporation is going to be beyond that up to $8.3 billion in debt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our total debt right now as a province, as a 
government is $13 billion and change. We know that’s the total 
debt of our government, and this $8.3 billion is going to be 
more than half of the debt of this government. So you have to 
wonder how this money’s going to be spent, what the plan is, 
how it’s going to be used for meeting their obligations under the 
federal coal-fired generation laws, how they’re going to 
possibly get a legislative scheme in place that is sufficient to 
meet those regulations. It’s a mess. 
 
And then here we have other expenses that SaskPower’s 
incurring. The Regina bypass project. We’ve been talking about 



1260 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2016 

that a lot, Mr. Speaker, in the last few days. On page 79, we’re 
told that SaskPower has to spend $57 million just to 
accommodate the Regina bypass project. So I have no idea if 
this amount is included in the total cost of the bypass that the 
Ministry of Highways has talked about. But certainly, here we 
are, you know, another expense, through no fault of 
SaskPower’s, but it’s a huge expense that ratepayers are going 
to be responsible for. 
 
On page 89, we have a quote by SaskPower about their 
financial flexibility and capability. And I think this is something 
because of the way the debt ratio is now perilously high and 
over the comfort zone that SaskPower has been in for decades. 
Mr. Speaker, we have this quote: 
 

SaskPower’s financial flexibility and capability is 
challenged by growing capital requirements, increasing 
debt, and unpredictable rate increases. Key financial 
drivers include revenues which are impacted by load 
growth, customer mix and approved rate increases. The 
cost of fuel is driven by load growth, fuel mix, market 
conditions and fuel costs. Depreciation and finance charges 
are impacted by capital expenditures, supply arrangements, 
and the cost of borrowing. 

 
And then they list four risks that are currently facing: 
 

[1] Increasing capital requirements and the availability of 
capital; 
[2] Rising debt levels; 
[3] Changing economics in the utility model, including 
carbon pricing and low natural gas prices; and 
[4] Impact of slow economic growth in the province 
resulting from low commodity prices impacting major 
customers. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these are serious, serious issues that this Crown 
corporation is dealing with. And we have to be clear with the 
ratepayers. We have to let the ratepayers know what are the 
plans for the future with all these significant challenges. 
 
On page 90 of the annual report SaskPower is talking, this is the 
risk management section of the report, and SaskPower talks 
about the environment. And I’m just going to share this with the 
Assembly right now: “Ongoing SaskPower operations and 
future supply options are impacted by new and emerging 
environmental regulations . . .” 
 
I’ll just stop there. The regulations aren’t new, Mr. Speaker. 
They’re a number of years old now, but they’re still calling 
them new. I’ll carry on with the quote: 
 

. . . sustainability initiatives and uncertainties. Issues 
including carbon pricing, climate change mitigation, 
carbon reduction measures, and clean technology 
development contribute to the uncertainty. These 
uncertainties may impact the achievement of SaskPower’s 
business strategies, priorities and operational targets. In 
addition, adaptation to climate change will be a significant 
factor for SaskPower to consider in planning future 
facilities. 

 
And again, we have nothing in the forecast for this company in 

terms of how much money we’re talking about. There’s no 
disclosure of that at all. They list four steps that they’re taking, 
and I’ll just share the first two of them at this point. First of all: 
 

SaskPower is in discussions regarding provincial GHG 
regulations and a federal-provincial equivalency 
agreement. 
 

They are, Mr. Speaker? I think we know that that discussion is 
going nowhere right now because of this province’s inability to 
implement a law like The Management and Reduction of 
Greenhouse Gases Act which has been sitting . . . had third 
reading in 2010. Six years later that bill is still a bill; it’s not 
law. And there’s no way that SaskPower can meet its 
commitments to these federal regulations without this bill being 
passed or else some other form of the bill. 
 
Now I’m told the bill is in considerable disarray within the 
Environment ministry. People don’t want to pass it because 
they say it’s poorly written and some of the clauses that were 
added — because it was introduced and then amended and then 
passed — and the amendment clauses are of particular concern, 
and that nobody in the ministry seems to have their act together 
when it comes to the climate change modelling for the Ministry 
of the Environment and for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. We know where that’s led to. What it’s led to is the 
imposition by the federal government of a new level of carbon 
tax which . . . this could’ve been totally avoided if these people 
had got their act together in 2010, if they had actually started 
the technology fund.  
 
We know from The Conference Board of Canada that it would 
have generated $1.3 billion in our economy and we would have 
had an additional 8,300 jobs. But I guess they weren’t interested 
in those jobs, Mr. Speaker. Instead, they are saying, well no, 
we’re just going to be happy with the loss of 11,000 jobs 
because what can we do? What can we do? There’s nothing we 
can do. Well I’m starting to sound like the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. What can we do, Mr. Speaker? 
 
What they could have done is acted and been bold and made 
some decisions. But instead, that bill sits there. SaskPower’s 
caught in limbo because they have no legislative framework in 
order to implement the coal fire, coal emission regulations. And 
it’s just a mess. It’s a complete and total mess, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now in here we have also . . . SaskPower has indicated another 
step they’re taking, and this is something that was announced 
with great fanfare by the Premier. SaskPower has announced a 
future supply plan target of up to 50 per cent renewables in the 
supply mix by 2030 and is developing an integrated resource 
plan to deliver. Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re holding our breath. It 
might not be a good idea, but we are holding our breath. And 
we’re not sure where that’s going to end up, but we know so far 
that the next power or wind power project has been shelved 
because of environmental concerns. 
 
[16:45] 
 
And we don’t know where the RFPs [request for proposal] are 
at. We do know that this . . . SaskPower refuses to deal on RFPs 
for small power providers and is only looking at large power 
providers. Unfortunately, we don’t have that industry here in 



November 9, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1261 

the province because they didn’t implement the technology 
fund in the Climate Change Foundation. 
 
So when this circle, this loop of failure on the part of this 
government to act in a way that promotes the development and 
the diversity of a power supply mix here in Saskatchewan, 
we’ve lost . . . Hitachi has moved out of Saskatoon. They were 
building large turbines, Mr. Speaker. They’re gone. Those jobs 
are gone. But instead we have the Ministry of the Environment 
spinning on its wheels, trying to figure out how they’re going to 
deal with these federal regs, putting SaskPower in an 
impossible position, and also pushing up the cost it’s going to 
take to actually comply with those regulations. 
 
And before I finish, Mr. Speaker, I do have to harken back to 
another huge expense that SaskPower subjected the ratepayers 
to, and that was the smart meter fiasco. And again, by a minister 
that we’re familiar with these days in terms of how often his 
name comes up with certain files that are very problematic, Mr. 
Speaker. But here’s yet another example of the then minister of 
SaskPower saying, oh well, I guess we’ll just have to spend a 
bunch more money and give that company a real deal because 
we’re scared they’re not going to be able to provide us with 
smart meters. I don’t know what he was thinking, Mr. Speaker, 
but it certainly is problematic. 
 
And this is one of the reasons why rate increases have gone up 
over 18 per cent, and probably close to 20 per cent if you factor 
in the cumulative effect of that. And we also have that same 
minister talking to the Minister of GTH, who happens to be 
himself, and saying, heck, I think I’ve got $24 million, and I 
heard you’re looking for some cash because Mr. Marquart had 
to pay off Mr. Tappauf who had to sell off the land because his 
name couldn’t be associated with that land deal. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it is annoying and frustrating to no end that 
SaskPower ratepayers are being subjected to all of these insults, 
added to insults, added to injury. And now here we are with a 
bill that looks to increase their borrowing power from 8 billion 
to $10 billion. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I think, you know, there’s a number of 
questions that we’re going to have for the minister once this 
gets to committee. But at this point in time I think other of my 
colleagues are looking forward to speaking to this bill and 
express more of the frustration that we see from ratepayers, that 
we see from taxpayers. And so at this point I will move to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 17, The Power Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 17, The Power 
Corporation Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 19 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 19 — The Film 

and Video Classification Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure and 
honour to rise this afternoon to speak to Bill No. 19 regarding 
The Film and Video Classification Act. It’s my pleasure to be 
able to join in on this very important debate. I was very pleased 
to hear comments from the members opposite — not the 
members opposite, but the members on this side — and there’s 
been some very good discussion happening with respect to this 
bill. I’m very happy to be joining in. 
 
I’ve had the opportunity to, in addition to hear those comments, 
to read the minister’s comments with respect to this bill. And 
they’ve been able to help me in terms of understanding it. Now 
from what I understand, this bill is actually repealing the 
original Act in its entirety and completely replacing it, which 
always presents a bit of a challenge when you’re trying to 
compare the two bills because you’re not provided with 
explanatory notes. At least, you know, this is the first time that 
I’ve gotten a stack of bills to review and so I don’t know if 
that’s always the practice, that they’re not provided with 
explanatory notes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But all I do know is that when there’s been, in the instances of 
this session, a repeal of a bill in its entirety with a replacement 
with a new bill, there are never any explanatory notes, which is 
fine. It just means that I have the extreme pleasure of going 
through both the old Act and the new bill, clause by clause and 
line by line, just to ensure that we’re not missing anything and 
that we’re trying to figure out exactly what’s going on and what 
the purpose is of this bill. Of course, like I said, we have the 
opportunity to see what the minister, any information that the 
minister is providing. But we just want to make sure that there 
isn’t anything that’s missed out. 
 
Now from what I understand with respect to this bill, Mr. 
Speaker, is that it’s creating . . . First of all, there’s a few things 
that are being changed. I may not be able to hit them all but I 
will hit a few of them, and I know that the critic for this bill and 
other members will want to join in on this and will be speaking 
to it as well. And then we’ll also have the opportunity at 
committee to ask questions at which point, hopefully, we’ll just 
make sure that we aren’t missing anything with respect to this 
bill. As I said, I did read about the old Act and this bill and I 
think I caught everything, but you never really know, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So one of the things that I did notice that had changed was that 
it’s creating a director of film classification and then also 
providing this director with a certain amount of legislative 
powers, Mr. Speaker. So from what I understand, first of all, the 
director of film classification is going to be a position that will 
be appointed by the minister, Mr. Speaker. So I guess we’ll wait 
and see what that whole process is going to look like. 
 
And that the director, amongst its powers, will have the ability 
to approve or disapprove films in Saskatchewan as well as 
requiring the exhibitor, retail distributor, or wholesale 
distributor who intends to exhibit or distribute a film approved 
by the director to remove any portion of the film that has been 



1262 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2016 

disapproved by the director. 
 
So this is going to have an impact on the film industry in 
Saskatchewan and those who are wanting to distribute film in 
Saskatchewan. And I’m sure the members opposite are waiting 
for me to talk about the film tax credit and some of the poor 
moves that they’ve made with respect to decisions in this area, 
but I’ll save that for later. I know we have a lot of time to talk 
about that, so I would just encourage the members opposite to 
stay tuned because there will be a great conversation about that. 
 
And that’s part of the reason why I wanted to make sure that I 
really got a handle on this new bill, Mr. Speaker. Because we 
know that when it comes to consultation in this area, in this film 
industry area, oh man, it’s certainly not their thing. They 
haven’t quite done that in the past so I’m sure hoping that they 
did that with respect to this new bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’m hoping at committee we’ll have the opportunity to find 
out who was consulted on this and whether or not the film 
industry in Saskatchewan — what little of it exists now, 
unfortunately, after the film tax credit was cut — feel about 
these changes and whether or not they’re satisfied with it. I 
believe that these, and you know, the critic for this area might 
correct me if I’m wrong, but I believe that these were originally 
powers that were given to a board, but now it’s a director. 
 
So it’s moving from a group of individuals to one individual 
that’s going to be appointed by the minister. So there’s always a 
concern about a level of oversight and level of independence 
from government. So I’m hoping that there is going to be some 
thought put into that with respect to who this appointment is 
and how these appointments are made, ideally. The legislation 
is clear that it’s going to be directed or appointed by the 
minister so, you know, there is some concerns about any type of 
independence in that respect. 
 
It also includes . . . Some of the changes include adding the 
Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan to 
the Act, or to the bill, which will be the new Act. And then the 
FCAA [Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority], Mr. 
Speaker, will be in charge of appealing the director’s decisions. 
 
So what I am happy to hear about, even though I have some 
concerns about the appointment of this director and the 
independence of this director, is that there is going to be an 
appeal process. So if individuals or organizations aren’t happy 
with the decisions that this director makes, I’m happy to see 
that it’s going to be that the appeal process will take it to an 
independent administrative tribunal, a tribunal that already has 
powers and mandates in terms of making decisions and is 
obviously well-versed in doing so in a judicious way. So I am 
happy to see that that portion is added. 
 
However, as I said before, it’ll be interesting to see what the 
thoughts are from those within this industry. Like I said, those 
good folks who are still within this industry in Saskatchewan, 
even though I believe there was . . . It’s quite alarming how 
many have left. And often, sometimes parties opposite accuse 
us of fearmongering, but there’s nothing but truth here when 
we’re talking about the film industry, Mr. Speaker, when I say 
that it’s declined significantly since the Sask Party decided to 
cut the film tax credit. 

And I’m looking right now actually at a Globe and Mail 
headline from June 27th, 2012, and it’s titled “Producers 
abandoning Saskatchewan as tax credit ends,” Mr. Speaker. So 
yes, of course there’s going to be some concerns from parties 
on this side of the House as well as from those within the 
industry when the Sask Party decides to meddle around with the 
film industry, even if it’s in legislation. I’m not too sure what 
sort of, like I said, what sort of consultation has gone on with 
this. 
 
I’m also going to quote another headline. This one’s from the 
StarPhoenix, and it’s from March 16th, 2016. So this is a 
common sentiment that’s gone on not just around the time when 
the film tax credit was cut in 2012, I believe, but it’s even as 
recent as 2016. And this is the title. I don’t even need to go into 
the article because the title, Mr. Speaker, is scathing enough. 
It’s “The Sask Party’s elimination of the provincial film credit 
damaged more than just the movie industry, writes Murray 
Mandryk,” which is true. It affected not just those who were 
directly employed by the film industry, but it was a lot of runoff 
industries that were hurt by this too. 
 
And it’s unfortunate now that the economy is slower in 
Saskatchewan that the Sask Party has decided they were going 
to do the opposite of diversifying our economy when times 
were good. And now, boy it would have been nice if we had a 
more diversified economy and we were able to utilize things 
like a growing film industry to help those businesses that 
prospered from that, not only directly from that film tax credit, 
Mr. Speaker, but from those who had offshoot gains from the 
business that was generated. 
 
I know, I think back a lot to when the movie Just Friends was 
being filmed in Regina, Mr. Speaker. And that’s one I enjoyed 
quite a bit because Ryan Reynolds was in town, and we thought 
that was a lot of fun. And I think I was in about first year 
university at that time, Mr. Speaker, and we would go around 
and try and find him and watch the filming as it took place. But 
not only were we around, but the crew that was there when we 
. . . And we did get to actually meet some of them, not Ryan, 
but . . . The amount of crew that came here, that was here, not 
just from Saskatchewan but around the world . . . Hotels, Mr. 
Speaker, boomed as a result. Restaurants, Mr. Speaker, boomed 
as a result. And these are all the things that the Sask Party 
didn’t think about when they made a foolish decision like 
cutting the film tax credit. And boy, it would have been sure 
nice for our local businesses if we would’ve kept that around, 
Mr. Speaker. So that’s quite unfortunate. 
 
I had other things. There are other things that this one does. I 
know that it creates a larger regulatory powers to this, but I 
know that there’ll be other people, including the critic, who’s 
going to want to speak to this bill. I’ll give them that 
opportunity, much more versed than me in this area to speak to 
those issues, Mr. Speaker. So with that, I think that concludes 
my remarks at this time with respect to Bill No. 19. So I will 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 19. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Regina Douglas Park has 
adjourned debate on Bill No. 19, The Film and Video 
Classification Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 



November 9, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1263 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. It now being 5 p.m., this Assembly 
stands adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1231 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1231 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1231 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1241 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1231 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1232 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1232 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1232 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1232 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1233 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1233 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1233 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Events Held by Community Associations Benefit Neighbourhoods 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1233 
 Grand Opening Ceremony for Day Program Facility 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1234 
 Community Named National Historic Site 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1234 
 United Way Telethon Surpasses Fundraising Goal 
  Carr .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1234 
 Local Couple Celebrates 70th Wedding Anniversary 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1235 
 Saskatchewan Apprenticeship and Trade Certification Awards 
  Bonk ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1235 
 Reopening of Colonsay Potash Mine 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1235 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Public Accounts Committee and Auditor’s Report 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1235 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1236 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1236 
 Answers to Written Questions  
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1237 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1238 
 Donations to Political Parties 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1238 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1238 
 Delivery of Mental Health Services 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1239 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1239 
 Funding for Hospitals 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1239 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1239 
POINT OF ORDER 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1240 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1240 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1240 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1241 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 13 — The Cancer Agency Amendment Act, 2016  
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1241 
  Merriman (referral to Human Services Committee) ........................................................................................................... 1243 
 Bill No. 40 — The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’interprétation  
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1243 
 



 

 Bill No. 37 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2016  
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1252 
  Merriman (referral to Crown and Central Agencies Committee) ...................................................................................... 1255 
 Bill No. 17 — The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2016  
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1255 
 Bill No. 19 — The Film and Video Classification Act, 2016  
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1261 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


