






















































Hansard: June 06, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 11B  MONDAY, JUNE 6, 2016, 19:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Hon. Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Hon. Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Merriman, Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 51; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Maurice Riou http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 321 
 June 6, 2016 
 
[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 
The Speaker: — It now being 7 o’clock, I call the Assembly to 
order. We’ll continue on with special orders, budget debate. I 
recognize the member from Melfort. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that the Assembly approves in 
general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Ms. 
Sproule.] 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to stand in the House tonight to show my support for 
the 2016-2017 budget “Keep Saskatchewan Strong.” And when 
we talk about keeping Saskatchewan strong, we talk about our 
economy, where it’s technology and research and food and fuel, 
fertilizer, manufacturing. We have what the world wants, what 
the world needs.  
 
An Hon. Member: — Sounds like a song. 
 
Mr. Phillips: — It’s not a song, and you don’t want me to sing 
it. But we are no longer, we are no longer a wee province. We 
are taking our rightful place as an economic leader in Canada. 
After eight years of strong growth, most of the time we’ve been 
in the top three in job growth. We’ve been in the top three in 
economic growth, in the lowest unemployment rate, and in 
population growth, Mr. Speaker, welcoming over 140,000 new 
residents to our province. 
 
And this budget does contain a $434 million deficit. But that’s 
actually, as much as anything, that’s good news because it’s 
controllable. Because next year we will have the opportunity to 
balance that budget, unlike some provinces, say to the left of us 
in Alberta where they’re looking at . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . Yes, it used to be left on both sides, but to the west of us in 
Alberta where they’re looking at balancing the budget in 2024. 
In Manitoba they’re looking at balancing the budget sometime 
late in their second term. What does that mean when you talk 
about 2024 and some imaginary figure way down the line? It’s 
a whole lot different when you talk about something that’s 
controllable, when you’re looking at doing it next year. And we 
did it without raising taxes, and we did it with controlled 
spending and investing in people and investing in infrastructure, 
all to keep Saskatchewan’s economy strong. 
 
You know, we talk a lot about keeping Saskatchewan’s 
economy strong, and sometimes I hear my people around me, 
my constituents say, but why? Why do you always talk about 
that? Why is it so important to you? Economy is the start of the 
story. People is why it matters. 
 

Mr. Speaker, it hasn’t been very long, three years I believe, 
since you and your wife were expecting your first child. And I 
remember quite a few years ago, my wife and I expecting our 
first child. And the most important government program for you 
at that moment is health care. You remember your doctor’s 
appointments. Is everything okay this month? You know, how’s 
it going? Is baby healthy? You remember the ultrasound when 
you see your baby for the very first time. Yes, you know, it’s 
what you care about at that time. And the day of the delivery, 
that moment. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh yes, I remember. 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Yes, you remember. Yes, the ladies maybe 
remember more than some of us. But that’s what matters to 
those people, is health care. That’s why it’s important that we 
have 600 more doctors practising in this province. That’s why 
it’s important that we have 3,000 more nurses of all 
designations practising in Saskatchewan. 
 
That’s why it’s important in this year’s budget that we have 
$7.5 million being taken from health care administration and 
put back into the front-line people. Because health care is 
important, and that’s why the economy is so important. And 
when we’re talking about health care we’re also talking about 
building hospitals, not closing them. We’re talking about a new 
hospital, children’s hospital, in Saskatoon. We’re talking about 
a new Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford. We’re 
talking about a new hospital in Humboldt and new medical 
facilities dotted in Maple Creek, in Kipling, all around the 
province. 
 
We haven’t got a record of closing 50 hospitals — 52 to be 
precise. And I don’t know with this little one when the 
appropriate time to start thinking about their education when 
they enter university, but I know it’s really early. And for that 
the Saskatchewan government, our government, has added to 
the registered . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — SAGES [Saskatchewan advantage grant 
for education savings]. 
 
Mr. Phillips: — I know, no. Not SAGES. RESP, the registered 
education savings plan. But thanks for your help. 
 
But if you put $1,000 into that program, we’ll put $100 to top 
that up. If you put $1,000 in next year, we’ll put another $100 
in, and we’ll do that right up until that child enters university or 
polytech. You know, and if you go up to, I think it goes up to, I 
know it goes up to $2500. Two hundred and fifty dollars when 
you can afford to do that. That’s new. That’s what the economy 
brings you. 
 
And as your child gets a little older, of course health care, child 
care is important. And we hear about it from the other side, 
they’ve been pretty quiet lately actually about child care. I used 
to hear it a lot and I often wondered why. In 16 years they put 
in 2,856 child care spots — 2,856, an average of about 160 a 
year. We do 600 a year. We’ve put in 5,000, and with this 
budget, finishing up the 18 schools, we’ll bring it up another 
810. And maybe we will hear more about it, but we shouldn’t 
hear about it from the party that had such a dismal record on it. 



322 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2016 

But as that child grows and goes into school and preschool, 
where we’ve increased opportunity for preschool . . . And 
we’ve added 40 new schools in Saskatchewan, opened or under 
construction today. 
 
We put in 614 new teachers for that child, 614. Over 200 more 
student support teachers in the school; that’s over 800 total. 
This year we’ll have a 7.8 per cent increase in the budget, 
bringing the total budget for education up to $2.2 billion, the 
highest amount ever, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when we’re talking about young children, I remember the 
days that my family and the days that I took my kids to the 
parks in Saskatchewan. And the parks, through the 16 years 
from 1991 to 2007, were almost embarrassingly neglected. 
They were just, you know . . . And you could see it. In 1991 
there was some quality to it, and as the years went on of course 
there was no maintenance, no budget for it, no improvement. 
 
We have added funding to the provincial parks to the tune of 
249 per cent funding increase to the provincial parks, 2,100 new 
electrical spaces in the provincial park system. And last year we 
had an increase in park visits of 860,000 people. How many 
families, how many of those young kids went to our parks last 
year? 
 
Now we look at this child as he graduates high school, and we 
again . . . I hate to go back. No I don’t; I really like to go back, 
actually. But when we go back, we see things like the tuition 
increase at the University of Regina during the NDP [New 
Democratic Party] years, 145 per cent. They were the lucky 
ones. The tuition increase at the University of Saskatchewan 
was 175 per cent, Mr. Speaker. And just to really make it all 
make sense, in SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology] they had a 338 per cent increase in 
tuition. And there was no backup programs to help with that at 
all. 
 
Now when a student graduates from high school, they have the 
Saskatchewan Advantage Scholarship that gives them $500 
each year for up to four years in university or in polytech. This 
will go up to $750 as our finances allow us to move it up. 
 
And what I like the best about what has happened is probably 
the graduate retention program, a program that we have 63,000 
of our young people, 63,000 young people that are taking 
advantage of a tax forgiveness of up to $20,000 for their tuition 
for staying in Saskatchewan because we show them that we 
want those young people in Saskatchewan. That’s a little bit 
different than what they wanted. They said they didn’t care. 
They said, and I quote, there is more for the rest of us when 
people leave the province. That is one very poor quote for 
leadership in our province. 
 
And new this year in the budget we will have $10,000 per 
student that they can take from this program and make a down 
payment on their new home. Now that’s a good idea because 
what that does, Mr. Speaker, is it sets the roots even firmer in 
Saskatchewan. And now we can be talking about their kids. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with this year’s budget we’re going to put $475 
million into the universities in Saskatchewan, $156 million into 
polytechs, SIIT [Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 

Technologies], and the Gabriel Dumont Institute. We will also 
spend $29 million on regional colleges around the province. 
 
Now when we’re talking about this person, now a young 
person, if he or she has a disability, you know, that’s a 
challenge, and it’s a challenge that the government can’t fix. 
But the government can help. The government can have, and 
we have a SAID [Saskatchewan assured income for disability] 
program that has funded over $700 million since it was 
introduced and has served more than 14,000 disabled residents 
of our province — 14,000. And, Mr. Speaker, since this 
government was elected, we have put $2.7 billion into making 
Saskatchewan the best place in Canada to live with disabilities. 
 
And when you’re a young family or you graduate university 
and you’re just starting out, of course the first thing you need 
coming out of university is a job. And in the first seven years of 
this — and granted, this last year has been tougher — but in the 
first seven years this government was creating one job every 
hour, 24 hours a day, seven days a week, 365 days a year. We 
were creating 60,000 new jobs in Saskatchewan. That’s what 
these young people need when they come out of university, is a 
job. 
 
And then I don’t know if you remember, Mr. Speaker, but 
remember your first paycheque? You get your first job, and you 
got your first paycheque. You can figure out, I worked 40 hours 
a week and I was getting $15 an hour. My paycheque’s $600. 
No it isn’t . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . No, no, I think 35 
cents an hour. But I had a time lapse. I was talking to Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[19:15] 
 
So it’s $600, and you get a paycheque and it’s only $475. And 
then the realism of the world hits you. You have to pay taxes. 
And, Mr. Speaker, if you’re in Manitoba say and that happened, 
you would be paying about $3,600 a year in provincial taxes. If 
you were in Saskatchewan, that same family of four with an 
income of $50,000 would have tax relief of 100 per cent. This 
year in 2016 they pay zero income tax. Mr. Speaker, that’s $300 
a month when you need it the most, when your income is 
supposed to be for looking after your families. 
 
But there’s more taxes than that, Mr. Speaker. There’s also 
education taxes. And education taxes, this party, this 
government has delivered the largest education tax cut in the 
history of the province, and we have held that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we also talk about municipal taxes. Now that 
hasn’t got a lot to do with us, but when you think about it, when 
we have municipal revenue sharing that has gone up from $127 
million, Mr. Speaker, to $271 million, that makes a difference. 
And I was playing with some figures on the weekend and just 
wondered what that meant to that family of four living in 
Melfort, Saskatchewan because I happen to know those figures. 
It makes a difference of about 120, $121 per person per year. 
That’s $484 each year that the municipal government gets to 
either . . . extra, more than what they were getting from the 
previous government, that will either cut their taxes down or it 
will increase their quality of life and the services that their 
community are able to . . . Almost $500 a year. 
 



June 6, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 323 

Mr. Speaker, when you’re a young family, you do worry about 
safety. You worry about highway safety when you’re travelling, 
and you worry about your good highways when doing that. And 
that’s where the highway budget comes in. But you also worry 
about the what-ifs. What if there’s an accident? And, Mr. 
Speaker, one of the things we don’t talk about very much is the 
fact that the former government wouldn’t even talk about a 
STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society] ambulance 
program in Saskatchewan, and this government helped to bring 
that in. And I say helped to bring it in because I want to give 
credit to my predecessor, the former MLA [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] from Melfort and the former Finance 
minister, Rod Gantefoer, and his wife, Carole Gantefoer, who 
had an amazing, a huge role in bringing STARS to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, and just for the heck of it, I want to talk about 
climate change. How about that? I want to talk about, I want to 
brag about climate change. Let’s look at the record before 2007. 
We had a government that could not grow this province. They 
actually in 16 years lost about just a little bit of population. 
They had the worst economic growth record in Canada. And, 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, their greenhouse gases went up 70 
per cent, 70 per cent. 
 
Our record, we have had the second strongest economic growth 
in the country. We have added 140,000 people. Our GDP [gross 
domestic product] has gone up 24 per cent, and our greenhouse 
gases has gone down 12 per cent. How can that be? We have 
the little . . . Anyway. And that’s not including, that’s up to 
2013, so that doesn’t include Estevan’s pride and joy, not only 
the member from Estevan, but Boundary dam 3 that will take 
800 000 tonnes of greenhouse gases out of our atmosphere. We 
have world class technology that they wish would never have 
been built. It’s created by Saskatchewan people and is there for 
the people of the planet Earth and will be used across the planet. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to run through this last part very, 
very fast. But I do want to talk about senior citizens because 
senior citizens is some place that I’m going to give the NDP 
credit, and that should quiet the House down. I’m giving the 
NDP credit because back in 1991-92 they came out with the 
seniors’ income plan, the SIP program, and they funded it. This 
is for seniors who need the help the most, people who are on the 
Guaranteed Income Supplement from the federal government. 
They came out with it in ’91-92 and it was $90. And up to ’95 
they raised it to $90. And in 2000 they raised it to $90. And in 
2005 it was still $90. And why? Because they can’t build an 
economy, Mr. Speaker. In our first term, this government’s first 
term, we raised it from $90 to $180; in the second term from 
180 to $270. That’s why you need an economy that is growing 
and strong. 
 
We’re building new senior housing units, as opposed to closing 
1,200. We have replaced those 1,200. It is great to hear that 
Swift Current is opening, last week I guess, last Friday they had 
the opening — 210 more spots for our seniors. And we’re 
continuing to build those, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I do want to mention the Saskatchewan drug plan. And we 
have been increasing the Saskatchewan drug plan, adding to it 
at about a rate of $10 million each year. This year we increased 
it by $15 million, Mr. Speaker, and we’ve included new cancer 

drugs into it, not only for seniors, but for other people right 
across the gamut. And I think, you know, as we talked about 
earlier today, that we all have been touched with cancer. And I 
think that is devastating enough to have cancer without having 
to have a bill of $1,200 or $2,500 extra on top to add more 
pressure to it. So I’m very proud of that. And even though we 
are still covering 70 per cent of the prescription costs, the drug 
plan is going up from $20 per prescription to 25. That is the 
reasoning. Tough decision, but one that for the safety of the 
program, it had to be done. 
 
And then we also have the safety net in place underneath that, 
Mr. Speaker, that if it costs you more than 3.4 per cent of your 
income, it is capped at that. Mr. Speaker, that’s why the strong 
economy is important. That’s why it’s important to keep 
Saskatchewan strong, and that’s why it’s important to the 
people of this province, Mr. Speaker. And for that reason and so 
many more, I will be supporting the budget motion and I will be 
voting against the amendment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for allowing me to 
join in the budget debate. I’d like to provide a local perspective 
really as to how this budget has been perceived and accepted by 
the very people of this great province who have placed us in the 
position of managing the contributions to the management of 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, joining with me in the Assembly on budget day 
was the mayor of Melville, Walter Streelasky, and his city 
manager, Kayla Hauser; the mayor of the town of Langenburg, 
Don Fogg, and his young preteen granddaughter, Maysen 
Zawada, who the member of Kelvington-Wadena had a great 
chat with; and Don Taylor, the reeve of the RM [rural 
municipality] of Saltcoats. They were in attendance to observe 
all the effort that went into the preparation and presentation of 
the budget, but also to hear this government’s plan on keeping 
their Saskatchewan strong. Mr. Speaker, they were not 
disappointed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, first off, my guests, constituents, and I would like 
to thank the Minister of Finance for his excellent job in 
navigating us through some rough water. And as Mayor Fogg’s 
young granddaughter said to me, that looked pretty hard. We 
visited in the rotunda after adjournment, and their comments to 
me were, thanks for continuing to support the RMs, the towns, 
and the cities of this great province. What they’re referring to 
was the increase of $56.7 million or the 16.2 per cent increase 
in municipal revenue-sharing that they now have access to over 
last year’s budget. This is unconditional funding that is going 
towards helping them continue their infrastructure works, 
whether it’s water treatment facilities, paving streets, 
maintaining parks and recreational facilities. Projects like these 
are absolutely necessary to ensure that their residents have the 
best services available to them and their families.  
 
The mayors’ thoughts are summed up in a press release that 
SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] had 
come up with: “Urban governments in Saskatchewan appreciate 
the provincial government’s support for our cities, towns, 
villages, and northern communities in today’s budget . . . 



324 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2016 

Mr. Speaker, after the post-budget scrums, I met with some 
farmer friends of mine to discuss the budget and to celebrate the 
completion of this province’s largest annual financial 
undertaking, seeding 2016. Every year this province’s 
agriculture producers invest billions of dollars in cash to plant 
33 million acres to annual crops. Agriculture is a major pillar in 
this province’s economy, but does have inherent risk — too hot, 
too cold, too wet, too dry. And, Mr. Speaker, sometimes that 
happens on the same day. This government recognizes a high 
level of producer risk and has continued to show significant 
support. Once again it’s proven in this year’s budget with an 
increase of 7.5 per cent in ag spending for a total of $389.8 
million. 
 
They are continuing to fund business risk management 
programs such as crop insurance, AgriStability, AgriInvest, and 
actually increasing this funding by 14.6 million. But this 
government also recognizes the need for agriculture to continue 
to build and grow for the future. And it continues to increase 
funding for ag research and supporting significant agriculture 
events such as Canada’s Farm Progress Show, 4-H 
Saskatchewan, and Agriculture in the Classroom. 
 
Although the opposition may have concerns with the selling of 
Crown farm land, my producers all indicated that their 
provincial government should not be in the farm land ownership 
business. The opposition tried this in the past. It was called the 
land bank and that really didn’t work out too well for anyone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I really enjoyed my steak supper and refreshments 
with the group of very positive ag producers who appreciate 
what this government has done and continues to do to support 
this valuable industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the morning after the budget I was on my way to 
my constituency to join in the celebration of a new project 
which I’ll discuss in a moment. But during my drive down the 
No. 1 Highway I had to slow down for a few construction 
projects along the way. My first stretch I got to watch some of 
the estimated 8,200 construction workers required to build the 
new Regina bypass. In my two short months driving this stretch 
of the No. 1 Highway, I really have to marvel at the 
transformation of the prairie landscape to provide a 
state-of-the-art bypass designed to improve the safety of my . . . 
and 24,000 other daily commuters along that stretch of 
highway. 
 
Mr. Speaker, further along the No. 1 Highway, I was again 
cautioned to slow down to watch more work and renewal being 
undertaken on our Saskatchewan highways. In fact this 
government is investing record values into our provincial roads 
and infrastructures, a budget of $1.15 billion in fact, which 
includes 355 million for capital construction. And we will see 
improvements to over 1300 kilometres of provincial highways, 
a lot of which my constituents are going to benefit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, investing in our highways does not only provide 
for results today, but it is building this province to take 
advantage for the future. Ray Orb, president of SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities], 
commented, and I quote, “The funding commitments made to 
highways and infrastructure, and the agriculture sector 
demonstrates that the Government of Saskatchewan 

understands the importance that highways and agriculture play 
in supporting the province’s economy.” Mr. Speaker, this 
government gets it, but there’s a lot more that we’ve yet to do. 
 
[19:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I was travelling down the No. 1 East, enjoying 
the sights of another great, green Saskatchewan spring, I drove 
past road signs directing me past Treaty 4 First Nations of 
Sakimay, Cowessess, Ochapowace, and Kahkewistahaw. And it 
reminded me of the commitments that this government has 
made toward First Nations and Métis funding. This budget 
provides approximately 211.9 million or an increase of 1.7 per 
cent to targeted funding to our First Nations and Métis 
organizations. This government is continuing their strong level 
of funding support to the amount of $156 million to 
Saskatchewan Polytechnic, Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 
Technologies, and the Gabriel Dumont Institute. 
 
This government has a plan, the Saskatchewan plan for growth. 
We want to ensure that Saskatchewan leads the country in 
reducing the disparity between First Nations and Métis students 
and their non-Aboriginal peers, reducing that rate by 50 per cent 
in the K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] system. But there is 
still so much yet to do, and we will get it done. 
 
As I continued to drive north through the beautiful Qu’Appelle 
Valley, albeit a little worse for wear after the tent caterpillar 
infestation, but in true Saskatchewan spirit, the leaves will come 
back just like our beloved Saskatchewan Roughriders, better 
and stronger than before. Sorry, I digress. As I drove on, I took 
a couple of calls — hands free of course — from some local 
businessmen in Esterhazy. And they wanted to comment on the 
budget. They, like so many of our small businesspeople in 
Saskatchewan, wanted to express their support for this budget 
developed under difficult times. 
 
In the heart of potash country the businesses of 
Melville-Saltcoats understand the resource sector fluctuations 
more than anyone. Our conversations went something like this. 
Tyler Metz from Saskpro Machine Works quoted, “I appreciate 
that this government tightened their own belts so that I don’t 
have to add another hole in my belt.” 
 
From another contractor in the constituency, “You know, in 
tough times we really have to distinguish between our wants 
and our needs.” And I know talking to our constituents 
throughout the election campaign, they were voting for a 
fiscally responsible government that continues to understand the 
needs of this province and will not put us in a risk down the 
road as it appears so many jurisdictions throughout North 
America are doing to their taxpayers. 
 
The Canadian Federation of Independent Business indicated 
that this government deserves credit for limiting its annual 
overall government spending to 2 per cent. They appreciate that 
this government resisted the temptation to increase taxes to 
cover their resource revenue shortfall. 
 
What other province in Canada has a plan to bring back 
balanced budgets in short order? Obviously this is reflected in 
the AAA credit rating that this province still enjoys. AAA credit 
ratings reflect this province’s fiscal discipline and sustained low 



June 6, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 325 

debt levels, which underscores prudent financial management 
practices. The benefits of maintaining a good credit rating 
results in lower borrowing costs, saving our taxpayers money. 
 
I also had one businessman tell me that, you know what? Good 
businesspeople know that keeping money in the bank when it’s 
paying 1 per cent interest really is a dumb idea when you have 
loans costing you 3 per cent. That is why your government paid 
down general operating debt by over $2.7 billion, nearly 40 per 
cent since 2007, to save close to $1 billion in interest payments. 
Well that billion dollars is going to help fund a few new 
schools, new care homes, and probably pave some more 
highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other day the opposition was discussing the 
relationship between food dependency and deficit budgets. Well 
this government had the willpower to quit their dependency on 
deficit budgets and return to a balanced budget in 2018. What 
analogy could we use to describe the opposition’s addiction to 
tax increases, Mr. Speaker? This government will return to a 
balanced budget in two years. This contrasted the record of the 
NDP. During their time in government they increased taxes 
over 21 times, and I’m afraid that really that shows the NDP has 
some significant dependency issues that require some long-term 
treatment. And that treatment really might be keeping them 
over there for a few more elections. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has reduced taxes over the last 10 
years, putting over $6 billion back into the hands of 
Saskatchewan taxpayers, whether as individuals or businesses, 
and this has resulted in Saskatchewan having one of the lowest 
personal and business tax burdens in Canada. And that money 
goes back into the business; it starts new businesses or buys 
consumer goods, which keeps this Saskatchewan economy 
going. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my destination last Thursday was to help open the 
new Esterhazy outdoor walking trail that was the vision of a 
few Esterhazy townspeople, with the help of Mosaic Company 
and a couple of local businesses, Noble Construction and Shop 
Easy Foods, and a group of very enthusiastic students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has a vision, a vision that we can 
do things better. The promised transformational change process 
is going to scrutinize all aspects of government services and 
determine if we are delivering them in the most efficient, 
effective, and sustainable way. We’re not going to be able to 
accomplish this alone, and we’re going to need to engage our 
partners and our stakeholders throughout the process. The 
Premier indicated both the revenue side and the expense side 
will be scrutinized to find the most sustainable balance between 
them. 
 
Later in the day I was getting my oil changed at one of the local 
car dealerships, Merit Ford, and our discussion certainly ended 
up on discussing the budget, but my concern for him was, 
really, how is business? Because of the multi-billion-dollar 
investment in our area by both Mosaic potash and PCS [Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan Inc.] Rocanville, we really have 
weathered the economic storm. Both of these companies have 
made significant investments in this province once the 
economic climate changed in 2007, and the province is once 
again open for business. 

This government this year will invest more than 3.5 billion for 
infrastructure, the largest single-year capital investment in this 
province’s history. Nearly 1.8 billion will be invested by 
Saskatchewan’s commercial Crown corporations — 
SaskEnergy, SaskPower, SaskTel — and that’s going into 
distribution, transmission and generation infrastructure, and 
communications networks. 
 
We must steadily be building for growth in this province. 
Commodity cycles are just that, commodity cycles. They have 
tops. They have bottoms. They go up. They go down. While the 
financing is affordable, now is the time to invest in 
infrastructure improvements which have been neglected for 
decades before us, and we can support the new enterprises that 
are still yet to come. 
 
Saskatchewan’s strong and diversified economy continues to 
attract new investment, with new announcements in the last few 
weeks and including this morning looking at Raging River. But 
it also includes the opening of Edgewood Forest Products in 
Carrot River, Crescent Point committing to major capital 
expenditures in our province, Husky Energy, Weil Group, K+S 
Legacy mine, BHP Billiton investing in a carbon capture and 
storage knowledge centre, Revera retirement complex. Each of 
these businesses can see opportunity by investing in 
Saskatchewan. This budget, Mr. Speaker, we are indeed open 
for business and there are more businesses that are yet to come. 
 
Always a believer that I really must head off the problems at the 
pass, I thought I was best to visit a couple of pharmacies in 
Esterhazy to determine how the news went over in regards to 
the increase in the children’s and seniors’ drug plan. The only 
issue was, in true Saskatchewan fashion, their concern at not 
being able to invest in their prescription costs, you know, ahead 
of time before the price went up. But their customers 
understood that health care costs in this province are enormous. 
In order to try and remain sustainable, costs will go up. Adding 
15 new cancer drugs and funding for current hepatitis 
treatments are going to come at a cost. 
 
Stopping in at the pharmacies in Langenburg and Melville, 
same stories were told. In fact seniors were very appreciative 
that their low-income support programs remained intact and 
their financial security would still be protected. And in typical 
glass-half-full philosophy they said, well you know what? At 
least our programs are better than the other guys next door. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my last stop of the day was at our old farm that 
was now Sorgard Seeds. Graham Sorgard is the new owner. 
He’s formerly from Alberta and has transformed our 6,500 acre 
seed farm into a 30,000 acre seed farm. Thursday night they 
were just attempting to finish #plant16. This year they have 
planted 12,000 acres of herbicide-tolerant genetically 
engineered canola — 12,000 acres of it. This is a crop that has 
become a significant cash commodity for thousands of 
Saskatchewan producers planted on 10.4 million acres in 
Saskatchewan worth over $2.6 billion per year . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — What was that hashtag? 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Plant16, and it’s done. It’s in the bag. 
 
Canola is a crop that has its origins and development right here 



326 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2016 

at NRC [National Research Council] and Ag Canada in 
Saskatoon. Genetically engineered canola has provided Graham 
and producers like him throughout Western Canada an 
opportunity to achieve both higher yields and lowering their 
pesticide load on the environment. Genetically engineered 
canola provides the opportunity for growers to plant utilizing 
direct seeding technology while reducing the environmental 
footprint, storing carbon, and improving soil structure that all 
contributes to this province’s environmental sustainability. 
 
While our government sees the values in GECs [genetically 
engineered crops], the NDP have been silent on this issue. 
While members of their caucus are endorsing nonsense doctrine 
like the Leap Manifesto, they seem to be ignoring the science 
and benefits behind genetically engineered crops that are grown 
by thousands of Saskatchewan farmers. At the same time 
Graham planted, as part of his rotation, 4,000 acres of field peas 
that were developed at the University of Saskatchewan Crop 
Development Centre. He planted wheat that was bred resistant 
to insects such as wheat midge and sawfly. That was developed 
at our University of Saskatchewan Crop Development Centre 
and at Ag Canada stations across Western Canada. 
 
These varieties were produced by public institutions, distributed 
by farmer-owned seed companies, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this is an industry that is thriving. It has choices of private and 
public, and it contributes significantly to this economy — $15.1 
billion to this economy, Mr. Speaker, in 2015. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan producers are the leader in lentil, 
pea, durum, and canola seed exports. Livestock sales in 
Saskatchewan, which includes feathers, hogs, and milk, totalled 
just over $3 billion for sales in 2015, Mr. Speaker. This is an 
industry that is not going to take a leap backwards as the 
opposition would like us to. This is an industry that I guarantee 
will put up one heck of a fight if they’re going to be challenged. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government continues to support producers 
like Graham and the thousands of others in the province who 
make a living in agriculture. When it comes to agriculture 
research, this government has designated $26.8 million to the ag 
research, providing capital to the Livestock and Forage Centre 
of Excellence at the University of Saskatchewan and to the 
International Trade Centre at Evraz Place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government continues to pledge to stand up 
for producers on major issues in Canada such as transportation 
and freight rate issues, and internationally, whether opening up 
new markets through STEP [Saskatchewan Trade and Export 
Partnership] or reducing trade barriers through various 
international trade agreements such as the TPP [Trans-Pacific 
Partnership] and CETA [Canada-European Union 
Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement]. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ended up the day, Thursday, with my regular 
phone call from my son Matthew. He lives in Ottawa and he 
was just driving home from his baseball game. The 
conversation went something like this: Dad, it’s the end of the 
month. Do you know how much it costs out here? Mr. Speaker, 
I do know how much it costs to live in Ontario, but I also know 
what it costs to live here in Saskatchewan. With the budget 
outlined, even with a couple of utility increases, Saskatchewan 
remains one of the most affordable places to live and work in 

Canada. Regina ranks as having the lowest or second lowest 
overall combined taxes and utilities of 10 major Canadian cities 
surveyed. With the tax structure currently in place, a family 
earning $50,000 pays under $720 in provincial tax, and that is 
one of the lowest provincial tax rates in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, quality of life cannot be measured just in 
monetary values. We must also look at services available in 
health care. Saskatchewan currently enjoys one of the lowest 
surgical wait times in Canada, a significant departure from a 
decade ago. Part of this reason is this government’s willingness 
to allow private surgeries and medical analysis. 
 
More outside-the-box thinking resulted in this government 
launching the innovative remote presence technology pilot 
project to deliver health care in Pelican Narrows. This 
government is fulfilling its commitment to provide an 
additional $500,000 a year to expand their innovative 
technology to other remote communities. But, Mr. Speaker, we 
know there’s a lot more that we need to do, but our government 
is on the right track to do it. Oh by the way, Mr. Speaker, my 
son went three for four at the plate that night. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Thursday was a good day. It was a good day 
talking to the citizens and businesses of this great province who 
know that this government is committed to improving their life 
and their children’s lives. Mr. Speaker, Friday was an even 
better day. I was on hand for the official ribbon cutting of the 
brand new Esterhazy group home. Five residents have been 
given a new opportunity to be a part of the community and, 
despite their intellectual disabilities, this new home has given 
them the chance to gain a sense of purpose and allows them to 
interact with others. This is another demonstration of this 
government’s investment in programs for children, youth, and 
families of people who are experiencing disabilities, and people 
needing income assistance and housing. 
 
The social services 2016-17 budget is now $1.052 billion, a 5.1 
per cent increase from the last fiscal year. This investment will 
allow the ministry to continue its work on child welfare 
transformation. And as a result of the Saskatchewan poverty 
reduction strategy, Social Services is doing a redesign of its 
income assistance programs to simplify administration, improve 
client service, and support transitions to independence and 
participation in the economic and social life of this province. 
We know we have a lot more work to do. 
 
[19:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, later on Friday afternoon I took part in a 
consultation meeting with a group of health care professionals. 
Consultations are a part of this government’s promise to its 
citizens to make them a part of the transformation process. 
Consultation is a part of this government’s promise to be 
informed, so it is capable of defending our business and 
industries from issues and challenges that we may face from 
within and outside the country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to end Friday evening, we attended a retirement 
party for a good friend of ours, Gayle Daum, a registered nurse 
who has served Sunrise Health Region for over 30 years. And 
as you would expect, over cocktails and Nanaimo bars I heard a 
lot of ideas about how to make health care better, and it’s our 



June 6, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 327 

government who listens and takes action. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these health professionals appreciated this 
government’s effort in supporting capital investments and 
health spending. They appreciated the $20 million increase this 
government has invested in the Saskatchewan surgical wait 
initiative to help ensure that we retain the shortest wait times in 
the country. They appreciated the initiatives this government 
has placed on doctor retention, adding 650 more, and an 
increase in the number of nurses by 3,200 in the province over 
the last 10 years. But they did admit, they admitted that what is 
going on now is not likely sustainable going into the future. 
And as Dr. Dennis Kendel, CEO [chief executive officer] of the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association, used in a blog he wrote: 
“. . . transformational . . . [challenge] is needed in our system to 
optimize public benefit from the public resources allocated to 
health and healthcare.” There may not be a need for increased 
public funding of health services, but there is a need for wiser 
utilization of the available resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to end my weekend, I was on hand at the Melville 
Horizon Credit Union Centre to welcome this year’s Telus 
Walk to Cure Diabetes. I didn’t need to be there to motivate this 
fantastic group of individuals. They were already highly 
motivated to raise the profile and funds needed to treat and find 
a cure for type 1 diabetes. Their enthusiasm was contagious, 
and you felt compelled to find a way to make things better. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had a very good weekend, a very good weekend 
with the constituents of Melville-Saltcoats because they believe 
in their abilities and the abilities of this government to keep 
Saskatchewan strong. Mr. Speaker, these 50 members that sit 
among us over here are highly motivated to find ways to make 
the lives of all residents of Saskatchewan better. They are 
highly motivated to keep Saskatchewan on track of being first 
and best in all the positive aspects of the economy and growth 
in all sectors. They are highly motivated to overcome the 
negativity of those who believe that change is wrong and 
ill-advised at this time. To quote Winston Churchill, “A 
pessimist sees the difficulty in every opportunity; an optimist 
sees the opportunity in every difficulty.” Mr. Speaker, this is 
now a province of optimists that believe that the times will be 
better and, Mr. Speaker, that time starts now. 
 
For that reason, Mr. Speaker, I support the budget moved by 
Minister of Finance and seconded by the member of Regina 
University with no amendments. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As always it’s a 
privilege and a pleasure to rise to enter the debate, this time on 
the 2016-17 budget speech. 
 
I’d like to start by pointing out that we have a budget that’s 
about three months later than usual, Mr. Speaker. And the 
reality is there was no need, no need to leave people on pins and 
needles, organizations and individuals who were counting on a 
budget in prompt fashion. We can talk about Manitoba, who 
had an election after Saskatchewan, actually a couple of weeks 
after Saskatchewan, and managed to produce a budget before 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And that was a brand new 

government, not a government who was entering a new term, 
Mr. Speaker. That was a brand new government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it’s funny how a brand new government can manage to get a 
budget together where a third-term government cannot manage 
to do that. But the reason is, there was no good reason this 
budget could not have been presented, and the reality is, there’s 
so much in this budget that we didn’t hear from members talk 
about during the election. There was no mention about cuts to 
urban parks. There was no mention about closing the Buffalo 
Narrows correctional facility, which is 18 jobs and removing 
the opportunity for better rehabilitation, having people 
connected to their community, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There was no talk in the budget about increases to prescription 
drugs. So there was absolutely no good reason for this budget 
not to be presented. But you know what? My colleague from 
Nutana put it well last week. I have a lot of respect for my 
colleague from Nutana. I think she’s a very wise woman. 
 
She says: 
 

. . . this government didn’t want people to know how badly 
they’ve squandered their [near] decade-long ride through 
high commodity prices and, through sheer luck, some of 
the best economic . . . [times] in our history as a province.  
 

Mr. Speaker, I think that that’s the reason why we didn’t see a 
budget pre-election or in the last couple of months, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I think the government’s theme for this particular budget is 
interesting to me, keep Saskatchewan strong. I need to provide 
a little context for you, Mr. Speaker. Right now we have almost 
10,000 fewer jobs year over year than we did. Bankruptcies are 
on the rise and wages are declining. I was asked by a reporter 
on budget day what message this . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
Mr. Speaker, they’re heckling on the other side about doom and 
gloom. This is reality, Mr. Speaker, that there are almost 10,000 
fewer jobs year over year. If that’s doom and gloom, if reality is 
doom and gloom, Mr. Speaker, then we’re in big trouble here. 
 
I was asked by a reporter on budget day what message this 
budget sends. Well I think the message the government is trying 
to send — or spin might be a better way of putting it — is very 
different than the one that will be transmitted by the realities 
and cuts of this budget and the reality Saskatchewan people 
face today who are struggling with the rising cost of living, 
difficulties accessing health services like ERs [emergency 
room] and specialists, challenges with their kids’ education and 
access to child care, and loss of jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government should have been focused on keeping 
Saskatchewan strong all along. Instead they ran the resource 
revenue ride until it crashed, without apparently a single 
thought to the possibility of low oil prices. They had an 
opportunity to ensure that when some of our natural resources 
dropped in prices, as natural resources tend to do, Mr. Speaker, 
the ebb and flow . . . People in Saskatchewan have to pay the 
price for their mismanagement. 
 
For example, I’m going to talk about this, Mr. Speaker. They 
could have, they could have reintroduced the film tax credit, for 



328 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2016 

example, something they cut four years ago, something they cut 
four years ago, Mr. Speaker. Or they could have just continued 
to do it all along, but instead four years ago they produced a 
mean-spirited and short-sighted cut instead of helping foster the 
film industry here in Saskatchewan that was already doing quite 
well except for an economic turndown and a high Canadian 
dollar, Mr. Speaker. Instead they chose to kill the film tax 
credit. 
 
So we can look to provinces, Mr. Speaker, like BC [British 
Columbia] and Ontario. We can look to provinces like BC and 
Ontario — any of them actually, really — Manitoba, Alberta, 
Mr. Speaker, who recognize the value of the sector and see how 
they are booming, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you only need to stand on a street in downtown 
Vancouver for 15 minutes before you see a film crew working, 
Mr. Speaker. I still hear from expats from Saskatchewan who 
are both sad and angry about having to leave their homes here 
in Saskatchewan. But they are busy. This government broke up 
families, Mr. Speaker. They are so busy. These individuals are 
very sad to not be here in Saskatchewan, but these individuals 
are busy at work in places like Ontario and BC, Mr. Speaker, 
and are contributing to those economies, Mr. Speaker, when 
they could be contributing to ours. When oil is low, film could 
be one of the things we can rely on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I mention, Mr. Speaker, that there’s almost 10,000 fewer jobs 
year over year. That, Mr. Speaker, includes a 25 per cent 
unemployment rate of First Nations people. That’s an 8 per cent 
increase over last year. That doesn’t even touch on-reserve 
employment or unemployment, Mr. Speaker. That’s off-reserve 
unemployment of First Nations people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to point to a February 2016 National Post story where 
Doug Elliott of the Sask Trends Monitor points out that the 
population is growing faster than job growth. The number of 
unemployed people in February hits an all-time high here in 
Saskatchewan — 36,600 people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In that same story in the National Post the then minister — I 
can’t mention his name, minister . . . I’m drawing a blank — the 
member from Meadow Lake, Mr. Speaker. The member from 
Meadow Lake pointed out that this government is working to 
improve the labour market by investing its supports and training 
for new and current employees. So that’s what the member for 
Meadow Lake says in February, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So let’s fast-forward a few months later to our budget with our 
still-constrained economic climate. There was not a mention in 
the budget of getting people back to work and creating jobs. In 
fact, in these very key areas there were cuts to apprenticeship, 
to youth and adult skills training, and to adult basic education. 
There were even cuts, Mr. Speaker, to economic development, 
trade, and exports. I heard the Finance Minister on Thursday 
morning on CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] talk 
about transformative change. He commented that this isn’t part 
of the need because resource revenues fluctuate, Mr. Speaker. 
Well oh my goodness, the Sask Party government has just 
figured this out now that resource revenues fluctuate? They 
should have been planning for this possibility all along by 
diversifying our economy, investing in green jobs and culture 
just to name a few, and ensuring that all citizens have the 

support they need to get the education and training they need to 
be successful, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another thing they should be doing, or should have been doing 
all along, this government in record revenues. Mr. Speaker, let’s 
put this in context — about $16 billion more a year than the 
previous administration ever had. This government should have 
been thinking about the long term. How about a sovereign 
wealth fund? Look at Norway with $1 trillion they’ve put away 
for that time when our natural resources either ebb and flow or 
run out, Mr. Speaker. Not only have they not thought about the 
long term, there was a short-term fiscal stabilization fund of 
which they were very proud, which they have now squeezed 
every penny dry in the most prosperous of times here in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, in the most prosperous of times. 
 
So not only have they not saved for the long term, they’ve not 
saved for a short-term rainy day, and they’ve spent all that 
money. But this is a government that’s in the midst of their fifth 
deficit, Mr. Speaker. This is not me saying this, this is the 
auditor of Saskatchewan, this is the auditor of Saskatchewan. 
Despite their spin and their bravado, just because, Mr. Speaker, 
you say something is true, that doesn’t make it true. But I think 
the members opposite think if you say it enough times, it must 
be true. 
 
The reality is they’ve run five deficits. In 2010, the auditor 
points out the GRF [General Revenue Fund] deficit was 409 
million; in 2011, 13 million; 2012, there was more boasting, but 
the deficit was 105 million. And now we have deficits in 2016 
and 2017. And you know, it’s interesting. I’ve heard the 
Premier heckle. Actually he responded in question period — 
not tonight, Mr. Speaker, I saw you look towards the Premier 
— on budget day when there were questions asked, the Premier 
actually answered by, when we talked about deficits and 
financial mismanagement, the Premier said, those lines didn’t 
work for you in the election. 
 
Well you know what, Mr. Speaker? Work or not, that is the cold 
hard reality of this government, five deficits in the sunniest of 
economic times. And we will keep saying it, Mr. Speaker, 
because it is the truth. This government’s debt has been 
climbing on a summary basis, which includes all the business of 
government, since 2009 and by the end of this year will be over 
$14 billion. That’s an increase of over 80 per cent in just five 
years, Mr. Speaker. So the economic record of this government 
in times of prosperity is not a proud one, Mr. Speaker. And I 
wish I could tell you that services are great and people feel like 
they have what they need, but that’s far from the truth either, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So when I think back to that question from the reporter about 
what is the message of this government, or what message does 
this budget send, I think the theme of this budget really is that 
people will feel . . . The message that will be transmitted to 
people is that this is a deficit budget, a budget that adds debt, 
but it’s offset by little but mean and painful cuts, and will bump 
the hard choices on to third parties like health regions and 
school boards, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to talk a little bit about some of those mean-spirited cuts 
of this budget because that’s exactly what they are. They’re 
small cuts but they have a real impact in the lives of people who 



June 6, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 329 

are affected by them. I want to say to the members opposite, for 
all of those members who clapped when this Minister of 
Finance announced on budget day the cut to the Saskatchewan 
employment supplement, I’d like to tell them a little bit about 
what this means to those 11,000 or so families, plus those other 
families last year who were taken off the employment 
supplement, those with children 13 and over, Mr. Speaker, and 
then this year those who had been on the program, had been 
grandfathered in, and were removed. 
 
[20:00] 
 
So those 11,000 or so families, what does that mean, Mr. 
Speaker? Well for those who maybe weren’t around in the day, 
the employment supplement was designed to help low-income 
working families stay working. There’s something called the 
welfare wall, Mr. Speaker, where you need to make it be able to 
pay to be employed rather than being on social assistance. And 
believe me, you don’t get rich on social assistance. That’s not a 
nice and a happy life, Mr. Speaker. But when you’re a 
low-income worker, you don’t have some of the benefits that 
you might have on social assistance, so sometimes people who 
have high medical costs, those kind of things, or child care costs 
feel sort of trapped by social assistance. So the whole point of 
the employment supplement was (a) to provide a top-up to 
those who worked hard. 
 
So the way it works, Mr. Speaker, the more money you earn, 
the higher the supplement becomes, Mr. Speaker, which is a 
very beneficial thing. There’s a huge incentive for people who 
are making minimum wage and supporting a family to work 
harder and earn more. But the second piece of this that’s really 
important, if you’re eligible for the employment supplement, 
you were also eligible for family health benefits, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And again, why is this important? Well because people who 
work at many low-wage jobs don’t have a union. They don’t 
have the advantage of a collective agreement or an employer 
who knows and understands the importance of benefits, Mr. 
Speaker. So you go from social assistance to a low-income job 
and you lose your prescription drugs, you lose your glasses, you 
lose dental care, those kinds of things. So the employment 
supplement provided you family health benefits which includes, 
if you’ve got a child under 13 now — it used to be for anyone 
who had children under 18 — most dental services, an eye 
exam once a year and basic eyeglasses, emergency ambulance 
— and we know here, Mr. Speaker, how much ambulance fees 
are — prescription drugs, and up to 12 chiropractic services. 
And for their parents it provides up to 12 chiropractic 
treatments, eye exams every two years, and some drug 
coverage, Mr. Speaker. So this government has ripped some of 
the most vulnerable families off a really important support 
program, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is what the minister said on budget day: “Removing this 
provision focuses the program on those with highest need, and 
combined with projected lower utilization, the province is 
forecast to save $2.5 million . . .” Mr. Speaker, a few things. I’d 
like to encourage members opposite to watch the video archive. 
This is where they clapped. Saving $2.5 million on the backs of 
1,100 Saskatchewan families is something members opposite 
clapped for. If that isn’t mean, I don’t know what is, Mr. 
Speaker. Perhaps they just didn’t understand the ramifications 

of their cut, but I can tell you that is a big cut to those families, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to make two other points about this, Mr. Speaker. With 
respect to the minister’s spin about the highest need, I have a 
child in both those cohorts, Mr. Speaker, under 13 and under 
18. I’d have to say that my teenager costs me a heck of a lot 
more than my eight-year-old does currently. Teenagers are 
expensive. So for the minister to say that those with the highest 
need are those under 13, I think we could take a straw poll and 
we could find out that teenagers are probably far more 
expensive than young kids, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another point, decreased utilization. The minister talked about 
decreased utilization. That’s because they haven’t changed the 
threshold since I think about 2009, at which point you’re 
eligible for it. So the reality is wages have gone up, but not by 
very much. I had a family, Mr. Speaker, who I’ve talked about 
in this House before who . . . He was a caretaker and she had a 
family day home. He got a marginal raise — I think it was 25 
bucks a month — and the family was removed from the 
employment supplement. This was a few years ago and, you 
know, the employment supplement itself wasn’t huge for them 
but the family health benefits were. So these cuts really matter, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think another mean-spirited change, the increase to drug costs 
for seniors. I’m sure we all went back to our constituencies and 
heard good and bad. From the members opposite, you’d only 
think that people were just absolutely tickled with this budget. 
I’d challenge any of them to have the guts to get up and say yes, 
I heard from a few seniors who said, this is going to hurt me. 
Because I can tell you I heard from seniors over the weekend, 
on Friday in my office and on Saturday at an event, about the 
$5 increase. 
 
And the reality . . . So I’m thinking about a woman I talked to 
on Friday who lives in low-income housing in Riversdale on 
20th Street, Mr. Speaker. She earns about $1,200, $1,180 a 
month with her CPP [Canada Pension Plan] and OAS [Old Age 
Security], and she pays about $800 in rent, Mr. Speaker. So she 
has about $400 a month to live on. So an increase for her 
medications at $5 a pop matters, Mr. Speaker, and her comment 
to me: I’m lucky I live where I do, which is a low-income 
housing place, or I’d be using the food bank, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d also like to talk a little bit about the context of a drug 
program. In 2007 when this government came to power, there 
was a universal drug plan for all seniors, and saw seniors 
paying no more than $15 per prescription. Now in 2016, over 
the course of this government’s time in office, over this 
government’s time in office with record resource revenues, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve seen . . . In the first place it was no longer a 
universal program. Then over the course of these years, Mr. 
Speaker, they chose to raise drug rates by $5 to $20 to . . . You 
know what to do, Mr. Speaker? To make it more sustainable. I 
think that’s the rhetoric we hear again today from some of the 
. . . We heard it from the minister and we hear it from these 
members about making it more sustainable. They increased the 
rate in this budget by $5 more to make it more sustainable, so 
$10 in the past few years. And as well, this government last 
year ripped a whole bunch more seniors off the drug plan, 
making it more difficult. 



330 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2016 

And I want to take a quick peek at a study, actually, specific to 
pharmacare. So we get further and further away from 
pharmacare here in Saskatchewan, and with these kinds of drug 
increases we’re not getting closer to having a pharmacare 
program. We’re getting farther away, Mr. Speaker. So if we 
look at a study by Dr. Steve Morgan at UBC [University of 
British Columbia], from Pharmacare 2020, I’d like to quote: 
 

Equitable access to medically necessary prescription drugs 
does not require that every drug be covered for every use. 
It requires that all patients [be able to] . . . access, without 
barriers, to medicines selected with due regard to public 
health relevance, evidence on efficacy and safety, and 
comparative cost-effectiveness. This is not achieved 
through drug programs for select populations or the 
protection of all people against only “catastrophic” costs. 

 
Even small patient charges — this is the point they should pay 
close attention to, Mr. Speaker — even small patient charges 
can deter patients from all income levels from filling necessary 
prescriptions, particularly preventative treatments that must be 
taken regularly to manage asymptomatic chronic diseases, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s from Pharmacare 2020 by Dr. Steve Morgan. 
 
The reality is when people don’t take their medications, they get 
more ill. And what happens when people get more ill, Mr. 
Speaker, they show up in our emergency rooms. They show up 
at their doctors’ offices. They are sicker and cost the system 
more, Mr. Speaker. There is all kinds of evidence that says 
supporting people in their drug costs pays not only in people’s 
health, but in saving our province and our country money, Mr. 
Speaker. That is well documented. 
 
I just have a couple of things more to say, Mr. Speaker. I know 
when I get started I find that I have more to say than I thought 
that I could imagine, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s important to put 
just a couple of things on the records, things that weren’t in this 
budget. There was, second year in a row, not a single word 
about mental health, Mr. Speaker, despite the fact this 
government, just a few months prior to the last budget, released 
with great fanfare a mental health and addictions action plan. 
 
Just an article from a few days ago, Mr. Speaker, the headline, 
“We’re all burning out here.” Mental health and addictions is a 
bit of a catastrophe, Mr. Speaker. Dave Nelson . . . I want to 
read a quote here. Dave Nelson, the associate executive director 
of the Saskatchewan division of the Canadian Mental Health 
Association, has this to say: 
 

Action on the action plan has been very slow. 
 

When this report came out and they didn’t target any 
resources for mental health — that was prior to the 
downfall in oil. Now, with a very tough budget, I’d be 
delighted if they put some money in mental health, but I 
[don’t] . . . Unless they do that, they’re smiling and saying 
that mental health is a priority, but they’re not really 
prioritizing it [at all, Mr. Speaker]. 

 
And I can tell you from first-hand experience, that is a reality. 
The Dubé Centre in Saskatoon, our acute psychiatric hospital, is 
in overcapacity every day, Mr. Speaker. I hear from families 
who have loved ones who’ve showed up at RUH [Royal 

University Hospital] in Saskatoon who get turned away. I heard 
from a mother who told me about her daughter being 
discouraged from Five Hills, calling an intake worker and being 
told, being asked if she had private health care or private 
insurance, Mr. Speaker, instead of being able to access a 
counsellor. So this young girl got the courage up to call and ask 
for help. She was told, well tap into something else, Mr. 
Speaker. Mental health and addictions is a huge challenge but 
it’s I think a great opportunity not only for people’s well-being 
but again for the finances of our province. 
 
Not a word about the poverty reduction strategy. Again if we 
think about transformative change, you think about where you 
could spend money to save money, Mr. Speaker. Providing 
people’s dignity and a good quality of life could go a long way 
to making our health care system more sustainable, Mr. 
Speaker. I represent a constituency where people are more ill 
because of where we live, because people live in poverty, Mr. 
Speaker. And the reality is we’re sicker in Saskatoon Riversdale 
because of poverty. And that is just not fair, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Infrastructure, Mr. Speaker, just briefly I want to talk about 
health care infrastructure. I think it’s important to point out that 
a couple of years ago there was a $2.2 billion health care 
infrastructure deficit. The government has allocated $14.1 
million for three facilities, Mr. Speaker: RUH, Pasqua, and the 
General for important infrastructure programs, Mr. Speaker, as 
the minister would say. The need for those three hospitals two 
years ago, which was a conservative estimate, was $675 
million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to read a couple of headlines about RUH: “No power, no 
computer, no hot water at hospital.” “Surgeries cancelled at 
Royal University Hospital for a second day.” Mr. Speaker, this 
is a drop in the bucket. And you would hope that all our health 
care facilities had functioning electrical systems and heating 
systems, Mr. Speaker. 
 
P3s [public-private partnership]. I just want to read a quick 
quote into the record, and I’m just getting ready to wrap up 
here. I could talk about surgical waits, Mr. Speaker, that this 
government has said are creeping up. I’d hardly say tripling in a 
year is creeping up, Mr. Speaker. When we talk about P3s, Mr. 
Speaker, this government, one of the things they like to do . . . 
The Meadows, Mr. Speaker . . . I wonder what the Finance 
minister is heckling about, Mr. Speaker. There’s lots of things 
that seem to really bother him, Mr. Speaker. The Meadows . . . 
The one thing this government likes to talk about P3s is being 
on time and on budget. 
 
I would point them to the School of Public Policy at the 
University of Calgary, volume 9, issue 12, “The Theory and 
Evidence Concerning Public-Private Partnerships in Canada 
and Elsewhere.” 
 
I’d like to read just a little bit of the summary: 
 

In fact, the clearest advantage that PPPs offers is to 
politicians who are able to transfer to private partners the 
risks of miscalculated construction costs and revenue 
projections (as with a toll road, for example). For 
taxpayers, the deals can often work out worse than if the 
government had simply pursued a fixed price design . . . 



June 6, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 331 

Public Sector Alternative arrangement. 
 

Mr. Speaker: 
 
Advocates of PPPs would argue that one clear benefit . . . 
[they] do offer the public is an impressive record of 
bringing in projects on time and on budget. It is true that 
the inflexibility of contracts and the financial risk 
transferred to the private partners have a powerful effect in 
keeping projects on track. However, the yardsticks by 
which the on-time and on-budget criteria are measured are 
typically flawed. The “start dates” of PPPs are marked 
after the conclusion of a lengthy negotiation and 
project-planning process between a government and a 
private consortium, making project completions seem more 
efficient than they really are. Meanwhile, the estimated 
cost of a project has a tendency to increase during the 
preliminary process. In other words, the delay and cost 
inflation that so often characterize traditional PSAs are not 
magically eliminated in a PPP: they just tend to occur prior 
to the first shovel breaking ground, rather than 
incrementally over the course of the project’s construction. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, that’s on PPP, P3s, Mr. Speaker. I have much 
more to say, but I know that I have many colleagues on both 
sides of the House who want to weigh in to the debate. I cannot 
in good conscience support the motion, and I will be supporting 
the amendment. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it’s a 
pleasure to be able to stand here this evening and talk about our 
budget. Now as everybody here knows, I’m not a very eloquent 
speaker. I’m not nearly like my seatmate here from 
Kelvington-Wadena, or the previous speaker from Saltcoats. I 
just kind of get up there and babble away and try and run things 
as smoothly as I can possibly do. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I guess to start out with, I will have a few 
thanks to say to some of our people. I’ll tell you why. These 
people are a little different. I’m not talking about my family at 
home or things like that, although I thank them a lot. But I’m 
talking about our treasury board, Mr. Speaker, our treasury 
board who did a fantastic job of going through all of this, all of 
the ministries who, in trying times, were forced to take a hard 
look at their budgets. And of course, our Minister of Finance, 
who did an absolutely fantastic job running on $1 billion 
shortfall, still managed to put together a very decent budget for 
the people of Saskatchewan. And I think everybody owes our 
Finance minister a round of applause. 
 
[Applause] 
 
[20:15] 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you, I thought . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Mr. Speaker, I thought it was 
actually such a good budget that I guess, right after he had done 
it, I gave him a slice of peach pie and called it a peachy budget. 
So you know, I was actually trying to suck up a little bit too, 
Mr. Speaker. 

But, Mr. Speaker, we have to start, you know. I was just 
listening to Saskatoon Riversdale member who was just up and 
talking about it, and she figures that all we would have to do to 
fix the budget in Saskatchewan is restore the film tax credit and 
everything would just be 100 per cent. Saskatchewan would be 
booming again. Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think . . . I think it’s 
a little more complex than that. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, as I listened to her, it was actually 
kind of funny. I’ll just bring this up because she was just up 
speaking and she was talking about health. She was talking 
about seniors’ drug plan. And I question, I question, Mr. 
Speaker, when the NDP was in before, where was their seniors’ 
drug plan? Oh that’s right, they didn’t have one. They didn’t 
have one at all. You just went and paid full price. Isn’t that 
amazing? But you know, they’re going to criticize, they’re 
going to criticize our government for making a very slight 
increase. 
 
Then to top it all off, then she starts talking about health. I can 
remember, Mr. Speaker, when I was first elected, when I was 
first elected in 2007 and the NDP had kind of disappeared, we 
used to get calls at least three times a day into our office on 
health. And, Mr. Speaker, now we get maybe a call a week on 
health into our office. And there’s a reason for that because that 
one hospital, which they were probably getting ready to close, 
only had four physicians left. Now, Mr. Speaker, now there are 
12 physicians sitting in the Nipawin Hospital. That’s one thing 
we have done, is we have improved health tremendously over 
what was under the NDP government. 
 
You take a look at our record. A record $5.17 billion investment 
in health this year, Mr. Speaker. This is light years ahead of the 
NDP. That was a government that had the longest surgical wait 
times in all of Canada. We’ve now got them down to the 
shortest, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, these are just a few odds 
and ends. Like I mean, I just couldn’t resist it just because the 
member from Saskatoon Riversdale happened to be speaking 
quite a bit on health, so I couldn’t help but bring it up. But I was 
kind of like the member from Saltcoats. He was talking, he had 
a real good weekend. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Same hairstyle. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Yes, he’s got a good hairstyle too, Mr. 
Speaker. I really enjoy his hairstyle. But, Mr. Speaker, he was 
talking about going around cutting ribbons and openings. You 
know, we’ve had the same thing sitting up in our area. We have 
people who believe in our products.  
 
He actually brought up about Edgewood Forest Products, Mr. 
Speaker, putting a $25 million expansion in Carrot River only 
just a few . . . Well they restarted the plant, the mill in Carrot 
River in 2012, put in a $25 million expansion. It was great. The 
Minister of Economy was up there for the ribbon cutting along 
with myself and the Premier. These are people who are willing 
to come into Saskatchewan and invest. Do you know when that 
plant was closed down? That was under the NDP. You know, 
but boy, if we just put that film tax credit back in there, this 
province would be booming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s been quite a few other ribbon cutting 
ceremonies up in our area. I was to Newmarket Place over in 



332 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2016 

Tisdale, the senior citizens’ home that we opened up, you know, 
putting up new beds for seniors. We pretty well had to go out 
and start building these new ones because the NDP shut 1,200 
of them down, Mr. Speaker. That was another one where it was 
a good day to go out there and cut ribbons. 
 
Another one was going over to cutting the ribbon at the Hudson 
Bay school, the new school in Hudson Bay. 
 
An Hon. Member: — A wonderful school. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Yes, a great school in Hudson Bay. Shortly 
after that they had a brand new one in Porcupine Plain, that was 
opened up. Mr. Speaker, this is a government that’s committed 
to building infrastructure, not tearing it apart, not closing the 
hospitals such as what the NDP did, not closing the schools as 
what the NDP did. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are all good things that are happening. And 
even during tight budgetary times, Mr. Speaker, this 
government is not going to back away on building infrastructure 
for the people of this fine province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, speaking of education, I want to talk about 
education. I think our education is doing quite well. First off we 
have more people that are staying in this province, so of course 
we have to build schools. That’s far better than under the old 
way with the NDP where they shipped everybody out. 
 
Actually our daughter just went through university, became a 
school teacher. Actually I think she’s in her third year of 
teaching now. Mr. Speaker, had she gone through university 
here in Saskatchewan and become a teacher, and if we still had 
an NDP government, she probably wouldn’t have a job here in 
Saskatchewan teaching because they had a tendency to get rid 
of teachers. They had a tendency to close schools. We have 750 
more teachers working in Saskatchewan now than what was 
under the NDP. 
 
We are doing great in this province, not as good as I would like, 
but we’re doing great. And you know, we’ve got this 
commodity downturn. These commodities are going to turn 
around. They’re going to come back, and then we want to be 
ready for it to help out our people in this province when they 
do. We are not going to do what the NDP did. We are not going 
to shut down our infrastructure. We’re going to have highways. 
We’re going to have schools, and we’re going to have hospitals 
for the people of this fine province of ours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we could talk about various different things. We 
can talk about agriculture. You know, Carrot River Valley is 
well known as probably one of the better agriculture districts 
within this province . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well now 
just a minute, I might have a couple of other people here that 
disagree with me on that. But, Mr. Speaker, we have a great 
agriculture area, great innovative farmers. 
 
And remember, Mr. Speaker, when the NDP never used to fund 
crop insurance? Do you remember, Mr. Speaker, when they 
used to say, the education portion on farm land, yes, they were 
going to take that off? And they said it, well, quite a few times. 
I think Tommy Douglas said it one time. Lorne Calvert said it 
one time, and quite a few of them said it. But you know what 

they did? They never acted on it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It took this government to act on it. And you know, we’re 
putting this money into agriculture to keep our farmers there 
because this is a multi-billion-dollar industry. Under the NDP, 
under the NDP, they would not even look at trade over in Asia. 
They didn’t think that that was very important. That was just, 
you know, why should we go and try and deal with them? Let’s 
just keep the Wheat Board, and everybody should grow wheat 
and sell it through the government. That was their idea under 
the NDP. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, since this government has been in power, 
that has changed. I know that our minister has been over to 
India quite a few times. Now we’re finding all of our lentils, our 
peas, we have a lot of these crops that are going over there, Mr. 
Speaker. This is making money for the good people of 
Saskatchewan, for the good farmers, the hard-working farmers 
in this province that are very innovative, as was mentioned by 
the member from Saltcoats, on having the new varieties of 
crops coming up. And people are going out there, and they’re 
marketing them. And you know what? They’re making money 
at it because they are not constrained under the Canadian Wheat 
Board. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, some of the other things that are still 
coming out within this budget that are great things is our 
revenue sharing with our various communities, with our cities, 
our towns, our villages, and our rural municipalities. Remember 
back in the dark days when the NDP was there and, you know, 
people in our RMs had to go begging to the NDP to get a grant 
for a bridge or get this or get that because the NDP would never 
give them, the NDP would never give them any money? 
 
And I’ve just got just a few of our RMs in here that I would like 
to bring up and see some of the increases here. In 2007-2008, 
the RM of Hudson Bay received $262,000. It’s now up to 
$318,000. RM of Bjorkdale, $239,000; it’s up to 370. RM of 
Tisdale: 130,000, up to 263,000. The RM of Arborfield: 
116,000, up to 252,000. RM of Connaught: 131,000, up to 
297,000. The RM of Moose Range: 247,000 to $431,000; RM 
of Nipawin: 216,000 to 391. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are just RMs in the constituency where I’m 
at. This is great money for these people. It keeps them having to 
go on bended knee to a government to try and get money. This 
is money that they can get out from the government that is 
guaranteed to be there and it helps out their budgeting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we could also talk about our small towns. You 
take the little town where I was born, Arborfield. It went from 
35,000 to $76,000, Mr. Speaker. Carrot River, Carrot River 
went from 98,000 to 231,000. We could go through this all the 
way through here and we see our cities, our towns, are being 
advantaged by having this. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, all the NDP can sit there and think about is 
the Leap Manifesto. I just had to bring up the Leap Manifesto, 
Mr. Speaker. You know, what a leap of faith and backwards 
thinking. They actually want to stop . . . Here we have our 
agriculture, a multi-billion-dollar industry and they say, I don’t 
think we should have trade. Here we have our oil industry 
who’s struggling right now. They don’t want any pipelines. 



June 6, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 333 

[Inaudible] . . . we have a potash industry. Well no, that’s trade 
too, so I think we should cancel that out. No, we’re all going to 
go . . . We’re all going to rub two sticks together to make a fire 
and live out in the bush. It might get a little chilly in the 
wintertime but, Mr. Speaker, that’s okay. It’s a good idea 
because it was brought up by a great socialist philosophy, and 
that I just really, really question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And speaking of that, I just got a little, little something here to 
read to you, if I can find it here in amongst my papers. Now, 
Mr. Speaker, actually this is a quote, Mr. Speaker. It’s been 
hanging down in our office. But it reminds me the socialist 
philosophy, and it’s a quote. I’m going to quote from Dr. 
Adrian Rogers, and it was done back in 1931 and it says: 
 

You cannot legislate the poor into freedom by legislating 
the wealthy out of freedom. What one person receives 
without working for, another person must work for without 
receiving. The government cannot give to anybody 
anything that the government does not first take from . . . 
[someone] else. When half of the people get the idea that 
they do not have to work because the other half is going to 
take care of them, and when the other half gets the idea 
that it does no good to work because somebody else is 
going to get what they worked for, that my dear friend, is 
about the end of any nation. You cannot multiply wealth 
by dividing it. 

 
[20:30] 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that was what, under the NDP, that’s what 
they wanted to do with our province. They wanted to basically 
shut it down. And that’s what you would have ended up with in 
the Leap Manifesto that I’m not going to say every member 
over there signed on to, but we do know that some did. And 
anyway . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And the member over 
there is saying he doesn’t know what I’m talking about. Well I 
guess I . . . Hey, I’m just reading what’s reported, so . . . 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, but I think we should take a look at our 
budget on the revenue sharing. I just have a few numbers here 
from some of our things that we’ve done within the 
constituency of Carrot River Valley. Now you talk . . . With this 
revenue sharing, which is kept intact by this Finance minister 
and this government, Tisdale revenues went up from $304,000 
to 731 in this past, since 2007 until now. Nipawin went from 
414,000 to 980,000 in revenue sharing. Revenue sharing for 
Hudson Bay went from 169,000 in 2007 to 347,000. Mr. 
Speaker, this is responsible government. This is letting our 
other, smaller governments, our governments that are around 
the province, all of our communities . . . This gives them fair 
recognition for what they do and they don’t have to go begging, 
cup in hand, to the provincial government all the time to get 
money. 
 
Then you look at the education, because this was brought up too 
at different times. You know, we’ve had an increase of . . . The 
North East School Division has increased 19.4 per cent from 
2007. We have Advanced Education, which is another one. You 
know, this government has built a new building in Nipawin, 
Cumberland community college, which I’m a great believer in. 
And that came out of advanced education over the years, where 
you’re seeing more and more of that. The Kelsey Trail Health 

Region, 50.1 per cent increase since 2007. Mr. Speaker, this is 
why I don’t have people calling our office anymore because our 
health system is doing far better than it did under the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can go on and on with all these various 
different things. The highways, like, I mean . . . Let’s face it, 
the highways in Saskatchewan under the previous 
administration were a joke, an absolute joke. And, Mr. Speaker, 
the member from Athabasca sits there and he claims that we’re 
never doing anything for the highways up in northern 
Saskatchewan. In this budget they are up 100 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is what’s keeping this province going. And, I 
guess, speaking of northern Saskatchewan because that is 
brought up by the member of Cumberland and the member 
from Athabasca every now and then . . . well every now and 
then? Basically every day. Let’s just take a look at some of the 
numbers they have gotten in revenue sharing. Creighton, 
$252,000 to $1,247,000. Excuse me — $452,000. I said that 
wrong, sorry. La Ronge, 634,000 to 1,719,000; Air Ronge, 
322,000 to $978,000; Beauval, $382,000 to 764,000; Buffalo 
Narrows — now the member would just stop your complaining 
about Buffalo Narrows — 541,000 to $1,222,000 in revenue 
sharing. Mr. Speaker, this is Cumberland House. We have the 
member from Cumberland over there, went from 495,000 to 
$882,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you start looking at all these things that have 
happened here within this province within the past eight years 
we’ve been in, the way the province has moved forward even 
under trying times, we are actually moving the province 
forward. 
 
Now we’re going to be looking at more ways . . . and I can’t 
even explain it as well. Actually, the best person explaining 
transformational change was actually my seatmate, the member 
from Kelvington-Wadena who went through the whole process 
and explained transformational change. And, Mr. Speaker, this 
is something that this government is going to be working on to 
see how we can improve this province even better than it 
already is. 
 
So in closing, Mr. Speaker, what I want to do is, again I want to 
thank our Finance minister. I want to thank the ministries for all 
the work that they have done. And I will definitely be 
supporting the budget and I will not be supporting the 
amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. A 
pleasure once again to stand up and give my reply to yet 
another budget. I’m triply privileged and honoured, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, privileged and honoured to serve the great people of 
Lumsden-Morse, privileged and honoured as the Minister of 
Agriculture to serve the farmers and ranchers and 
agribusinesses of this great province, and privileged and 
honoured, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to be able to speak in this 
beautiful place. Never a day goes by that I don’t think about 
how privileged we all are to come to work here. 
 
Before I go much farther, at the end of my remarks, I will 



334 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2016 

obviously be supporting this budget. But before I move on, I 
want to thank and congratulate our Minister of Finance, our 
treasury board members, and the deputy minister of Finance 
and her great officials. I know that months and months of work 
have gone into preparing this budget and it’s been a gruelling 
task. It hasn’t been easy. 
 
And you know, before I move into the Agriculture budget 
which I’ll obviously want to talk about, I want to take a minute 
to speak about the overall provincial budget. And I think it’s 
fair to say, and trite, that low natural resource prices are not 
what any of us had hoped for, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s caused 
challenges for many people in our province and certainly 
challenges for those that I mentioned in preparing this 
provincial budget. 
 
However, if our government has done our work — which we 
have — and with strategic investments and infrastructure and so 
on, and sound economic policies, we will weather this storm. 
And while the low commodity prices have definitely caused a 
challenge when it comes to the provincial budget, our economy 
remains diversified and resilient. Let me assure you, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we have the capacity to manage these difficult 
times. This budget is our government’s commitment to keep 
Saskatchewan strong. 
 
Each year our government develops the province’s fiscal plan 
and budget with careful attention to all areas of revenues and 
expenses. And while historically we have been very good at 
managing expenses, this year we are beginning to take a closer 
look at how we generate revenue. This budget is about 
controlling what we can control and setting things up to balance 
the budget for next year. And we will have honoured our 
commitment of no tax increases in this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now more than ever, a strong agriculture industry is important. 
And, Mr. Speaker, while some tough decisions had to be made, 
we will continue to invest where we need to to provide better 
quality of life and better services for the people of 
Saskatchewan. With this budget, we will keep agriculture 
strong to keep Saskatchewan strong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as Minister of Agriculture I want to spend quite a 
bit of time talking about the agriculture portion of this budget. 
The Ministry of Agriculture’s budget for 2016-17 is $389.8 
million, a 7.5 per cent increase over last year. The increase 
comes from an additional $14.6 million to fully fund business 
risk management programs. We are honouring our 
commitments and are offering the same programs as we have 
over the past eight years. And while the ministry will 
experience some expense reductions from a decrease in 
amortization costs and some operational savings, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, there will be no impact on programming, customer 
service, or staffing. 
 
This year we are budgeting $254.6 million to fully fund 
business risk management programs which include crop 
insurance, AgriStability, AgriInvest, and western livestock price 
insurance. These are all cost shared 60/40 between federal and 
provincial governments. 
 
The crop insurance budget for 2016 is $166 million. On average 
coverage levels are increasing to a record $216 per acre, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, up from $183 per acre in 2015. The improved 
coverage is a result of better forecasted crop prices and 
increased long-term yields. Due to an increase in coverage the 
premium per acre is going up slightly to an average of $7.84 per 
acre from $7.06 in 2015. 
 
Our government understands that crop insurance is a major part 
of farmers’ risk protection. Since 2008, when our government 
first reviewed the crop insurance program, we have been 
focused on making continual improvements to ensure it remains 
relevant and effective for producers. 
 
In the theme of continuous improvement, more enhancements 
have been introduced for the crop insurance program. The 
insurable area for fava beans has expanded to include the entire 
province and insurable yields have increased, reflecting 
increased production. Insurance for Khorasan wheat has 
improved as producers can now receive individual coverage for 
their farms. Previously coverage for this crop was based on area 
averages, and in response to the experience growers have 
gained with camelina, an establishment benefit value of $30 per 
acre has been added. 
 
Also in response to industry feedback, we have made 
improvements to our forage insurance offering. This year 
producers will have higher forage coverage, as insured prices 
have risen more than 30 per cent and forage establishment 
coverage has increased from 55 to $70 per acre and the cap on 
the forage insurance variable and in-season price option has 
been removed. This will allow for an increase in the market 
price of forage to be reflected in the claim payments of 
producers who seek these options. Forage insurance proved 
effective in 2015 as substantial payments were made to 
producers following a spring frost and dry conditions. Beyond 
business risk management programs, our government is also 
once again committing $71.2 million through Growing Forward 
into strategic initiatives. 
 
For the most part, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we will continue with 
the same programming and support as previous years including 
$26.8 million for agricultural research and innovation. We will 
also continue to provide programming for water infrastructure, 
value-added agribusinesses, and to support environmental 
practices on farms. We’re also once again providing $4.2 
million in industry grants, which is the same as last year, for 
things such as 4-H, Ag in the Classroom, Agribition, Farm 
Progress Show, to name just a few. 
 
One other item we announced in this year’s budget is a change 
to the agricultural Crown land sale program. As a government, 
we have been upfront from the start about our thoughts on 
government owning farm land. Our interest is only in 
administering land that has a higher public good from an 
ecological, environmental, heritage, or economic perspective. 
We are not interested in owning land that will be better held in 
the hands of producers, those who could realize the benefits of 
ownership. And that is why we introduced the original 
agricultural Crown land sale program in 2008 and why we 
rolled out a similar program in November of last year, the 2015 
agricultural Crown land sale program. 
 
[20:45] 
 



June 6, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 335 

Through these programs we have sold more than 540,000 acres 
of Crown land. Our government will continue to focus on the 
sale of Crown land that has no further public benefit. The 
ministry expects to generate $148 million in net earnings from 
land sales during 2016-17. This is an ambitious goal but one our 
government has been working toward for the past seven years. 
Owning farm land is not a business the government needs to be 
in. We are actively encouraging the sale of Crown land to 
current leaseholders and we will continue to do so throughout 
this year. 
 
We will also be discounting the 2015 agricultural Crown land 
sale program . . . discontinuing that is, the Crown land sale 
program one year early. The program, which offers purchase 
incentives on the sale of eligible Crown land, will end on 
December 31st, 2016. We will not be offering the final year of 
the program and that means there will be no more incentive to 
purchase Crown land that is currently leased after the end of 
this year. However the 30 per cent rental premium will stay in 
effect for 2017, and any cultivated or previously cultivated land 
that is eligible for sale that has not been purchased will continue 
to be subject to rental premium increases in upcoming years. So 
I would encourage farmers and ranchers that lease eligible 
Crown land to purchase it sooner rather than later. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP has quite a history. You know, in the 
1940s when they came to government in this province — I 
think it was 1944 — they had a doc they called the Regina 
Manifesto. The Regina Manifesto, unbelievably in North 
America, called for an end to capitalism and sadly, Mr. 
Speaker, the Regina Manifesto was still on their website up 
until I think a year or two ago. 
 
You know, they became government in 1944 and they did the 
things then that they did when they were last in government. 
They invested taxpayers’ money in ill-conceived investments, 
and I use those terms to be generous. You know, I’m not aware 
of all of the investments that they made in the ’40s and ’50s, 
Mr. Speaker, but I know of a couple and here’s a couple of my 
favourites, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
One of the investments was a cardboard box factory. I think that 
one actually did make some cardboard boxes but then it went 
broke, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as all NDP investments always 
have, always likely will. But my all-time favourite, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, of their investments back in that era, was the shoe 
factory. They made shoes — not Birkenstocks either, Mr. 
Speaker. Well they had a shoe factory. I can’t say they actually 
ever did make a shoe — never saw anybody that wore one or 
even admitted they saw them — but they had a factory that 
went broke and lost a whole lot of taxpayers’ money, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In about 1957 there was a famous debate in Mossbank between 
Tommy Douglas and Ross Thatcher where they debated this 
kind of foolishness that we’re talking about that started in the 
1940s and ended in 2007, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The shoe 
factory was a big one of course but, you know, there have been 
all sorts of other crazy NDP investments over the years. 
 
In the 1970s, the Blakeney government presided over a 
commodities boom unlike one we’ve ever seen up until the 
present. It was huge. I mean when you compare the cost of 

production in agriculture and mining and oil and gas, the profits 
were very substantial in those days, certainly higher than 
anything we’ve seen recently. And you know, what did they do 
with the money that they generated in the 1970s? Did they build 
infrastructure? Did they put it into health and education and 
social services? No, no, no, they didn’t. They spent it 
principally on two things, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They spent it on 
the land bank. 
 
The land bank, that was a sweetheart. They purchased farm land 
at above market value, substantially above in lots of cases, 
driving up the price of farm land — in a time when there was a 
commodities boom, don’t forget — and farm land prices were 
already going north. They did that, and in so doing . . . And of 
course when they purchased this land then they turned it over 
either to the families they bought it from or other qualified NDP 
families generally. And by doing this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they 
kept, you know, young farmers like I was in those days and I 
bet you were, Mr. Deputy Speaker, out of the landowning 
business. They drove the price of land. The land bank land was 
not available to farmers like myself. You had to have NDP 
credentials, and I didn’t, I’m happy to say. And so that’s how 
they spent some of the money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the most ridiculous waste of the profits from that boom in 
the 1970s was their purchase of potash mines. These were not 
new investments to the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. These 
were potash mines we already had. And not only did they buy 
these potash mines but after they bought them, the 
government-owned potash mines couldn’t break even because 
they were so well managed. And so the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan not only had to buy half the potash industry at a 
cost of billions and forgo the profits and taxes and royalties that 
they’d been paying, but they also had to subsidize the operation 
of those potash mines that they had purchased. Mr. Speaker, 
that is how the NDP, through their series of budgets in the ’70s, 
handled the wealth that was generated in that commodity and 
resource boom in the 1970s. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a long list of failed NDP investments from 
the ’90s and up until 2007. You know, I think of Channel Lake; 
Guyana, South America; NST Chicago; Persona Inc. from 
Newfoundland; Retx.com, an Atlanta dot-com company, Mr. 
Speaker; tappedinto.com out of Nashville; Clickabid, their 
Internet auction business; Soft Tracks Enterprises; Navigata, a 
BC telecom; Craig Wireless, a Manitoba Internet company; 
Coachman Insurance, an Ontario insurance company, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker; Agdealer, farm equipment Internet site; 
SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company]; mega bingo. They lost $8 million playing bingo, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. Austar Communications out of Australia. 
They bought Minds Eye Entertainment, their money-losing 
movie company. Business Watch International and Clinicare. 
The total losses out of those investments, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
were $303.42 million. And then there was a list of 20 
agriculture investments that they wrote off, all of them. Wrote 
them off. None of them made money, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
They blew the money. 
 
And you know, Saskatchewan was the first jurisdiction in North 
America to elect a socialist government in 1944. We were the 
North American socialist experiment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a 
failed socialist experiment that cost our province 65 years of 



336 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2016 

progress. Decades of our best and brightest young people left. 
We saw our infrastructure deteriorate. We saw 52 hospitals 
closed, 176 schools closed. But did they learn anything from 
any of that? No, they didn’t. And in this year, 2016, they’ve 
endorsed the Leap Manifesto. They’re big over there on 
manifestos, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This one though is a 
document that would end modern agriculture and resource 
extraction. Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s what we do in 
Saskatchewan. We practise modern agriculture and we extract 
resources. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, you know, people need to know, people need 
to know about this and that’s why I’m happy to stand in this 
beautiful place and explain it. They haven’t learned anything, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and they would do it all over again. And 
that’s why the voters of this province won’t ever likely elect 
them again as the government. 
 
And you know what they do, Mr. Deputy Speaker, every day? 
Almost every day they stand up in here and they complain that 
they would have liked to have done the good things that we did 
as government, but they didn’t have any money. Well they tried 
. . . They blame the federal government and the previous 
provincial government and they blame us and they blame 
everybody else they could think of. They blame the 
circumstances. They blame everybody but themselves because 
they spent the money, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I better probably get back to the budget. 
And in closing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the budget is a clear 
demonstration of our government’s commitment to our 
economy and our social institutions and, from my perspective 
as Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Speaker, to our farmers and 
ranchers and agribusinesses. We recognize agriculture’s role as 
a resilient and stable contributor to Saskatchewan’s economy. 
 
With the growth plan as our guide, we have been building and 
strengthening our industry with the goal of making 
Saskatchewan a global agricultural leader. Our government’s 
commitment to agriculture is unwavering. We have delivered 
the eight largest agricultural budgets in history and continue to 
offer business risk management programs that help farmers and 
ranchers to be innovative and to expand their operations. And 
we’re on the right track. Our industry has met some of our 
growth plan targets already and are well on our way to reaching 
the remainder. 
 
In 2015 alone, we set a record for agricultural exports, brought 
in the second largest harvest in Saskatchewan’s history, and hit 
an all-time high for realized net farm income. The strength and 
profitability of our industry is evident. The net farm income for 
Saskatchewan is expected to reach record levels again, and the 
growing strength in the cattle and hog industry, along with 
strong crop sales, will continue to sustain the agricultural 
economy and I’m confident that we will continue to see 
success. We have hard-working and dedicated farmers, 
ranchers, and agribusinesses, and as a government we will 
remain committed to working with them to ensure success. 
Together we will keep Saskatchewan strong, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and accordingly I will be supporting the budget and 
not the amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

. . . from Moose Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Moose Jaw North. Thank you, Mr. Speaker, 
and thank you to my colleague, the Minister of Agriculture, for 
such a fine rendition of agriculture in our province and what has 
been done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to start out too by acknowledging the work 
of our Finance minister and the good work that he’s done. This 
is a fair budget. It realizes the needs of our citizens and 
understands the current income challenges that this province is 
currently facing. And, Mr. Speaker, our Finance minister did a 
great job, along with his staff and the public employees in the 
ministry that have worked for a long time to bring this budget to 
the public. And like I said, it is a fair budget and deserves a lot 
of credit. 
 
[21:00] 
 
I also want to acknowledge the hard-working people of the 
province in every sector because it is a strong province. It’s a 
diverse province in farming and education, construction, 
mining, research, forestry, ranching, and many other sectors 
that they . . . The people of this province love this province. 
They have a great pride in it and work very hard to see that this 
province continues to strengthen and be strong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a $14 billion budget, and that’s a large amount 
when we think of operating the province. But when it comes to 
putting a budget together, it’s a best guess at a point in time, 
and taking all the information we can get at one particular time, 
putting it together and coming out and making a best guess on 
where we would be with the income and with the expenses that 
we incur. 
 
So we appreciate the understanding of the people of 
Saskatchewan that understand that at this point in time a small 
deficit budget is probably the best thing for the province, as we 
look at this best guess in time. And we did the same thing last 
year when we did the budgeting, the best guess in time. But 
who could have predicted the fall in the resource commodities 
of $1 billion? It was so unpredictable, and of course it was 
uncontrollable at that time to see what was coming down. And 
it ended up in what it is today, that we have oil prices that have 
reached a bottom. And fortunately the oil prices are showing 
significant gains, little by little, so we’re hoping that that will 
come back to assist us in our future of the province. 
 
The potash also is low, but what you’ve got to realize in the 
province of Saskatchewan with the great asset of potash that we 
have . . . And you think of the great mines of the world that are 
in the industry of potash, and to think that their best experts can 
see that potash is what is in the future and the huge optimism 
that the industry has. When I think of K+S industry that is 
building a brand new mine, the first mine in somewhere around 
60 years . . . BHP Billiton also has a new mine in construction 
near LeRoy. We also look at the massive investment that 
Mosaic has paid in putting their investment into potash mines 
that are currently in Saskatchewan. In the news today Yancoal 
is also considering a mine and all that goes with it. 
 
The world is watching Saskatchewan. They’re watching for 
leadership. They’re looking for leadership, and they understand 



June 6, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 337 

the food supply. And Saskatchewan has what they need, and 
now a big part of that is the agricultural products and of course 
potash for agricultural nourishment around the world. So potash 
will be strong, and the $434 million deficit is something that we 
will accept at this time for the betterment of the province in the 
long term by investing in people and infrastructure and keeping 
the province moving forward. 
 
There are three choices we can make when we look at the 
situation of a deficit. And the first one of course is we could 
raise taxes, which the NDP did for many years. In fact they 
raised them 21 times in 16 years. But when you raise taxes, Mr. 
Speaker, people lose confidence. If you put up the PST 
[provincial sales tax], they stop spending. They lose their 
confidence, and the same with the corporations. If you increase 
corporate taxes, which we have lowered to attract investment, if 
you increase that, you stop that traction for investment in the 
province and obviously it hurts the economy. It also could lead 
to the stop of investment and possible layoffs and higher 
unemployment. So raising taxes is really a very poor option. 
That’s what the NDP did in their tenure. That’s something that 
we don’t want to do because we want to keep this province 
strong and the economy strong. 
 
We could also cut programs, but when you think of cutting 
programs you start thinking of health care, which is very much 
needed. In fact under the NDP, as has been pointed out several 
times, we had the longest wait-list in Canada and we’ve got it 
down to the shortest wait-list. We know we’ve got a ways to go. 
There’s always lots to do, especially in health care, but that’s 
just one area that we don’t want to cut programs in to save 
money and stop the deficit. 
 
We’ve come up with new cancer drugs that have been brought 
into and have been added to the formulary, so that again if you 
cut programs, do you cut those and not include them? That’s 
really not the right thing to do. 
 
When we think of education, our children of course are our 
future and need all the investment we can put into education. So 
we can’t cut school, education or school spending to save taxes 
and stop the deficit. 
 
The other way we could do it obviously besides raising taxes or 
cutting programs is to face the deficit, and that’s what this 
government has chosen to do. That’s what the Finance minister 
said on budget day, and it really is the right thing. For $434 
million on a $14 million budget, it’s a plan for and a planned 
for balancing the budget in the next fiscal year. It was a tough 
choice but it was the right choice, and I believe that the people 
of Saskatchewan understand it. At least all the people that I’ve 
talked to from my contacts, not only in my constituency but 
other contacts that I have talked to in the last six days, also 
agreed that it was the right choice, and Saskatchewan needs it. 
 
We’ve come a long way. We’ve built a strong economy, a 
provincial economy, and we want to keep moving forward. We 
want to improve health care and we have done so with 
hospitals, with senior care homes, with daycares. We have more 
doctors and more nurses working in the province and 
everywhere than any time in the past. 
 
Highways and transportation are very important to our economy 

because we have to transport our goods to ports for exporting 
and importing. So transportation and highways is important. 
Education, as I said, is important, and job creation, keeping our 
children here, attracting investment with lower taxes and 
creating opportunities and, above all, a positive attitude for this 
great province to keep it moving forward. So there are no tax 
increases, which sends a message of confidence to consumers 
and to business, an investment for the province, investing in 
strong government programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, education is a top priority for this government. We 
have increased education by 7.8 per cent or $2.2 billion, 
including over 390 million for capital investments, the finishing 
of 18 joint-use schools, the preventative maintenance, building 
repairs. We’re creating the creation of child care spaces, over 
800 new child care spaces; increasing support for students with 
intensive needs, students in vulnerable circumstances, and 
English as a second language programs. That’s what’s keeping 
Saskatchewan strong, those kind of investments and those kind 
of programs. 
 
In health, a record of $5.17 billion, a 1.1 increase in health. 
Now since 2007 we have increased the health budget in 
Saskatchewan by over 15 per cent . . . by over 50 per cent. 
Health infrastructure, like new hospitals in Saskatoon and in 
North Battleford. My colleague from Moose Jaw Wakamow 
mentioned the new hospital in Moose Jaw in my constituency, 
which was promised by the former government but never 
delivered. The new hospital includes an MRI [magnetic 
resonance imaging], the first MRI in rural Saskatchewan 
outside the major centres, a CT [computerized tomography] 
scan, the hyperbaric chamber, all part of the better services that 
we can provide for the people of Moose Jaw, the Five Hills 
Health Region, and certainly help the waiting list for the people 
of Saskatchewan throughout. So our waiting times have been 
reduced and we will continue to do that with a $20 million 
increase to help shorten surgical wait times and reduce wait 
times for surgery and diagnostic services, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot to be said about this budget. The 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency will see an increase of $9.8 
million to substantially increase the funding to help pay for an 
additional 15 new cancer drugs that were approved last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve talked to you about some of the services 
that are provided for the people of Saskatchewan. Social 
services will have a 5 per cent increase for programs for 
children, for youth and families, people experiencing 
disabilities, and people needing income assistance in housing. 
$3.4 million will address the emerging needs for those with 
intellectual disabilities and support the transition of individuals 
from Valley View Centre in Moose Jaw as homes and programs 
become available. And, Mr. Speaker, that movement has 
already started and there’s a number of these homes in my 
constituency. And I know that there has been some concern by 
the neighbourhoods where they are but I can assure you on 
visiting a few of them that the people there are very well 
maintained, very well looked after. And the residents that move 
into these are doing much better without having a room of 50 
people in a bedroom or multiple people in showers. So the 
people are enjoying their new life in these homes and it’s good 
for them. It’s good for Moose Jaw. It’s good for the 
neighbourhoods. 



338 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2016 

Mr. Speaker, when we look at highways and infrastructure, 
there’s a continued need to grow the highway infrastructure, 
and with the biggest investment ever, $1.15 billion. The need to 
move products is important for Saskatchewan. Being 
landlocked, that’s how we get our product to market. And as 
you know, Saskatchewan is in fact an exporting province so this 
year the budget will present a three-year, 70 million surge to fix 
more highways including overpasses and highway 
improvement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to spend a few minutes on this idea of a 
hidden budget that the NDP have been talking about and saying 
for some time. And really, I’ve asked them on several 
occasions, what are they talking about and I never get a straight 
answer. But when you think of the election and think of the 
province of Saskatchewan, there really were two major parties 
that could form a government. And one of us, one of the parties, 
the Saskatchewan Party obviously had a positive record and a 
plan, an open, honest government to grow and to take care of 
the people. 
 
The other side . . . Well they say that they were prepared to 
form government but really, Mr. Speaker, there’s no indication 
of that. They too had a record, and it was a record of decline, a 
record of cuts, a record of closures and mismanagement. And 
the Minister of Agriculture went through some of the 
investments and I just want to mention a couple of them, 
notably the Big Sky farm that lost $26 million; Navigata 
Communications, another $90 million; and of course the 
famous SPUDCO, their infamous SPUDCO potato company 
that lost $35 million. 
 
And I won’t go on the list because it does go on and on. But 
there was over $329 million of people’s money, of 
Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money, that got lost by bad NDP 
investments, lost ventures, inefficient planning, 
underperformance, and being unprepared. 
 
So they talked about this hidden budget. And as we went 
through the election they mentioned the hidden budget, and it 
was even talked about tonight by the members opposite. But, 
Mr. Speaker, if they were a party actually ready to and willing 
to form government, wouldn’t they have had a plan of how they 
would have looked at the income? Where was their operation 
ledger? Where was their unexplained income going to be spent? 
Where was the programs to balance their proposed budget? 
How high was their taxes going to be raised? How high was the 
PST going to be put up, because that’s what they do. How much 
income tax would be increased, and how much property tax 
would also go in? How much would the corporate tax go up? 
These were the things that they would have in their budget. 
They’re saying ours was hidden, but they didn’t have a plan at 
all. All they had was a plan to spend money, but nothing that 
would substantiate where the money was going to come from or 
how they were going to put it together. 
 
I wonder how many schools they would have closed. Would it 
be perhaps another 176? Or how many hospitals they might 
have wanted to close, as they did in the past with the doctors 
leaving and the nurses leaving? That was their record, Mr. 
Speaker. And how many highways wouldn’t have been built or 
maintained? How many businesses would have been closed or 
shut down, and how many people would have again moved out 

of the province? That would have been their budget. They talk 
about our hidden budget. That was the plan that they . . . That 
was their record. And their plan would be similar to that 
because they didn’t have a plan to put forward, even though 
they’re saying that we had some kind of a hidden budget. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are much, much more 
astute than that. They could see this, and that’s why the election 
was what the election was. 
 
[21:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, they had no plan and they had no leadership. They 
continue to live in the past with outdated ideas and make up 
assumptions that are simply not true. And we see that everyday 
in question period, where a number of preambles on the 
questions that they ask in question period have to be corrected 
because they can’t even work out a proper question with the 
facts that are correct in going forward. 
 
That party has no basis for governing, for no growth, and no 
budget for the economy. And the people of Saskatchewan 
realize that and understand the new path of the economic 
development. And there is a better life for Saskatchewan 
citizens. The new governance is to grow the economy, 
including keeping our youth in the province and having people 
return to the province that have moved away. The new path is to 
attract investment, assist the needs of people, and grow our 
strong economy. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, our budget does just that. The budget is well 
thought; it’s a well-planned document to keep Saskatchewan 
strong. Accepting the current year deficit, with a target to 
balance in 2017-2018, is a good plan. It maintains maintaining a 
high credit rating. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are no tax increases. There is controlling of 
the spending. We’re investing in people and investing in 
infrastructure. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re keeping Saskatchewan 
strong. Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the amendment, 
but I certainly will be supporting the budget that was brought 
down last week. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s a pleasure to join in the response to budget speeches this 
evening, and I’m happy to put a few comments on the record. 
 
And first, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is something that made me 
look at the future of the province very heavily today. My wife 
and I were able to see our first ultrasound of our third baby 
coming in December. So when you go through some of these 
special occasions in your life, it takes you a minute to step back, 
and you want to look back at some of the choices you made in 
your life, obviously. And I think as a politician we should, I 
think as a politician we should review choices we make all the 
time. That’s what part of this budget’s about. 
 
But first of all, first of all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to 
say hi to my wife and a couple of family members watching 
tonight. I had time to listen to the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale’s speech a little bit, and she went on a theme about 



June 6, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 339 

mean-spiritedness and the mean-spiritedness on this side. And I 
think she may misread our emotions and our feelings a little bit, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’re not mean-spirited on this side of 
the House. We’re just a little upset, and I’ll give you a bit of 
family history why I’m a little bit upset about some of the 
things that happened in the past. 
 
I’m upset because my one sister lives in Halifax because she 
saw no choices to get employment in Saskatchewan. I’m upset 
because my other sister lives in Minneapolis and I don’t get to 
see them very often. That’s why I’m upset. I’m not 
mean-spirited, I’m upset because usually the only time I get to 
see some of my loved ones is Christmas every three or four 
years, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
That’s one of the reasons she may be misreading on this side of 
the House, some emotions that I would say are . . . And the 
upsetness comes from the fact that we always knew 
Saskatchewan could be better. Saskatchewan’s potential, I 
believe, we feel was never lived up to for a long, long time. 
 
I think upon review some of the choices that were made . . . The 
member from Lumsden-Morse went over it much better than I 
can because he was there for the Thatcher-Douglas speech 
debate, I believe, in Mossbank. Actually I think he was there for 
that debate, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I don’t know if he was 
there in the 1940s when they made the land bank decision, but I 
believe he was there for the Thatcher-Douglas debate. And 
that’s history; that’s one of the hallmarks of Saskatchewan. 
That was one of the greatest debates in Saskatchewan history 
about the debate of ideas, which I think this legislature should 
be in.  
 
I believe the member from Douglas Park agrees with me; the 
debate’s about ideas. And I think when you bring emotions into 
this debate, which they should be, they should be directed for 
the right reasons. And I think the emotions on this side of the 
House are to keep Saskatchewan strong, to ensure that 
Saskatchewan, our province, lives up to its potential. 
 
To be able to say to our kids, and to my two-and-some kids, that 
when you graduate from high school, there are some great 
post-secondary institutions. There are great institutions that you 
can go to and seek higher education. And then after you’re done 
choosing your higher education, there are opportunities for you 
to work and live in this province, so that you don’t have to just 
come home at Christmas every couple of years, so your families 
can have family suppers every Sunday and get together and talk 
about your week, I think that’s what we are focused on on this 
side of the House. We’re focused on maintaining opportunities 
for our young people and for people all across the province. 
 
I know the member from Melville-Saltcoats gave a great speech 
tonight and talked about all the different businesses and all the 
different constituents he was able to go and travel around and 
meet in his constituency right after the budget and talk about it. 
And we had some of those same opportunities in Regina. 
 
I believe we had some people that did have some questions 
about the budget in our office, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’re not 
going to sit here and say there wasn’t hard choices that needed 
to be made. There was hard choices that we had to make as a 
government. And I commend the treasury board, the members 

of the treasury board that work tirelessly after the election to 
make sure that there was a good budget to present, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I commend the Minister of Finance. He did a lot of 
work, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in ensuring that he could present a 
budget that the people of Saskatchewan knew was fair, honest, 
and invested in their priorities. 
 
We also talked with . . . They talk about the campaign and they 
say, you never campaigned on this. You never campaigned on a 
budget that would be a deficit. You never campaigned on 
making cuts. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s not completely 
true. When I campaigned in Regina Walsh Acres, I campaigned 
and I made three commitments. I said, we’re going to have a 
deficit budget, ’16-17. We’re going to get back into the black in 
’17-18. I’m going to put your priorities first. To my 
constituents, we said, we’re going to put our priorities first. 
We’re going to say we’re going to invest in people. We’re 
going to invest in infrastructure, and we’re going to continue to 
build this province. 
 
So the budget that was presented by our Finance minister, the 
member from Regina Northeast, we put 74 per cent of our 
budget into health, education, and social services. I don’t think 
that anyone can go into their constituency and knock on a door 
and say, we’re going to present a budget that puts 74 per cent of 
your money, your taxpayers’ dollars — because it’s their 
money, it’s not the government’s money — into health, 
education, and social services, there wouldn’t be a person, I 
believe, in Saskatchewan that would think that’s a bad idea, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. So we did campaign on that as well. 
 
And we also campaigned and we said, we have a revenue 
problem, but that shouldn’t be your problem as a taxpayer. So I 
went to doors in Walsh Acres and we campaigned on no new 
taxes. We kept every one of those promises in this budget; I 
want to thank the Finance minister very much for that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, listen to a few of the comments made by 
the member from Saskatoon Riversdale: she did bring up that 
seniors pay $5 more for drugs, children pay $5 more for drugs. 
She talked about thresholds, and it’s not a universal program 
anymore. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, she didn’t go into the numbers 
unfortunately, which I’m going to do for her. It’s $66,000 at 
threshold; two people can make $66,000 in a household before 
they don’t qualify for the $25 drug program. So if my math is 
correct — and the member from Douglas Park may be able to 
help — that’s $132,000 for a senior couple living, after they’re 
65, that wouldn’t be qualified for that program. So you can 
make up to $131,000 in a household before you don’t qualify. I 
don’t know about you guys, but I believe my parents don’t 
make that much money, I’m pretty sure, when they’re retired. 
So I think that’s a fair bit of money you can make before you 
don’t qualify for that program. So it’s $66,000 a person in a 
household before that. 
 
So I believe that when budgets are tighter, these are some of the 
choices you have to make. And talking with constituents, I 
know that some of the Walsh Acres constituents didn’t qualify 
after we made those changes, but they said, we understand 
sometimes you have to make choices. We understand the fact 
that when you’re going to make some difficult decisions. We 



340 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2016 

understand that those decisions have to be made so that you can 
have a sustainable program. 
 
Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we talk about 
transformational changes, also we talk about it so that we can 
have sustainable programs, a sustainable health care program, 
sustainable programs in social services because, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we know in the next couple of years that revenues are 
tighter, and when revenues are tighter you have to make tough 
decisions. 
 
I think the members opposite . . . And I’m not going to call 
them mean-spirited because I think what their problem is, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is that they still are fighting a campaign from 
1999 or, as the member from Lumsden-Morse said, maybe 
1957. They keep on bringing up old ideas, old ideas that people 
just aren’t understanding anymore. And you talk about the 
Regina Manifesto and the Communist Manifesto and the Leap 
Manifesto, and I’m not going to go through all that because I 
was able to talk about that in my speech, reply from the throne. 
But I think the member from Kindersley said it correctly, 
maybe they should just stay away from manifestos for a while. 
Maybe this isn’t the best idea for them, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
A few more things I’d like to talk about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
a budget that I’m going to definitely be supporting. And some 
of the general highlights of this budget were very well taken by 
the public. I had conversations with quite a few people. Mr. 
Hopkins from the Regina Chamber of Commerce, he was quite 
happy that there was no new taxes. Marilyn Braun-Pollon from 
the Canadian federation of taxpayers, also quite happy that 
there’s no new taxes. We campaigned on that and that’s a 
commitment we made. 
 
Budget 2016-17 continues the government’s support of early 
education and child care across the province. As part of 
joint-use school projects, 810 new child care spaces will be 
developed in Saskatoon, Regina, Warman, and Martensville. 
This budget includes funding of $1.6 million for nearly 200 
previously approved child care spaces. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that’s something that’s quite important to me, and quite 
important to a lot of young families in Saskatchewan now, is 
that they have the opportunities for child care spaces, and they 
have the opportunity for their children to have some place to go 
when they have to go back to work, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Budget ’16-17 also maintains strong investment in 
post-secondary students in education to keep Saskatchewan 
strong. Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions continue to 
receive strong support, including 475 million for the University 
of Saskatchewan and Regina and their affiliated and federated 
colleges; 156 million for the Saskatchewan Polytechnic, the 
Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies, and the Gabriel 
Dumont Institute; and 29 million for Saskatchewan’s regional 
colleges. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s another point of contention that I 
have with our members opposite is talking about the funding for 
secondary education, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and talking about 
that our funding just hasn’t kept up with the rate of growth. 
That’s something where, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m not 
completely sure is a factually correct comment, and I just want 
to put out a few numbers on the record regarding secondary 

education. 
 
Regina board of education, their operating increase since 2007 
is 40.62 per cent and enrolment growth is 8.2 per cent. Total 
operating funding is $221.1 million. I think that’s keeping up 
with the growth that we’ve seen in our schools, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Regina Catholic School Division operating increase 
since ’07 is 39.73 per cent and enrolment growth of 14.2 per 
cent. Mr. Deputy Speaker, these show our commitments to 
secondary education.  
 
So the total operating funding for Regina Catholic school is 
$107.5 million, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I know the member 
opposite from Douglas Park is interested because she knows 
these numbers. But I think she would agree that the numbers I 
just read are correct, I believe. And she’s thinking about it, but 
she’s got a bit of a smile so I think she knows that the numbers 
are pretty close to being right. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I would like to put on record is 
how we’ve shown our support for secondary education. We’ve 
shown it through our actions. We’ve shown it through our 
commitment to funding. We’ve shown our commitment to 
infrastructure funding, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we want our 
children to be able to have the best possible education so that 
they can succeed in whatever future endeavour they choose. 
 
I know that going out and talking with students . . . I’ve been 
able to talk in a few schools in the Regina Walsh Acres 
constituency. And talking with students, I know that they’re so 
much smarter now, students are, than we were. They have so 
much more information right at their fingertips. They know 
more about world events than probably half the adults I know. 
And it’s amazing. 
 
[21:30] 
 
Even my son Nickson, he’s three years old and he knows how 
to run an iPad. He knows how to go on YouTube and look at 
videos. I’m not even sure I really knew how to turn on a 
computer until I was in grade 8 or 9, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
I think to be able to say to students that your future is, you can 
make it whatever you want, our commitment to funding is 
allowing more and more students to reach for the stars and be 
able to reach for every career choice they want, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And I think as a growing province, the province that wants to 
keep its young people in here at home, we need to continue that 
investment. And this budget does that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And it’s a budget where you had to make tough choices, but we 
put education, health, and social services first, and Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that’s exactly, exactly what we campaigned on. 
 
I just want to talk about a few of the headlines that we . . . going 
back looking at some of the headlines. We have great staff in 
this building, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They’re great staff and they 
do some wonderful research and helps us prepare speeches. 
And it’s this day in history headlines. In June 1st, 2005, 
“Politicians should get back to watching the spending.” That’s 
an interesting headline that I think is as relevant now as it was 
back then. I’m not sure they controlled their spending. This is a 
quote from that headline: 



June 6, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 341 

The auditor went on to state that at issue was the security 
of payments, about 550 in total, for meeting rooms, 
equipment rentals, catering, professional services, training, 
travel, and translation services. Of those payments, 200 of 
them resulted in losses of $260,000 and further, 350 
payments that have cost the taxpayers another $240,000. 

 
I think that as elected officials it’s incumbent on us to make 
sure that we safeguard each and every dollar we get from 
taxpayers. And it’s their money, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so we 
have to ensure that we treat their money with the utmost 
respect. As I say, and has been said for a long, long time, 
governments never raised a dollar. Governments never made a 
dollar. The government only takes dollars from people that had 
to work hard and make their money, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
June 2, 2003: “Government’s too secretive.” 2003, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, who was in government then? Hmm. 
 
2004: “Government loses $2.2 million on hogs.” How do you 
lose $2.2 million on hogs, Mr. Deputy Speaker? So it’s an 
article by James Wood. “The NDP government expects to lose 
all of the $2.2 million it invested in Saskatchewan Wheat Pool’s 
money-losing hog subsidiary in what the Saskatchewan Party 
calls yet another failed NDP business gamble.” Those captains 
of industry over there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, June 3, 2003: “SLGA paid for tracking system but 
then backed out of a deal.” This is a funny one. “Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority paid a Regina company nearly 
$300,000 to develop a system to track the sale of bingo cards 
but backed out of the deal with nothing to show for the 
$300,000.” I think the member from Saskatoon Centre could let 
me know who the SLGA minister was in ’03. I wonder who 
made that decision. 
 
2005: “SaskPower’s earned every ounce of suspicion.” This is 
2005. “The NDP campaign promise was after all that we would 
have the lowest utility . . .” This is one of their campaign 
promises from 2016 too. Weird. Recycling, at least they got 
recycling right with their policies. “. . . lowest utility rates in the 
land, not subsidized utility rates in fact. Atkinson initially said 
her NDP government wouldn’t provide general revenue fund 
subsidies to make up the difference.” Broken promise . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . broken promise, member from 
Yorkton. 
 
June 4, 2003: “Crown’s books not as open as they should be:” 
 

Crown Corporations need to give more disclosure on who 
receives money from them and the amount they receive. 
Crown corporations represent about 40 per cent of all 
government spending, yet they disclose less information 
than the rest of government, said Fred Wendel, 
highlighting one of the findings in his ’03 auditor’s report. 

 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m reading some of these to show 
that I know a lot of times the members on the opposite side say 
that we go way too far back in the past, in the history. Why go 
back to the ’50s and ’60s? Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’ve 
made lots of mistakes in their last term in government from 
2000 or 2003-2007 that we can go back and talk about them for 
a little bit. 

2004: “Sask audit shows a problem.” 2005: “Senior waits two 
days in the hospital.” 2003: “Crowns told to be more open.” Oh 
this is a good one. 2006: “Rural health centres face doctor 
shortages, emergency services threatened.” ’06: “Doctor 
shortages force ER closures.” 
 
An Hon. Member: — No. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — It’s true, member from Estevan, it’s true. ’03: 
“Bad highways put MLAs mouths in gear.” This is an 
interesting one. 2006: “Mystery why Sask people continue to 
support the NDP.” Well at least that was ended with, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. June 9th, 2003: “Government given a rough 
ride over state of highways.” And the member from Moose Jaw 
would like this. June 10th, 2004: “SPUDCO countersuit will 
continue with government.” 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s a long list of issues that has faced 
governments throughout Saskatchewan’s history. And I read 
some of those because we’re facing some of the same issues the 
members opposite faced, and I think they’ll realize that there’s 
always going to be some issues. And the member from Yorkton 
does a fantastic job with the Rural and Remote Health. One of 
the problems is trying to recruit doctors to rural and remote 
Saskatchewan. I think it’s an issue that governments face all 
over North America. It’s not a Saskatchewan-specific issue. 
 
But this side of the House will continue to work hard and keep 
its word and try and ensure that there’s the best possible 
services in all of our centres across Saskatchewan. Because I 
believe that throughout our campaign . . . And I’ll go back to 
what I said on the doorsteps to Saskatchewan people and to the 
people of Regina Walsh Acres, is that we’ll commit to not 
raising taxes. We’ll commit to putting the people of 
Saskatchewan’s interests first. And we’ll commit to investing in 
what you want us to invest in, which is health care, education, 
and social services. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s a lot more I’d like to say about 
this budget, and there’s some things that I think we’ll be able to 
debate in the little bit future in some private members’ motions. 
There’s a lot of information in the budget, and there’s 
conversations that we’re going to have with constituents, all of 
our constituents, and talk about what we believe is some of the 
good things in the budget and some low points in the budget. 
Because I’m not scared to have those conversations with our 
constituents in Walsh Acres because I think they deserve to 
know why some of the decisions had to be made, and that was 
based on sustainability. Programs have to be sustainable. 
 
And one of the things I’m looking most forward to is having the 
conversations with the constituents about transformational 
change. Because I think that’s one of the best parts of this 
budget we’re going to talk about because we’re going to review 
all the programs in government . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
And the member from Nutana laughs, says well why haven’t 
you been doing that for the last eight years? Well, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we have, just because there should be a continuous 
review in programs, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I think if you’re 
not doing that as a government, you’re not doing what you 
should for the people of Saskatchewan and for the taxpayers, 
because programs do need to change and programs do need to 
be looked at so that they ensure they’re getting the best money, 



342 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2016 

the best programs for their money, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And when I go on the doorsteps and I talk to people, I also ask 
them, what would you like to see from your government? What 
are some changes you’d like to see? Because as a 
representative, listening to your constituents and bringing their 
ideas forward I think is your most important job, and I believe 
everyone in this Chamber feels the same way. 
 
So I’m looking forward to talking with the people of Regina 
Walsh Acres after this budget, bringing forward their ideas for 
some changes that our government can do better. And I believe 
we can always do better; I think there’s always more work to be 
done, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’re looking forward to doing a 
lot of that work this summer, and looking forward to trying to 
bring forward some changes and making sure that 
Saskatchewan continues to stay strong. So for the reasons that 
I’ve outlined and for the reasons that the minister has done a 
fantastic job, I’ll be supporting our budget and not the 
amendment. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise tonight and join in the debate on the budget. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s going on to 10 o’clock on a Monday night. It’s getting late, 
and in fact it’s so late the NHL [National Hockey League] 
hockey game is over, Mr. Speaker. And I originally thought I 
was going to be speaking tomorrow afternoon. Mr. Speaker, 
just in case you’re not aware, Pittsburgh won 3 to 1. 
 
I thought I was going to be speaking tomorrow afternoon, Mr. 
Speaker, but the Whip, the member from Saskatoon 
Silverspring-Sutherland, informed me earlier that I’d be 
speaking tonight. I think he did that, Mr. Speaker, because well 
frankly he’s a little bit grumpy, not just about the hockey game 
but, Mr. Speaker, he’s a little bit upset with me personally. I 
have to tell you what happened. 
 
A couple of weeks ago, him and I were chatting and he 
mentioned . . . He was talking about his wife, Leane — who I 
know well, great lady — owns a business in Saskatoon called 
Durand’s shoes. I just bought a pair there recently myself, Mr. 
Speaker. He was telling me that she’s a big fan of plants, and he 
also mentioned that she loves popcorn. And I told him that I’d 
been in a greenhouse lately and I saw a plant — not making this 
up, Mr. Speaker, it’s true — a plant called the popcorn plant. If 
you rub the leaves really firmly and you smell it, it smells like 
fresh-popped popcorn. And the Whip said, I wish I had known 
that. He said, I’d have got one for my wife; she would have 
loved it. So the following weekend — last weekend, or the 
weekend before this past one — I was thinking, you know, I 
should be nice. I was leaving Rosetown to come back to . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Just to get it on the record. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: —Yes, I am trying to get the fact on record 
that I’m nice. Thanks for that. 
 
So before I left Rosetown, I went to the greenhouse and I 
picked up one of those plants. I brought it to Regina and I gave 
it to the Whip to give to Leane. So he took it home, and I got a 

very nice text from her thanking me for it. She was delighted 
with the plant. And then, Mr. Speaker, I get a text from him this 
weekend that says, and I quote, “Apparently the popcorn plant 
grows up to seven feet tall. We had to go buy a pot for it. It cost 
me 30 bucks. You’re the best.” So, Mr. Speaker, he’s grumpy, 
well because he’s cheap. He’s got really nice shoes, but he’s 
cheap. 
 
So that’s why I’m speaking tonight, Mr. Speaker. As a number 
of colleagues have done, I have a number of people I want to 
thank tonight. I’m also going to talk a little bit about the 
constituency of Rosetown-Elrose and the good people who’ve 
given me the privilege of serving them in the House. I’m also 
going to talk a little bit about the Ministry of Government 
Relations budget, the ministry that I have the privilege of 
serving as minister for, and also the budget as a whole and the 
great job done by our Finance minister, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On that note, on the topic of the Minister of Finance, it was just 
a great experience for me over the past year. I served as his 
Vice-Chair on treasury board, along with the Minister of 
Advanced Education; the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure; the Minister of Immigration, Job Skills and 
Training; the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood; and the 
member from Lloydminster. We served on treasury board. And, 
as I said, Mr. Speaker, it was a great experience under the 
leadership of the Minister of Finance. 
 
So now for the thank yous. I want to take an opportunity to start 
with . . . I haven’t had an opportunity since the election 
campaign to thank a number of people. I’m going to start with 
my campaign team. I’m going to start with my campaign 
manager and good friend — and yes, Mr. Speaker, contrary to 
what the member from Regina University says, I do have 
friends — my good friend and campaign manager, Jim Angus. 
 
Jim’s an amazing guy. Mr. Speaker, this month of June marks 
the 10th anniversary of Jim being the recipient of a liver 
transplant. He was in Edmonton. I remember it well; I 
remember going to visit him. I remember watching hockey 
games with him. Edmonton was in the Stanley Cup finals that 
year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, against I think it was Carolina. I 
remember watching hockey in the evenings with him, and it’s 
just been amazing what’s happened. In a very life-threatening 
situation, he now is fine. He’s had some health challenges over 
the past 10 years, but he’s doing great. 
 
I talked to him today, Mr. Speaker. He was my campaign 
manager. He was door knocking with me, doing everything a 
campaign manager would do. He is enjoying his family. He’s 
enjoying his grandchildren, and he’s enjoying his life, Mr. 
Speaker, because of an organ donor. I want to talk about that 
and what our government’s doing for organ donations in a few 
minutes as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But first onto other members of the campaign team, Kelly 
McFaull. Kelly was our guy in charge of election signs. He 
looked after all the highway signs along with a great deal of 
help from Travis Boyd and Garry Nisbet, and I want to thank 
them for all their work as well. But Kelly was also our go-to 
guy in so many things. When we were setting up our campaign 
office, he did a ton of work there. He’s one of those guys, not 
only if you ask him to help he’s there, but he’s looking for ways 



June 6, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 343 

to help without even being asked, Mr. Speaker, and I certainly 
appreciate that. 
 
I also want to acknowledge a gentleman who’s been so 
supportive over the years. Mr. Deputy Speaker, Darryl Senecal 
had serious knee surgery last year and this year was out I don’t 
know how many days door knocking with me. He played me 
out, Mr. Speaker. He’s done that every election that I’ve been 
involved in and I can’t say enough about how much help and 
support he’s been. 
 
And speaking of door knocking, I have to tell you about just an 
incredible friendship, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Doug and Polly 
Orth have been great family friends for many, many years. 
They’ve been involved in all three election campaigns I’ve been 
in. They door knock come rain or shine. They’ve just been 
tremendous and I’ll always appreciate that. 
 
[21:45] 
 
I also want to mention Kathie Parry and her partner, Don 
Campbell. Kathie coordinated our campaign office. She helped 
with door knocking and numerous other things. And Don, 
amongst many things he helped with, he did all the audiovisual 
stuff for us in the campaign office. 
 
And speaking of that campaign office, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 
couldn’t have handled that without volunteers like Donna Ogg, 
Bobbie Crossman, Carmelina Spadaforda, Joan Henderson, and 
Myrna Macdonald. And I certainly appreciate all that they did. 
 
And I also need to mention my business manager for the last 
three elections, Jim Turner. It gives me great peace of mind 
when you don’t have to worry about that part of the campaign. 
With Jim things are always done properly and on time, and I 
appreciate that very much. 
 
Speaking of being punctual and doing things quickly, Mr. 
Speaker, I also have to acknowledge Rick Jackson. He is from 
Rosetown and he looked after the lawn signs in Rosetown. It 
was within a couple days after the writ dropped. There was 
lawn signs all over town. He was constantly putting them up 
whenever anyone would ask and within, I think, 48 hours pretty 
much after the election, they were all down and taken care of. 
Just did a great job this election campaign as he did the last one 
as well. 
 
I also want to mention our constituency president, Ian 
McPhadden. Since I’ve started in politics, Ian’s always been 
there to help, whether it’s with an election campaign or during 
an off year, meetings, events, whatever the case may be. 
 
And I also just want to take a minute and mention some people 
who have been so important to me right from the start. Larry 
Burechailo and Marj Sutherland have been tremendous sources 
of support through a nomination in 2006 and elections in 2007 
and 2011. Now since then, Mr. Speaker, they’ve become 
snowbirds and so they couldn’t be as involved in this election, 
but they still actually came back early to help out, and I 
certainly appreciate that. And speaking of snowbirds, Norm and 
Bev Collins also came back early to help out with the election. 
Norm’s been a huge help over the years going back also to the 
2006 nomination and through every campaign, and I just can’t 

thank him enough. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s always that risk when you start 
thanking people, you’re going to miss some, and I know I have. 
I know there’s been so many people that have helped with 
campaigns and helped along the way, and I certainly apologize 
to them. There’s all the folks on the constituency executive and 
people who have contributed in so many ways and I certainly, 
from the bottom of my heart, I want to thank them. 
 
And now on to family. Mr. Deputy Speaker, as all the members 
here know, politics can take a toll on family. They put up with a 
lot, not the least of which is all the time that we have to spend 
away because of the work we do. My mother, Elizabeth Reiter, 
is a never-ending source of support. She’s been doing 
scrapbooks for me on my political career — pictures and news 
stories — and it’s just been fantastic. I appreciate that very 
much. 
 
My brother Ken, my sister-in-law Debbie, and my nephews, 
Jeremy and Justin. Jeremy and Justin now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
live on the Saskatchewan side of the Alberta border. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s great to have them back in Saskatchewan like so 
many other people are doing. And slowly but surely, because 
they had been living in Alberta, slowly I’m weaning them off of 
the Edmonton Eskimos, and they’re going to become diehard 
Rider fans, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I promise you that. Also my 
sister Laura Schwab and her husband Eldon. 
 
My brother Ken and my sister Laura played a big part in this 
election campaign for me, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They were out 
a number of days. They came to Rosetown. They helped me 
door knock and it was just great having them there. We spent a 
bunch of time together, did a lot of campaigning, but just had a 
lot of fun together and I appreciate all that help they gave me. It 
was a lot of fun doing it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and my wife, Bonnie. As I mentioned 
earlier, politics can take its toll on families and that of course is 
most dramatic, I guess, on spouses, our spouses and partners, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. And it’s the dark side of politics that those 
who have been the most supportive are the ones who are 
sometimes targeted with unfair comments or with drive-by 
smears. And for that I apologize, and I want to say thank you 
for all your support. 
 
But of course, Mr. Speaker, the bright side of politics usually 
outweighs the dark side. And we’ve all been given a 
tremendous privilege and opportunity to make a difference in 
our great province, to have an influence and an opportunity to 
help make our province grow and to keep Saskatchewan strong. 
 
I also want to thank some staff, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My 
constituency assistant, Kathie Parry, who I mentioned earlier. 
And the staff in this building, in the Minister of Government 
Relations office, the position I currently am privileged to hold: 
our admins, Cheryl Verhelst and Lauren Jelinski, who are 
always cheerful and helpful when people call or come to our 
office; ministerial assistant, Jeremy Brick, who has weird taste 
in music but that’s because he doesn’t like mine. But he’s a 
great employee who is enthusiastic and always eager to pitch in, 
and I know was a great help in the campaign for the member 
from Regina University. 



344 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2016 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, also ministerial assistant, Shannon 
Andrews, who although she cheats in football pools, she is 
always bubbly and cheery and has a great work ethic and it’s a 
pleasure to have her in the office. And speaking of great work 
ethics, Mr. Deputy Speaker, my chief of staff, Angela Currie, 
you’ll never find a harder worker, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Because 
of Ange, I never have to worry. She worries enough for both of 
us about everything, and everybody here who knows her would 
agree with that. She’s been a great chief, and I can’t express my 
appreciation to her enough. 
 
Now for the constituency of Rosetown-Elrose. With the 
redrawing of the boundaries, I no longer represent several 
communities: the community of Eston, of Outlook, Dodsland, 
Plenty. Mr. Speaker, I just want to thank those communities for 
how well they treated me. It was such a privilege to represent 
them. I’ve made some great friends that’ll last a lifetime. And I 
just want to put on the permanent record how much that 
privilege has meant to me. 
 
I now have the opportunity to represent the communities of 
Delisle, Vanscoy, Perdue. They’re included in the new area, and 
I’m meeting new people there all the time. And I have to thank 
them for the great reception that I was given during the election 
campaign. They were just fantastic. I had a great door knocking 
in the new area of the constituency. 
 
And of course now I need to also thank the area of the 
constituency that I’ve represented all along including the 
community where I live, the community of Rosetown. Those 
people have just been tremendous, been so supportive, and I 
will always be indebted for that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I mentioned that I wanted to talk a little 
bit more about what our government’s doing on the organ donor 
front. It was mentioned in the Throne Speech and I have a news 
release in front of me. It was released on May the 19th when the 
Minister of Health tabled a motion that asked the Standing 
Committee on Human Services to review Saskatchewan’s 
current approach to organ and tissue donation and recommend 
ways to improve the rate of donation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this will be bipartisan, and I am so looking 
forward to . . . At times in this House, as we all know, it gets 
too partisan. This is a very important issue, and I think we all 
welcome the input from all the members on both sides of the 
House on this. You know, we’re waiting to hear how they’re 
going to determine how they go about some of their work. But 
as I mentioned earlier, I’ve a very good friend who is a recipient 
of an organ donation and that’s the reason he’s with us today 
and living a full and happy life. And I think there’s just so much 
more potential of what we can do for that. 
 
We have an abysmally low rate of organ donors in this 
province, and I think it’s just simply a matter of hearing people 
out, doing what we can to encourage people through education, 
and maybe doing some things better on the government side 
that we can to do that encouragement, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So I 
just . . . This is such an important topic to so many people who 
have had their lives touched by this that I look forward to the 
good work that the committee is going to do on this. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, on the Government Relations budget, 

there’s a number of things in that budget, of course, that I’m 
very proud of. I have a municipal background. That’s what I did 
for a career before I entered politics. And there’s, you know, as 
all the members are aware, there’s many things. There’s record 
infrastructure investment we’re going to be doing through a 
number of programs, several of them involving the federal 
government, the Building Canada Fund. 
 
But probably sort of the cornerstone, if you will, of the 
Government Relations budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
municipal revenue-sharing, $271.6 million in revenue-sharing 
this year. It’s a record amount. It’s because of the one . . . It’s 
tied to one point on the PST. 
 
So I just want to put this in some context for you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I’d like to talk about what’s happened since we were 
given the opportunity to form government in 2007 and ’08 for 
municipal revenue-sharing in comparison to some other 
standards that we could use. In that period of time, from 
2007-08 to 2015-16, Mr. Deputy Speaker, again for the context, 
the consumer price index, the cost of living if you will, 
increased by 17 per cent. At that same time in that same time 
frame, kindergarten to grade 12 education increased by 30 per 
cent, substantially more than the cost of living, substantially 
more than the consumer price index That was 17; education 
funding was increased by 30 per cent. Advanced Education, 
universities and polytechnic, in that same time frame from 
’07-08 to ’15-16, it increased by 46 per cent, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Health, no more core service to provincial governments than 
health care. The amount that we fund the regional health 
authorities in that same time frame, it went up by 53 per cent, 
dramatically more than the consumer price index. And yet in 
that same time frame . . . In fact I’ll just stretch it out just a little 
bit further, Mr. Deputy Speaker, including in this current 
budget. Municipal revenue sharing has increased, while the 
consumer price index was at 17 per cent, municipal revenue 
sharing increased by 113 per cent, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I could give a number of examples for 
different municipalities on how much they increased, but I think 
the member from Carrot River Valley covered a lot of them in 
his constituency. A number of members covered ones around 
the province. 
 
So instead I think what I’ll do, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is I just 
want to hit some highlights from news releases on budget day 
that SUMA, the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association and SARM, the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities, some of the things that they said in their news 
releases about this budget. It says: 
 

SUMA Appreciates Municipal Funding Programs in 
2016-17 Budget. 

 
Urban governments in Saskatchewan appreciate the 
provincial government’s support for our cities, towns, 
villages, and northern communities in today’s budget, says 
the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association . . . 
 
“Urban municipalities understand the difficulties that come 
with preparing a budget with limited resources,” said 



June 6, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 345 

SUMA President Debra Button. “We appreciate the 
recognition of municipalities today, through direct funding 
such as revenue sharing and shared funding such as the 
New Building Canada Fund.” 
 
With the revenue sharing remaining as one point of the 
PST based on revenues from two years ago, municipalities 
will see $271 million, and funding remains steady for items 
such as policing, libraries, community rinks, the 
Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency, and the 
Urban Highway Connector Program. 
 
“This funding from the provincial government allows our 
cities, towns, villages, and northern municipalities to make 
the most of our property taxes,” says Button. “It’s a relief 
to know that as engines of economic growth, we can focus 
on putting that money into the services and infrastructure 
our communities need and our residents expect. 
 

That’s from SUMA, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now from SARM, same day, on budget day it says . . . that 
news release says: 
 

The Government of Saskatchewan has released the 
2016-17 Provincial Budget. Even in the midst of an 
economic downturn due to the decrease of revenues from 
the oil, gas and potash industries, the Province has 
continued to invest in areas that will support economic 
growth and development in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
First and foremost, SARM is very pleased that the 
Government of Saskatchewan’s commitment to 
maintaining the municipal revenue sharing has remained 
strong. “Municipalities rely on revenue sharing dollars to 
deliver services to residents, local business owners, and 
industry in rural Saskatchewan,” said SARM president Ray 
Orb. 
 
. . . [RMs] will also benefit from the [$16 million] . . . 
commitment to assist them with local road and bridge 
maintenance and construction projects through the 
Municipal Roads for the Economy Program . . . “While 
SARM requested a reinstatement of . . .” 

 
It goes on, Mr. Speaker. It’s fairly lengthy. They make 
comments about agriculture as well, and then they wrap up 
saying: 
 

Rural Saskatchewan will also benefit from [the budget’s] 
. . . increased funding commitment for rural physician 
recruitment and the Government’s decision not to increase 
education property tax. These commitments are 
appreciated by SARM and will help to support the quality 
of life in rural Saskatchewan. 

 
[22:00] 
 
On that note, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just need to deviate for a 
minute on the issue on education property tax. You heard earlier 
today the member from Wood River talked about a couple of 
municipal items that are very near and dear to his heart because 
of his background as president of SARM. He talked also about 

revenue sharing. Mr. Deputy Speaker. He also talked about 
education property tax and how important it was to him 
personally and also to all the members in SARM. 
 
I think back to before I was in politics, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
what a contentious issue the level of education property tax 
was. There was tax revolts as my friend, the Minister of Social 
Services, mentioned. There was a . . . [inaudible] . . . rally at the 
legislature. It was a huge, huge issue. Mr. Deputy Speaker, at 
that time I was on the SARM board as president of the Rural 
Municipal Administrators Association and I remember at every 
single SARM convention — the main convention in March or 
the mid-term convention in the fall — it was always the number 
one issue. It was always the bone of contention. 
 
In fact I remember one of the . . . I don’t remember the year 
offhand, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I could check that for you. But I 
remember then Premier Calvert in his address to the SARM 
delegates, knowing how contentious it was, had said when it 
came to education tax on property, and I quote, he said, “The 
status quo is not on.” And then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, well we 
were all excited. We thought something’s finally going to 
happen. We couldn’t wait to see what happened. 
 
Twelve months later, it was the SARM convention again, and 
what had changed? Nothing. Premier Calvert at that time again 
announced the status quo was not on. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, nothing changed again. So you can imagine how 
pleased and proud I was to be part of a government that in 2009 
made a dramatic change to how education is funding in this 
province and finally rectified a long-standing problem with 
education property tax, Mr. Deputy Speaker. You still see that 
today. You saw that when the member from Wood River spoke 
about it. It came up at the last SARM convention when I spoke. 
The people there are still incredibly pleased at the changes that 
this government made, and you can see it in SARM’s news 
release from this budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So on to some other issues. Some of the things that my 
ministry, the Ministry of Government Relations and the 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis and Northern 
Affairs . . . You know, it’s kind of funny, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
The person who sarcastically was clapping, I guess thought I 
was talking too long, was the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health, who I think probably has set records — well with the 
exception of a couple of members on the opposite side of the 
House — for really long speeches, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So on the topic of First Nation and Métis programming, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, some good news all around there. In a tight, 
austere budget, this budget allocates $211.9 million in program 
funding targeted primarily for First Nations and Métis 
organizations and individuals. That’s an increase of three and a 
half million dollars, or 1.7 per cent from the funding in last 
year’s budget. 
 
And there’s a number of highlights in that budget as well, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. There’s $30.8 million in funding for targeted 
activities on and off reserve, such as training for jobs and 
on-reserve adult basic education under the Ministry of the 
Economy. There’s $5.1 million in ongoing funding for 
initiatives that respond to the joint task force in improving 
education and employment outcomes for First Nations and 



346 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2016 

Métis people from the Ministry of Education. And the list goes 
on, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And on the topic, you know, of First Nations and the North, in 
fact the member from Athabasca I think today in the House had 
raised some northern issues and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you 
know, was questioning some things that, whether the 
government has done for the North. And of course, it’s 
cross-ministry and cross-Crown. One of the responsibilities I 
have is Minister Responsible for SaskTel. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
have in my hand a number of news releases that have come out 
in just the last few months, all pertaining directly to the North. 
Mr. Speaker, just for example, a little while ago, last summer 
there was a news release that talked about high-speed Internet 
that’s now available in a number of communities across the 
North. It says: 
 

The households to be connected in northern Saskatchewan 
under today’s announcement are in the following 
communities and surrounding areas: [and listen to this, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker] Bear Creek, Black Lake, Brabant Lake, 
Dillon, Canoe Narrows, Clearwater River Dene Nation, 
Dore Lake . . . Fond-du-Lac, Grandmother’s Bay, Jans 
Bay, Missinipe. 

 
It goes on and on, Mr. Deputy Speaker: Sled Lake, Stanley 
Mission, Stony Rapids, Sucker River — I’m skipping some of 
them, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because I don’t want to sound like 
the members opposite when they do the petitions — Waterhen 
Lake, Wollaston Lake. There’s a number of those, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
I also have from June 1st, just a few days ago, Mr. Speaker, 
there was an announcement on SaskTel investing $2.1 million 
in wireless enhancements. There’s an announcement on 
“SaskTel increases capacity by up to 100% in 7 more resort 
communities,” the communities of Cochin, Sarnia Beach Lake, 
Wakaw Lake, Waskesiu, Mr. Speaker. SaskTel’s doing an 
announcement on capital investment. “SaskTel continues to 
expand High Speed Internet access in rural Saskatchewan,” Mr. 
Speaker. So it’s the rural and remote areas of the province if 
you will, Mr. Deputy Speaker, continue to be served. 
 
“SaskTel enhances high speed Internet in Northeastern 
Saskatchewan,” and the news releases go on and on. “New 
SaskTel Wireless Service launches in two northern 
communities.” That was in December, the announcement for 
Stony Rapids and Black Lake. “SaskTel extends 4G service to 
Canoe Lake Cree First Nation and Jans Bay.” And also 
“SaskTel Wireless Service launches in two northern 
communities.” That was last September for Wollaston Lake and 
Fond-du-Lac First Nations. So, Mr. Speaker, in that area of the 
province certainly things have been happening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also have the privilege of serving as Minister 
Responsible for SaskEnergy. And I just want to talk a little bit 
about the team over there and the great job that they’ve been 
doing. I’ve just been working on a message that will be in the 
annual report that will be released soon, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and I’m just going to hit a few highlights out of that. 
 
It talks about over the past eight years how our government has 
worked to create the Saskatchewan advantage and the role that 

SaskEnergy has helped to play in that. Just an example of that, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: it says SaskEnergy’s success in these 
areas has supported the overall strength of our province’s 
energy sector which continues to attract billions of dollars in 
new investment. For example, in early 2016, Husky Energy 
celebrated the opening of its Edam East heavy oil thermal 
facility, located near the village of Edam. This natural gas fuel 
plant is the first of three heavy oil thermal projects Husky will 
bring online this year, with the projects expected to create 500 
construction jobs and 90 permanent positions. 
 
Along with other large-scale infrastructure investment across 
Saskatchewan, these expansion projects indicate that our 
diversified, resilient economy is well equipped to weather the 
economic uncertainty and continue to create opportunity for 
Saskatchewan families. Mr. Speaker, I just have to 
acknowledge SaskEnergy president, Doug Kelln, and his team 
over there for the great job they’ve been doing. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I begin to wind up, just across the 
board, the budget as a whole, Mr. Deputy Speaker, no tax 
increases. We’re controlling spending. We’re still investing in 
people. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re continuing to invest in 
infrastructure to keep Saskatchewan strong. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, so you know, it makes you wonder what 
leaders across the province are saying about that. And I just 
want to just fairly quickly mention some comments, some 
quotes from some of our municipal leaders that came on budget 
day. “First and foremost, SARM is pleased that the Government 
of Saskatchewan’s commitment to maintaining the municipal 
revenue sharing has remained strong.” That was from SARM. 
 
From Debra Button, the mayor of Weyburn and president of 
SUMA, she says, “We’re pleased today the government lived 
up to the commitment for that one point of the PST for revenue 
sharing.” Also from SUMA, it says, “Urban governments in 
Saskatchewan appreciate the provincial government’s support 
for our cities, towns, villages, and northern communities in 
today’s budget . . .” 
 
From Mayor Don Atchison from Saskatoon, this is a quote out 
of The StarPhoenix on June the 1st: 
 

. . . Atchison said he is pleased the Saskatchewan Party 
government is sticking to its formula to pass along 20 per 
cent of provincial sales tax . . . to municipalities. 
 
“I think it was good news for the citizens of Saskatoon,’ 
Atchison said. “They said they wouldn’t touch (the 
formula). [And] they didn’t touch it.” 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, one more: 
 

Municipal officials agreed that, as Regina Mayor Michael 
Fougere put it, cities came out “unscathed”’ and could 
even look on the budget positively “‘given the 
environment.” 
 
Communities, both urban and rural, will see record revenue 
sharing and hiked funding for municipal infrastructure. 

 
That was out of the Regina Leader-Post, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 



June 6, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 347 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think I’m going to probably wrap up 
right now. I just want to reiterate what I had said earlier, that I 
was very pleased to serve with the Minister of Finance and 
treasury board, working on this year’s budget along with all our 
colleagues in caucus, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a budget that 
I’m very proud of, I think all my colleagues are proud of. It’s a 
budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that even in tough economic times 
is going to help to keep Saskatchewan strong. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will not be supporting the amendment, 
but I’m very proud to be supporting the original motion. Thank 
you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
You know, we saw lots of headlines last week but there was one 
that really lit it up on the west side of Saskatoon, one that really 
lit it up. And that was, “Sinners spared but seniors, poor hurt by 
province’s cuts.” My office was hopping on Friday afternoon 
by the comments made by the Minister of Social Services. I’ve 
never seen action like that in my office on a Friday afternoon. 
That minister really got things going. 
 
They wanted to know what is going on in Social Services. 
What’s happening to SAP [Saskatchewan assistance plan], 
what’s happening to TEA [transitional employment allowance], 
and what is this stacking? What is stacking all about? You 
know, they wanted to know. And these are . . . You know, I’ve 
got to tell you, this was really something to see. They were 
hopping mad, you know. And it’s not just because, you know, 
as they would say, a levelling of programs or that type of thing, 
but people on the west side of Saskatoon, and I think right 
across this province, are having a hard time making ends meet, 
and they were hoping this budget would provide some relief. 
And instead they’re paying more for their drugs and now 
they’re finding out about this new plan in Social Services about 
stacking. 
 
What is stacking all about? You know, you’ve got all this 
terminology that’s being thrown our way and you know, the 
government side says they don’t like being called mean, but it 
sure sounds like mean. If it walks like a duck and it quacks like 
a duck, maybe it is a duck and maybe it is just plain mean. 
Maybe it is just plain mean. 
 
But I’ve got to tell you, it really lit it up. And really, it just 
speaks volumes, volumes about the tone of this government and 
how they’re out of touch. Here we have a budget three months 
late. Why couldn’t they have delivered this in February? Busy 
season? You know, it’s like they all of a sudden discovered that 
the price of oil had gone down. But by their own documents, 
their own documents, the price of oil went below 50 bucks late 
in 2014, early 2015. It’s been a year and a half that we’ve been 
going through this, and there’s nothing new that’s coming out 
of that over there on that government side, that government 
side. 
 
So why did we have to wait so long for this budget to find out 
that they’re going to charge more for seniors and families for 
their drugs? That’s what they needed to wait for? This is a big 
question out there. Here we are in June, the dog days, we’re all 

waiting for summer holidays. Now the budget finally, finally 
comes out and here we are short of ideas except for 
SkipTheDishes. That’s one thing that’s maybe interesting. 
 
But I’ve got to tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I often hear 
— I’ve just got to put this on the record — I often hear this, and 
this is something that the government will often brag about: 
there’s $600 billion worth of tax savings, but they can never 
really fully explain it. They . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Six 
hundred million is it? Six hundred million? Here we go, okay 
now they’re going to get some more facts on the record, 600 
million of tax savings. But they can never really, really explain 
what it is, what it really is. I misspoke in there, I apologize. I’ll 
put that on the record, I’ll put that on the record right away, or 
else I’ll have their crack team of fact checkers out and I’ll hear 
all about it tomorrow. I’ll hear all about it tomorrow. I 
misspoke. But anyway, I really want to know more about it. 
 
[22:15] 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to get serious for a minute. I 
want to just talk a little bit about what the member before me, 
the Minister for Government Relations, was talking about. He 
was talking a bit about what they’ve done for First Nations and 
Indigenous peoples, and we do have to say that there’s been 
programs. But we are deeply concerned about a couple of 
programs that have been cut. The Buffalo Narrows Community 
Correctional Centre has been cut, and that savings will be about 
$1 million. We also see that the Aboriginal court workers 
program will be cut, that will save $4 million. So $5 million 
right there. But the minister did talk about an increase of $3 
million, so if you do the math there, there’s $2 million still of a 
shortfall. 
 
And you know, I really have to say that, you know, we hear, 
and especially with the last year . . . I want to be very, very 
serious about this. I want to talk about the Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission, and the 94 calls of action that has 
happened, or not happened. And we did not hear the minister 
talk about that. He did talk about many of the initiatives that 
might have or not fallen into those categories. But we know that 
is something we need to take very seriously. 
 
And as the critic for human rights, I do want to say that we’re 
watching very carefully about the Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission and the calls of action. So I really do want to 
challenge the minister to make sure. We’ve not heard about this 
in the Throne Speech. We have not heard about this in the 
budget speech, and we have not heard about this from the 
minister in his past comments. Even though . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Now he’s shouting out we should ask 
questions. 
 
I think that in the spirit of this — and he did talk about 
bipartisanship — we are looking for more work on this. And so 
I do want to raise this as an issue that we are looking for, we are 
looking for attention to this. There is 94 calls of action. Some 
30-some, maybe half of them are related to the provincial 
responsibility. And so we are looking for attention to that, and I 
hope he can address that in estimates. I think that will be very, 
very important. 
 
As I was saying that we are disappointed though, as we’ve just 



348 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2016 

shown, that they’ve talked about, the minister talked about a $3 
million increase, a $3 million increase in spending in 
Aboriginal Affairs. But we can see that they’ve cut $5 million 
through the Aboriginal court worker and the Buffalo Narrows 
Community Correctional Centre closing early. So this is a real 
problem here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I do want to as well say, that as my role as human rights, that I 
am going to be watching . . . And we haven’t got these figures 
broken out, but I know the Human Rights Commission is 
dealing with even more concerns being brought forward, and 
they’re dealing with it on a limited budget, a limited budget. We 
don’t know whether they got more money or less money. But 
you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the best day for the 
government on a budget is the budget day when everything 
seems to be holding together. And now we’re finding out some 
of the cracks, some of things that aren’t working as well, and 
we really hope that they have funded and supported the Human 
Rights Commission. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well we’re going to be looking at housing to 
see what’s happening in housing. We hope that there is 
sufficient funds in the programs that they’ve announced. 
Especially, I know people who are living on limited means will 
be looking for rental repair and home repair. I think that’s very, 
very important that it’s adequate and it doesn’t run out halfway 
through the year. Too often that’s been the case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, often I’ll do this every day: I will stand in this 
House and I will present a petition. And I know that the 
members opposite are a little alarmed, a little concerned about 
the number of petitions I hold in my hand. But I will hand in 
one page at a time, one page at a time until this is fixed. 
 
This again, you know, when they say they’re not mean-spirited, 
but here is something that clearly is mean-spirited — $225,000, 
I think, is the cut. And yet this government made this 
announcement back in February . . . Or actually, I think it was, 
actually I heard it was in December that the actual cut was 
made, and the announcement was made or shared with the 
organizations. So here we have a program that really benefits all 
of us. Now it affects some 17 different language groups, 
including Cree, including Cree, including indigenous languages. 
And I think this is one that really the government should take 
back and take another look at it. It’s not really that expensive. 
And it’s one that really serves so well right across, right across 
the province. And not only in Regina and Saskatoon, but also in 
the smaller communities: Prince Albert and Moose Jaw, and 
throughout the province. 
 
And I think when we look back and we recognize in fact that 
we are all immigrants, except for the indigenous folks, that this 
is something that makes our province a wonderful thing. And I 
think that, particularly when you consider that the fact that this 
program was announced and developed in ’91 when the 
government of the day was facing all sorts of other pressures, 
but felt the value of the immigrant community and the 
newcomers really was important enough that we established 
heritage languages, and that that was an important program in 
Saskatchewan. So I think this is an important area that I would 
really call on the government to reconsider, to reconsider and 
do the right thing. 
 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s one other area I want to talk 
about before we finish for the day. You know, the folks on the 
opposite side like to talk about the Saskatchewan Income Plan, 
and we think that’s a good program. And one of the members 
talked about how it was developed in ’91. Actually it was 
developed in the ’70s by Allan Blakeney. And we’ve had this 
debate many times in the House since government’s taken over, 
the fact that it hadn’t been increased since ’91 and there were 
many tough choices that this side, the NDP, had to make. And 
unfortunately, that was one that we look back at and we regret 
and we think we could have done better. It should have been 
increased but the pressures of the time forced other decisions. 
 
But the interesting thing of . . . I would like to, you know, 
remind the other side that when they took over that program in 
2007, there was some 18,000 recipients. I think it was up to 
18,000 for SIP, or not, for . . . Yes, it was Saskatchewan Income 
Plan, the senior plan — 18,000. And now I believe it’s down to 
about 15,000. It’s about 15,000 now. I believe it’s at 15,000. 
The written questions I got last week were 15,000. Okay. And 
that’s what the current minister and the past minister . . . The 
incomes are higher so they’re doing better and that is somewhat 
fair enough. 
 
But I do want to say this. I’m glad that we can have this debate 
right now. But as Labour critic, I do want to urge the Finance 
minister, and I know the Finance critic will be doing the same 
thing . . . The Finance minister, we know, will be attending 
meetings about the CPP in late June — Canadian pension plan, 
CPP. 
 
And we really encourage the minister to join in with other 
provinces, the federal government, to really look at increasing 
the contributions to CPP because we know there are too many 
seniors, or not the seniors, but workers who are not making 
contributions to saving plans and really aren’t putting away 
enough. And a voluntary savings plan isn’t good enough 
because we see there’s too many pressures. And we know that 
in Saskatchewan, where we see people not putting away enough 
for their retirement. So we need to really enhance the Canadian 
pension plan, and I really urge the Minister of Finance to take a 
good, long, hard look at that because we would really think 
that’s the thing to do to make the Canadian pension plan the 
pension plan of choice, so that people do put money aside 
through their work so they can have a retirement plan. 
 
As we know and we see, and maybe that’s right that the seniors 
are moving out of that poverty level and that’s good. But still 
we have those people who are making a little bit more and 
they’re just not making ends meet. And so to the Minister of 
Finance, I really do urge you to really consider that. It’s been on 
the agenda I know for many years now, I know we’ve urged the 
former minister to consider that initiative. And we now know, 
with the Liberal federal government and several other provinces 
coming on side, that really this is the time to do the big change. 
 
And so with that, I’ll just leave it at that and we may have 
questions. Oh I have more to say in terms . . . I’m just . . . CPP, 
I’m leaving at that. But I don’t want to go on too much longer. 
 
I do want to say in terms of labour — and I am leery. I’m 
watching the clock here — two things, two things: occupational 
health and safety. And I know both sides of the House, we 



June 6, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 349 

always say that we want to do more for that. 
 
But we had a golden opportunity. Workers’ Comp had some 
$240 million in surplus earnings and they’re trying to decide, 
and they may have decided already this week. I hope not. But 
even a small portion of that, if that was kept back to help out in 
terms of occupational health and safety, would go a long way. 
And I’m disappointed to see that OHS [occupational health and 
safety] was at $8.4 million and it’s been floating around that. 
 
Now we know OHS is funded through Workers’ Comp. It 
doesn’t come through the general, what used to be called the 
General Revenue Fund. It’s not funded through taxes or 
royalties or anything. OHS is funded by WCB [Workers’ 
Compensation Board]. So that money could’ve paid a little bit 
more. Even one or two or five million more could have gone a 
long, long way. And we haven’t seen the committee of review 
that’s out there yet, and we know that there’s big issues like 
PTSD [post-traumatic stress disorder] is out there and we 
should be taking a look at that.  
 
And I would really urge the government to urge WCB just to 
hold on to that 240 million, make sure we make the right 
decision. And so I want to urge the government to do the right 
thing on that. We have a golden opportunity with $240 million, 
what we could do with just a small part of that, even $10 or $20 
million of that, not the whole thing, not the whole thing. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we wrap up for the evening, I do 
want to say and I do want to apologize to the House for 
misspeaking about the $600 billion. We’ll have a good laugh at 
that. Nobody gave me a hard time about my tie tonight. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I did. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Oh okay, so there you go. But I do . . . 600 
million, not 600 billion. So anyways. 
 
But I am concerned about the other shoe dropping with 
transformational, the initiative that’s happening. We’re seeing 
today, we heard about the RICs [regional intersectoral 
committee] coordinators being cut. It’s obviously a wrong 
direction there. We heard about the urban parks being cut last 
week. That’s a wrong direction there. We’re hearing about 
Meewasin and Wascana here being on the table. That’s just not 
the right way to go. So we’re worried about the other shoe, 
what that really means for the people of Saskatchewan. And for 
that reason, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be voting for the 
amendment. I think that’s a reasonable way forward, and I 
cannot at all vote for the main motion. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Being near 10:30, the time of 
adjournment, this House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 
1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Phillips ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 321 
  Kaeding ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 323 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 327 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................... 331 
  Stewart ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 333 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 336 
  Steinley ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 338 
  Reiter ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 342 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 347 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 




