






















































Hansard: November 01, 2016


FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

of the 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan
____________

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
____________

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 34B  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 1, 2016, 19:00 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (Ind.) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10; Independent (Ind.) — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1055 
 November 1, 2016 
 
[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It now being 7 o’clock, I’ll call the 
Assembly to order. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 40 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 40 — The 
Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 
sur l’interprétation be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And I hope to pick up where I left off just before the break and 
provide some further edification and commentary on the notion 
of privatization and what’s being proposed by the government 
in this rather strange bill where we see sort of a back door entry 
into the world of privatization through something called The 
Interpretation Act, Mr. Speaker. And I highlighted a few 
concerns before the break, and I have several more to raise 
before I finish my comments this evening. 
 
One of the things that I think is important to note about this bill 
is the fact that the government is creating something that 
doesn’t exist pretty much anywhere else in terms of a hybrid 
publicly owned, privately owned corporation. Privatization has 
occurred in many, many, many different forms throughout the 
western world and actually throughout the world in the last 40 
years since the advent of neoliberalism in mainstream 
governments. 
 
But what’s happening here, I’ve tried to find examples of, and 
perhaps some exist, but in my research that I was able to do, I 
wasn’t able to find any examples of this beast that can only be 
called a hybridization of public and private ownership in one 
particular animal. 
 
And what it reminds me of, Mr. Speaker, is a children’s story 
that I used to read to my kids, and it’s a little bit scary. Of 
course, in this story, things actually end all right. But see if I 
can find it here; maybe I’ve lost my tag. It’ll show up 
eventually and some of these tags I want to speak to. 
 
At any rate, I guess I’ll start instead with a story. And one of the 
things we do talk about here, Mr. Speaker, is the notion that 
past behaviour is a good indicator of future performance. And I 
think we have a good example of that in something that 
happened in 1986. And this a story about SaskEnergy. So I’m 
going to read from a book called Privatizing a Province: The 
New Right in Saskatchewan by James Pitsula and Ken 
Rasmussen. And this book was published, I believe, in 1990, 

Mr. Speaker. This talks about . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who is it dedicated to? 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Oh, and it is actually dedicated to the memory 
of Tommy Douglas. So there you go, Mr. Speaker. My 
colleague is obviously familiar with the book. 
 
This is the story of SaskEnergy, and here’s how it goes: 
 

The decision that finally turned public opinion against the 
Devine government’s privatization campaign was the 
attempt to sell SaskEnergy, the natural gas division of 
SaskPower. When Devine initially announced his 
privatization program, he had specifically exempted public 
utilities. [That sounds familiar, Mr. Speaker.] Despite this 
clear and unequivocal commitment, Eric Berntson, the 
minister responsible for SaskPower, informed the 
legislature in May of 1988 that SaskPower was being split 
into two parts, an electric utility and a natural gas utility, 
the latter renamed SaskEnergy. When asked whether this 
separation was preliminary to the privatization of the gas 
division, Berntson answered that it had “absolutely nothing 
to do with the sell-off of anything.” 

 
That sounds remarkably familiar to some of the commentary 
we’re hearing from the Minister of Justice this week, Mr. 
Speaker. Now I’ll continue: 
 

Despite this assurance, George Hill, the president of 
SaskPower, stated in January 1989 that the only thing 
holding back the privatization of SaskEnergy was cabinet 
approval. Hill, a lawyer from Estevan, was a former 
provincial PC party president and had helped arrange for 
Grant Devine to be parachuted into the Estevan 
constituency. He was both a power to be reckoned with in 
the Tory Party and a strong supporter of privatization; 
when British privatization expert Oliver Letwin came to 
Regina, he worked out of an office down the hall from 
Hill’s office in the SaskPower building. Given Hill’s 
political influence, his public statements hinting at the sale 
of SaskEnergy had to be taken seriously.  
 
Deputy Premier Berntson began to go through various 
verbal contortions to explain away the fact that the 
government intended to privatize the utility. 

 
And I’ll stop there for a second, Mr. Speaker. Again we see this 
same kinds of verbal contortions taking place here this week 
when we see this government attempting to redefine 
privatization to create this beast of this hybrid private-public 
corporation with no regard to all the legal implications and 
certainly all the confusion that it’s going to create. 
 
I’ll continue: 
 

When asked what Devine had meant when he said “basic 
utilities” would not be touched, Berntson replied that the 
natural gas distribution system was not a utility. Pressed to 
define what he meant by a “utility,” he irritably advised the 
reporter, “Look, if you’re looking for a definition, ask 
Webster.” [He didn’t ask the World Bank, he asked 



1056 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2016 

Webster.] Webster’s dictionary defines a utility as 
“Something useful to the public, especially in the service 
of electric power, gas, water, telephone, etc.” George Hill 
did not bother with these linguistic gymnastics: “The 
opposition will attempt to say that Devine changed his 
mind. I say, so what? It happens every day of the week in 
everyone’s life.” 

 
So we go on: 
 

One of the main reasons Hill gave for the privatization 
was the need to reduce SaskPower’s $2.2 billion debt . . . 

 
Now again, Mr. Speaker, I’m shocked by the familiarity of this 
problem and the situation that we find ourselves in here today, 
which is 20 years later, basically. This consumed the debt . . . 
I’ll continue the quote: 
 

. . . which consumed 40 cents of every dollar paid by 
Saskatchewan consumers to meet interest charges. 
According to Roy Billinton, an engineering professor at 
the University of Saskatchewan and former member of the 
Public Utilities Review Commission, the debt had swollen 
so large because from 1975 to 1985, the government had 
skimmed off about $100 million in SaskPower profits and 
added them to the general revenue. If the corporation had 
been allowed to keep these profits as retained earnings, its 
borrowing requirements would have been reduced. 
Billinton also suggested that power rates had been kept 
artificially low, reducing revenue and forcing SaskPower 
to borrow more. 

 
George Hill attempted to pin the blame for the debt on the 
NDP [again, a familiar story, Mr. Speaker]. He charged 
that the NDP had demanded dividends from a company 
that could ill afford huge payouts and had lacked the 
political guts to raise electricity rates, preferring instead to 
borrow huge sums in New York. He also alleged that the 
NDP had spent money wastefully, eventually amassing a 
SaskPower payroll of 3,610 employees, 801 of whom had 
been eliminated by the PC government. 
 
In all his railing against the SaskPower debt, Hill failed to 
mention that it had soared from about 1.4 billion in 1982 
to 2.1 billion in 1987. Since he had either been chairman 
of the board or president of the corporation during most of 
that period, he had obviously been slow in coming to the 
conclusion that the size of the debt was insupportable. But 
now that the debt had been identified as a problem, the 
Devine government proposed the sale of the natural gas 
side of SaskPower, which had assets of $879 million, as 
the solution. 

 
Again history repeats itself, Mr. Speaker. We’re hearing today 
how the debt is causing problems for this government, and 
they’re looking for transformational change, which may mean 
going back on their promise to not privatize the public utilities 
of this province. Carrying on: 
 

The cash raised would be used to retire a portion of the 
debt [again, familiar noise] thereby reducing SaskPower’s 
interest charges and enabling it to keep electricity rates 
down. The Tories promised that in the three years 

following the privatization of SaskEnergy, electrical rate 
increases would be kept below 3 percent per year and that 
they would be kept below the rate of inflation for ten 
years. To sweeten the pot even more, the government 
promised to cut electricity rates for all skating and curling 
rinks in Saskatchewan by 50 percent, a policy that was 
sure to win votes in the province’s many small towns, 
where the ice rink served as the main community centre. 
In addition, all Saskatchewan residential and farm 
customers would be provided with a 5 percent discount on 
their electricity bills up to $100. This could either be taken 
as a cash saving, or in the form of free shares in 
SaskEnergy. And, in the event that all of these 
inducements were not enough, the government pledged to 
put some of the money raised from the privatization into a 
fund to support economic diversification. The fund would 
make available to new industries $10 million per year for a 
minimum of four years. 
 
The natural gas side of SaskPower was far more profitable 
than the electrical side. Over the preceding ten years, the 
gas division had made $407 million while the electrical 
division lost $25 million, and the gas side accounted for 27 
percent of the corporation’s assets and 82 percent of the 
retained earnings, but only 13 percent of the long-term 
debt. Privatization opponents pointed out that the sale of 
an asset would not, in the long term, improve the 
corporation’s financial position. 

 
Again, eerily resembling discussions of today, Mr. Speaker. I 
will continue: 
 

If an asset was capable of generating a profit in the private 
sector, there was no reason why it should not be capable of 
generating a profit in the public sector. It seems odd that 
for decades, SaskPower had been able to manage in both 
good and bad economic times, including the Great 
Depression, without having to resort to selling 
income-earning assets. But in 1989, apparently this was no 
longer possible. 

 
Again, reminds me of today’s discussion. Carrying on: 
 

Debt had its cost in the form of interest charges [this is 
what we’re hearing now] but so did equity investment 
because investors expect a return on their investment in the 
form of dividends or capital gains. The money that would 
be going to the shareholders in SaskEnergy was money 
that would not be going to the owners of the Crown 
corporation — that is, the citizens of Saskatchewan. 

 
This is clearly what’s going on here today, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Carrying on: 
 

According to the terms of the privatization of SaskEnergy, 
shareholders would receive a guaranteed annual dividend 
of “approximately 10 percent” and a five-year guarantee of 
the principal. That was a share that bore a suspicious 
resemblance to a bond.  

 
Now we haven’t heard any of these details yet in what’s 
forthcoming, but of course the government has to get their 
backdoor bill in before any of this can even start, Mr. Speaker, 



November 1, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1057 

because they’re going to undercut the provisions of the Crown 
protection Act and they can’t do that until this bill is passed. 
 
I’ll carry on: 
 

The various lures attached to their privatization proposal 
— the 50 percent reduction in electricity charges for 
hockey rinks and curling rinks, the $100 worth of free 
shares to all SaskPower customers, the diversification fund 
— were essentially window dressing; even such a devoted 
privatization booster as business columnist Bruce 
Johnstone admitted that these inducements “reeked of 
political opportunism.” 

 
Another concern raised by the privatization centred on gas rates. 
 

With SaskEnergy as a private-sector monopoly, what 
assurances was there that the service would not deteriorate 
or that consumers would not be charged excessive rates? 
The government proposed to appoint a commissioner with 
a 10-year term and power to review SaskEnergy’s rates 
every three years, but the absence of an annual review and 
the refusal to allow the commissioner to hire any staff 
beyond a secretary ensured that the rate regulation would 
be ineffective. The proposed method of regulating 
TransGas, the SaskEnergy subsidiary in the business of 
transporting natural gas long distances and for large 
industrial users, was similarly toothless: the regulatory 
board was allowed to review TransGas rates on a 
“complaint basis” only, and for no longer than 12-month 
periods. 
 
Another major criticism of the privatization focused on the 
question of who would control SaskEnergy after the sale. 
The government attempted to put these concerns to rest by 
legislating restrictions on the private company. 

 
Now today, Mr. Speaker, what we see is this notion of 51 per 
cent, 49 per cent as the government control. 
 

The head office was to remain permanently in 
Saskatchewan; two-thirds of the board of directors were to 
be Saskatchewan residents; the initial share offering was 
made to Saskatchewan residents only, and no foreign 
ownership was to be allowed; and no shareholder, apart 
from SaskPower, could hold more than 8 percent of the 
total shares. 

 
However, there was nothing to stop Saskatchewan 
shareholders from subsequently selling their holdings to 
out-of-province buyers. Given the typical pattern of 
privatizations, the shares would probably be underpriced, 
providing a strong inducement to immediately flip the 
shares for quick profit. They would then be snapped up by 
investors in [that old] central Canada, where much of the 
country’s money is concentrated. As soon as a large 
volume of SaskEnergy shares was made available on the 
stock exchange, continued local ownership of the 
corporation would be very much in doubt. 

 
The government, significantly, didn’t offer any promises 
about share offerings subsequent to the first one, which 
probably meant that they would not be restricted to 

Saskatchewan residents. Shareholders do not appreciate it 
when the government says certain people are not allowed 
to buy their shares because that reduces the demand for the 
shares and, inevitably, their value. Governments 
consequently have a very difficult time upholding 
regulations about share ownership. A case in point was the 
loosening of restrictions on the ownership of SaskPower 
bonds, where restrictions designed to keep the securities in 
Saskatchewan hands were initially placed on the sale. At 
first, out-of-province residents were not allowed to buy the 
bonds, and no one person was permitted to purchase more 
than $100,000 worth. In May 1989, both these restrictions 
were lifted. Since the market for the bonds, which had a 
feature whereby they could be exchanged for Saskoil 
shares, was now much larger, the value of both the bonds 
and the shares went up. It seemed clear that when there 
was a conflict between local ownership and profit-making, 
profit-making won out. 
 
What had been true of SaskPower bonds would be no less 
true of SaskEnergy shares. There was no real guarantee 
that a majority then would continue to be owned by 
Saskatchewan residents, and the legislative guarantee that 
SaskEnergy’s head office would remain in Saskatchewan 
did not amount to much, because while the government 
could pass a law determining the location of the head 
office, it could not effectively legislate what was done in 
that office. 

 
[19:15] 
 

Roy Romanow, who had succeeded Allan Blakeney as 
NDP leader in November 1987, argued that local 
ownership had been a key reason for establishing Crown 
corporations in the first place. Through the Crowns, the 
people of the province were able to define market forces 
and gain some control over their own economy. Profits 
were invested in the province and policies were instituted 
to direct spinoff activities to local businesses. SaskPower, 
for example, purchased $400 million in goods and services 
from Saskatchewan companies in 1988. 

 
“Can we be assured that buying from Saskatchewan 
businesses would be the first priority of a privately owned 
utility owned by out-of-province investors?” Romanow 
asked. 
 
Another benefit was that a Crown corporation did not have 
to pay federal tax. 

 
This is again something we’re talking about here today, Mr. 
Speaker, where the proposal put forth by the Minister of Justice 
today will indeed bring our Crown corporations within the 
claws of the tax collector in Ottawa. And we have no answer 
from this government as to why they would put our Crowns in 
that situation. 
 

Had the gas utility been a private corporation from 1978 to 
1988, it would have paid $113 million of its $407 million 
profit to Ottawa. Privatization would likely divert money 
from Saskatchewan to federal coffers. 

 
We have no answer from the minister today in terms of how he 



1058 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2016 

intends to deal with that or why he would put us in that 
position. 
 

The government had one final argument in support of its 
case. Pointing to the example of NOVA, which began 
modestly as the Alberta Gas Trunk Line Company and 
developed into a $7 billion corporation, George Hill 
predicted that privatizing SaskEnergy would lead to 
economic diversification: “There will be very much of an 
expansionist philosophy. The things that SaskEnergy could 
get into are limited only by one’s imagination.” Hill did 
not explain why it was necessary to sell the utility that 
delivered natural gas to people’s homes in order to have 
economic diversification. If, for example, opportunities 
existed in the petrochemical industry, those projects could 
be undertaken whether the gas utility was publicly or 
privately owned. 
 
The bells ring 
 
Up to the time when Devine announced the imminent sale 
of part of SaskPower, the NDP had appeared to be losing 
the battle over privatization. Devine had boasted that he 
would use the issue to bury the socialists. Just as Mulroney 
won the 1988 election by polarizing the electorate over 
free trade and in so doing had managed to cover up the 
government’s mistakes and scandals, Devine was in a 
position to do the same thing with privatization. Privately, 
NDP strategists worried that the Tory premier might be 
able to pull this off and sweep into power for another term. 
 
The tide began to turn against privatization on the 21st of 
April, 1989, when the bill to privatize SaskEnergy was 
introduced in the legislature. When the bells rang to 
summon the members for the vote, the NDP MLAs walked 
out in protest. Saskatchewan was one of two provinces, the 
other being Ontario, where the government was not able to 
force a vote with the opposition absent, so the bells kept 
ringing and the legislative proceedings ground to a halt. It 
was a calculated gamble for the NDP to dramatize its 
opposition in this way, because there was a chance that the 
public might see their boycott as irresponsible and 
undemocratic. The Tories certainly hoped for this 
response, declaring angrily that they had been duly elected 
to govern and that the NDP had no right to arbitrarily shut 
down the legislature. If the New Democrats were so sure of 
their case, they should not be afraid to debate the details of 
the government proposal in the proper forum. 
 
Complicating things for the NDP was the fact that since the 
budget had not been approved, government departments 
were independent on interim supply bills for operating 
funds. There was enough money to last into the middle of 
May, but after that pressure would mount for the NDP to 
return to the legislature so that money could be allocated to 
maintain government services. By stopping the business of 
the House, the NDP MLAs took a major risk. If the voters 
were indifferent to the privatization of SaskEnergy, they 
would have to creep back, humiliated, to the legislature. 
 
As it turned out, the NDP’s bold strokes succeeded beyond 
even their expectations. The protest against the sale of 
SaskEnergy touched a nerve. The latent public antipathy to 

Devine’s privatization crusade, welled to the surface and 
was channelled into a fierce campaign to save SaskPower. 
Within a matter of weeks, 100,000 people had signed a 
petition demanding that the government back off from the 
sale. Romanow addressed huge emotional rallies in Prince 
Albert, Yorkton, Saskatoon, and Regina. The anger in the 
crowds was palpable and Romanow was interrupted by 
ovation after ovation and shouts of “Ring those bells” and 
“Let’s fight back.”  
 
Six days into the walk-out, Devine called a press 
conference to urge the NDP to come back to the 
legislature. “We knew they would go crazy,” he said. “All 
I’m saying is the legislature is the place to debate it. Let’s 
debate it.” Devine denied that natural gas was a utility and 
thus that he had gone back on his word, and also rejected 
the idea of calling an election. “Why would I call an 
election when I haven’t built Rafferty and they’re holding 
it up? When I haven’t provided shares for natural gas and I 
haven’t allowed people to invest in potash?” A few days 
later an Angus Reid poll showed how out of touch with 
public opinion the Premier was. Sixty-seven percent of 
those polls said they were opposed to the privatization of 
SaskEnergy by means of a public share offering, 22 
percent approved, and 10 percent had no opinion. 

 
And I’ll just skip ahead a little bit to the end of this part: 
 

Finally, the NDP returned to the legislature with the 
understanding that the bill would die on the order paper. 
The government appointed a three-member panel chaired 
by Lloyd Barber, president of the University of 
Saskatchewan and a member of the board of the 
pro-privatization Institute for Saskatchewan Enterprise, to 
examine the impact of a SaskEnergy share offering. For the 
time being, the plans to privatize the natural gas utility 
were put on hold. 

 
I’ll stop there in terms of this part of the story, Mr. Speaker. I 
think that Barber’s report, I was just looking at it, and I really 
want to thank the Legislative Library staff for assisting me in 
my research for this debate. And they also pulled out the Barber 
report that was issued in 1989. And I guess it still sits on the 
books and it’s sitting there. But we know that SaskEnergy is 
still owned by the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
So that’s an example of public groundswell and the value I 
think that people in Saskatchewan who really understand our 
Crowns, understand the importance of their value. And again 
why we’re being put in this position now with this weird 
hybridization creature that the Minister of Justice is creating by 
defining privatization the way he has is really quite interesting 
and, I think, disturbing. And certainly I know we will all have 
lots to say about this as we go along on the debate. 
 
Just some comments that have been shared with me as we see 
this unfold, Mr. Speaker. One of the things that was raised, and 
I raised it in the House today in question period, is the choice of 
49 per cent as the ultimate furthest expansion that this 
government would go when they call it not privatizing. But I 
would call it at least partial privatization, if not privatization of 
a large part. But 49 per cent is what the government’s chosen. 
 



November 1, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1059 

As we pointed out today, the Income Tax Act of Canada in 
section 149 says that a Crown corporation is exempt from 
corporate income tax, provided not less than 90 per cent of the 
shares is held by the government or province. So this is the 
question. We didn’t get an answer in question period today, but 
certainly what is the government thinking when they’re going to 
jeopardize the entire profits of this Crown corporation, making 
it subject to income tax because they’re privatizing 49 per cent 
of the corporation? 
 
If more than 10 per cent is sold, federal income tax becomes 
payable. In essence, a significant portion of the Crown 
corporation is now held by outside, non-government interests 
and that 15 per cent of SaskTel’s profits are going to be paid to 
the federal government — a windfall for Ottawa. A windfall for 
Ottawa, and this is coming from a Premier who is not happy 
with anything coming from Ottawa these days. A windfall for 
Ottawa at the expense of the residents of Saskatchewan, even if 
only 11 per cent of the entity is sold. At a minimum, I think the 
government should consider amending this bill to reduce it to 
10 per cent, just to protect the profits that the people of 
Saskatchewan currently enjoy. So again we really will look for 
explanation from this government as to why they’ve chosen 
such a wide margin for privatization. 
 
Something else that I talked about earlier is the minority 
shareholder class and the rights that they will have to benefit 
themselves. Because the shareholder has no obligation to 
anyone but themselves, and they don’t attract any liability 
either, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But will these private minority 
shareholders have the right to appoint board directors, board 
members? And what about security regulations? There’s all 
sorts of security regulations that could, may or may not affect 
the Crown . . . Again I struggle with words to describe what this 
beast would be, but sort of the quasi-private or semi-public 
beast? What laws apply? Do the security regulations apply? 
 
There is one upside that was pointed out to me by a constituent, 
and that’s that perhaps irresponsible fiscal behaviour of the 
government towards a privatized Crown would have to cease. 
And we’re looking at the strange direction of the government to 
ask SaskPower to purchase GTH [Global Transportation Hub] 
land, for example. 
 
So at least then the minority shareholders could say, are you 
crazy? You’re affecting our ability to maximize our profit here. 
Why are you doing that? And we’ll see maybe less government 
interference. So that is one small, little ray of sunshine in all of 
this, is that at least the minority shareholders would see the 
sense of what’s going on and stop things like the SaskPower 
purchase of GTH land that we were talking about earlier in the 
House here last week. 
 
The downside is that the sale of a portion of the Crown would 
not necessarily result in an optimum price, because any 
purchaser is going to want some sort of control of the 
corporation. Again, is this going to affect, for SaskPower, the 
way the . . . or any of our utilities? Will this change the way the 
Saskatchewan rate review panel would operate? That’s a very 
good question. What’s going to happen to the Saskatchewan 
rate review panel? And the suggestion here is that it may have 
to go to a quasi-judicial means of operating. So we don’t know, 
because we’re creating something that doesn’t exist. 

It’s almost . . . well yesterday it was Halloween and we know 
there was lots of little Frankensteins running around, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. So this is kind of like that. This is like a 
Frankenstein that doesn’t have any comparisons in any other 
part of our real world. 
 
So we don’t know. We don’t know what’s going to happen to 
the Saskatchewan rate review panel. We don’t know whether 
minority shareholders are going to be able to ask for directors to 
be placed to represent their interests on our Crown corporations. 
We don’t know what’s going to happen with securities 
regulations and The Business Corporations Act and the rights of 
shareholders. There’s all these questions. 
 
The government is claiming currently that there is no offer for 
SaskTel, although this individual said they offered $1.53 and 
two used tennis balls. I guess there is an offer for SaskTel in 
that sense. The interesting question is whether any member of 
the government or officials have been in discussion with any 
Canada telecommunication company or pension fund regarding 
the sale of any of the assets of SaskTel in the past 12 months. 
 
Now the Premier has already alluded to some of the potential 
investors in this non-privatization privatization, and he even 
referred to the Auto Fund, which is a fund of one of our Crown 
corporations that may want to invest in other Crown 
corporations. And again, it spins the mind to sort of figure out 
how that’s going to work. 
 
This person indicates that in the public there are rumours about 
discussions for the sale of SaskTel. And so I think the Premier 
and the minister need to come clean with the public and be 
transparent and accountable around this issue, and let us know 
what the discussions are, and be upfront with the people about 
what they’re planning to do through this privatization scheme. 
 
So those are just some thoughts and . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . Yes, there’s other questions in here about the GTH scandal, 
but we’ll save that for another day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Just want to share some comments from . . . Actually it’s from 
the House in May, and this was reported in the Battlefords 
News-Optimist on May 30th. And I just want to share what the 
Premier said in May about SaskTel. He said, “I was asked 
during the election campaign if our government . . .” I just want 
to give Hansard the date of this . . . the second week, so this is 
May 30th, so the Tuesday before the 30th, whatever day that 
was. 
 

I was asked during the election campaign if our 
government would change the Crown protection Act, 
which obviously governs what governments can or can’t 
do with any of the Crowns, [we thought] beyond what 
we’d campaigned on with respect to SLGA. I said that we 
wouldn’t and we would keep that promise. That’s what we 
have done for the last eight years, Mr. Speaker, is worked 
hard to keep the promises that we’ve made. 

 
So this really is foreshadowing, Mr. Speaker, of what we’ve 
seen here today. Of course he’s not going to change the Crown 
protection Act when he knew all along that he had this crazy 
scheme to hybridize privatization through this creature of 
Crown private corporation, where minority shareholders with 



1060 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2016 

private minority shareholders will sit at the same board of 
directors table as our Crown representatives. 
 
An Hon. Member: — But it’s not what he promised. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — I don’t think that’s quite what he promised. 
And I’m not sure what the Premier intended by this comment, 
because he said we wouldn’t change the Crown protection Act, 
which obviously governs what governments can or can’t do 
with any of the Crowns. 
 
And yet we see this insertion of some weird World Bank 
definition of privatization, which I can’t find anywhere. I don’t 
know where the minister got it from. And there’s hundreds of 
different definitions of privatization out there, so by the very act 
of what they’re doing on The Interpretation Act in this bill, Mr. 
Speaker, does change the Crown protection Act. It does change 
the governance of what governments can or can’t do with the 
Crowns. 
 
And you know, the minister uses the word clarify. That’s just 
too cute by far, Mr. Speaker. This is not clarifying at all. This is 
not clarifying at all and that minister should be much more 
careful about his choice of words here because it’s got nothing 
to do with clarity. And in fact what it does do is it shows how 
the Premier has broken the promise that he made to the people 
not only in this election but in 2007 as well, and I’ll get into that 
a little bit sooner or a little bit later. 
 
[19:30] 
 
There was an article recently in Planet S and I want to share this 
with the Assembly as well. It’s called “In Brad Wall’s Words,” 
and it’s a recap of our Premier’s statements on SaskTel 
privatization. So let’s have a look. Here we go, and I am 
quoting this: 
 

Let it go: Brad Wall doesn’t have a hidden agenda to 
privatize SaskTel and sell it off when a good offer comes 
along — at least according to several remarks he’s made 
about privatizing the telecom over the past six years. 
 
If there IS a privatization agenda, then it’s hidden in plain 
sight. 
 
Based on comments since 2010, Saskatchewan’s premier 
tends to emphasize two things: keeping his party’s 2007 
election campaign promise to not privatize Crowns; and 
ensuring the Saskatchewan electorate has the final say (via 
referendum) on privatizing SaskTel. 

 
To me, Mr. Speaker, what we saw introduced in this House last 
week goes directly in the face of those comments. They go on 
to say: 
 

However, Wall’s and the government’s actions do reveal a 
consistent pattern: a piecemeal-type policy that gradually 
sells or privatizes Crowns or public services. 
 
For example, the government and its Crowns have sold 17 
different publicly held investments, shares or stakes since 
2008. It’s also outsourced public goods or services to the 
private sector 23 different times. 

On top of that, it’s supported four big P3 projects. That 
includes the one time a provincial Crown has been sold to 
the private sector — 60 per cent of Information Services 
Corporation in 2012. Unlike SaskTel, SaskPower and SGI, 
ISC was not covered by The Crown Corporations Public 
Ownership Act, tabled by the NDP and supported by the 
Saskatchewan Party in 2003. 
 
Still, for the sake of longevity — and perhaps trajectory — 
it’s worthwhile to look at what Wall has said on the public 
record about privatizing Canada’s lone provincially-owned 
telecom. 
 
On The Record 
 
The first statement comes from a one-on-one interview 
with Gordon Pitts in The Globe and Mail in May 2010. 
 
Pitts asks Wall why he resists privatizing Crowns; Wall 
references the 2003 gaffe by the then-party leader, Elwin 
Hermanson [and] here’s what . . . [Wall] said. 
 

It’s a practical lesson from the election of 2003 . . . 
[which, Mr. Speaker, I think you were part of] when we 
sacrificed the chance to implement the rest of this 
growth agenda. I was the Crown corporation critic and I 
helped write the policy, so mea culpa. We sacrificed the 
chance to make some long-term changes in the psyche 
and environment in the province for this one issue. 

 
Some on the right say SaskTel doesn’t have a future as a 
standalone indie. Well, it just had its biggest year. Part of 
it is a growing economy and part of it is an attachment 
people have to their Crowns. In the case of SaskTel, it’s 
competing with other telcos, and this (attachment) has 
stood them in good stead. I’m not saying Saskatchewan 
is an island with respect to government-owned 
enterprise, but there are unique elements that say to me, 
we still have other things to do; we made a commitment 
and we plan to keep it. 

 
That was the minister, or the Premier, in May of 2010. 
 

Seven months later, Leader-Post reporter Angela Hall did 
a year-end interview with Wall. She asks him about 
accusations of a hidden privatization agenda. 
 
“The fact is we have put significant investment into the 
Crown sector. We put significant general revenue dollars 
into SaskTel over the three years to help them expand 
connectivity in the province, to help them expand the 
mobility network.” 
 
There’s little else that comes from Wall on SaskTel and 
privatization until the 2016 election cycle, which started 
March 8th. 

 
The Tune Changes 
 
On March 15, then-NDP leader Cam Broten raises the 
prospect of Wall’s hidden privatization agenda for the 
province’s Crowns, as reported by the CBC. 
 



November 1, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1061 

When pressed on the issue, Wall said: “There’s something 
we signed on to called the Crown Corporation Protection 
Act, or to that effect. Basically, it protects Crowns from 
being privatized,” he said. “If elected, we will make one 
change to that: that’s to the liquor retailing in the province. 
And we’ve already announced that.” 
 
“With respect to the major Crowns, we will not be 
changing it if we’re re-elected again,” he said. 
 
The discourse shifted on May 17 [and that, Mr. Speaker, 
you know that’s after the election]. 
 
Before entering the Legislature for his government’s 
throne speech, Wall told reporters that “competition has 
gotten tough,” for SaskTel, due to a May 2 deal that saw 
Bell Canada buy Manitoba Telecom Services, according to 
Leader-Post reporter David Fraser. 
 
“Maybe that’s a discussion Saskatchewan people want to 
have,” Wall said. “We wouldn’t be able to be in a position 
of welcoming private investment into SaskTel even if that 
was thought to be the right thing, because we didn’t 
campaign on it. 
 
“If it was something Saskatchewan people, we thought, 
really wanted to at least talk about, there is the idea of a 
provincial referendum.” 

 
I think one of the things . . . and I mean all of this, the irony 
here, Mr. Speaker, is replete. And I think it just goes to show 
that the promises . . . I talked to a former MLA [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] and former cabinet minister, and she 
said, does he think the people of Saskatchewan are stupid? 
Because that’s how he is treating them. And I think she is right. 
I think this government doesn’t have the courage to make the 
changes to the Crown protection Act that they want to make. 
They haven’t been able to do that since 2003 when they lost the 
election because of it, and in 2004 when they unanimously 
voted in favour of the Crown protection Act. Mr. Speaker, 
they’ve put themselves in a box and now we see them trying to 
weasel out of it. 
 
And what I will do, Mr. Speaker, is turn to another article right 
now, because this is a really interesting story. It’s from the 
Manning Centre, which is a right wing think tank, I believe 
based in Calgary. And this is written in October of 2010 by 
David Seymour, who’s for the Manning Centre. And the article 
is called “C2C: Limited Government in Saskatchewan or 
WWHD (What Would Hayek Do?).” And so here’s how it 
goes. This whole piece is about how Crown corporations are an 
incursion on liberty. And so this person’s coming from a 
perspective of liberty or libertarianism which of course is 
individual freedoms as opposed to collective rights. 
 
So what he says here, and this is a quote: 
 

What follows is an examination of the current 
Saskatchewan government . . . and in particular its success 
at limiting its own activities and therefore expanding the 
metaphorical spheres of liberty in which the people of the 
province live. 

 

First thing he starts on is fiscal management, and this is a quote: 
 

The larger the amount of money expropriated by 
government, the less likelihood that people are to plan their 
activities by way of controlling their own funds. In the last 
financial year of NDP government, 2006-07, the 
Government of Saskatchewan’s all-in expenditure figure 
was $9.3 billion. In 2009-10 the same figure was $12.5 
billion. In other words, over three years, the Saskatchewan 
Party government has increased financial outlays by 
around 34 per cent in nominal terms. [And Mr. Speaker, 
we know it’s way higher than that now in 2016.] In fiscal 
year 2003-04, expenditures were 7.7 billion, so the 
increase in expenditures for the last three years of the NDP 
government was around 21 per cent. The Saskatchewan 
Party has not only adopted the spending trajectory of the 
previous government, they have actually accelerated it. 
 
Two possible defenses are that the spending is driven by 
factors beyond the government’s control, or that the 
spending is on better causes than previous spending. 
Healthcare, with its relentless cost increases that are driven 
by demographics and technology changes and the 
government’s policy of substituting provincial tax revenues 
for school board taxes, and the push to improve 
Saskatchewan’s notorious highways (which are also of 
greatest interest to the Saskatchewan Party’s rural base) 
could be cited as examples of these two defenses. 
Unfortunately, it is not clear that these arguments hold 
water. According to the summary financial statements, 
healthcare was 35 per cent of expenditure in 2003 and 36 
percent in 2009. Transportation was around four percent in 
each and every year. It would seem that the spending 
increases are rather more across the board than driven by 
any particular policy direction or external condition. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, once again, where has the money gone? I’ll 
continue. 
 

One of the things that happens when a government spends 
more money is that it is required to raise more revenue. For 
the most part, Saskatchewan’s booming economy, good 
harvests, and in particular the resource sector has achieved 
that for this government, with one major hiccup. In 2009, it 
was forecast that potash revenues for the year would be 
approximately two billion dollars. In the event, a 
worldwide market crash meant that the government was 
actually required to return $200 million to the potash 
companies as a tax refund. 

 
What happened next could only be described as somewhat 
disingenuous behaviour by the government. 
 
It dipped in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, commonly 
known as the rainy day fund, then required Crown 
corporations to pay 100 per cent of profits as dividends 
(with the exception of SaskPower, which is particularly 
short of capital in view of increasing demand). Whatever 
one’s view of the Crowns may be, this unforeseen taking is 
a disturbance that makes it more difficult for their 
managers to plan future activities and therefore damages 
the entire Saskatchewan economy. 

 



1062 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2016 

With a billion dollars of help from taxes and oil revenues 
being higher than forecast, the government then made the 
roundly lambasted claim that in actual fact they had not run 
a deficit but a $424.5 million surplus. 
 
A final exacerbating feature of the fiscal situation the 
government has found itself in this year [which is 2010] is 
their 2008 tax cuts. Tax cuts are only a step toward limited 
government if they are accompanied by a decrease in 
spending. 

 
That’s not happening here, Mr. Speaker. 
 

If they result in deficits, then they are more accurately 
described as a tax delay. They can be seen as having 
behavioural effects by reducing the penalty for wealth 
creation and therefore increasing economic activity. 

 
He sums up this section by saying: 
 

Altogether, Saskatchewan’s government has ramped up 
spending faster than its predecessor, poorly forecast its 
revenues, run an effective deficit when resource revenues 
are found wanting, then covered it up by asset stripping the 
Crowns and dipping into the fiscal stabilization fund to 
claim they had actually run a healthy surplus. They cut 
taxes, but these were arguably structured in a way that 
widens the gulf between those that pay taxes and those 
who benefit from them. 

 
That’s the Manning institute, Mr. Speaker. And I just want to 
take a little look here at . . . Well we know the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund was drained throughout those years. We 
know that the Crowns have paid over $3 billion in dividends in 
the last few years, but I want to take a look at the summary 
statement of financial position. 
 
So we’re talking in 2006 of . . . The net debt of this province 
was $7.76 billion in 2006. In 2016 — 10 years later — the debt 
is higher, $7.899 billion, Mr. Speaker. This government is 
further in debt now with record revenues that we’ve never seen 
the likes of, asset-stripping the Crowns as was pointed out by 
the Manning institute. 
 
And the other thing that I think is really troubling for the people 
of Saskatchewan is the financial presentations that they make 
every year with the budget, because we’ve got to remember, 
Mr. Speaker, the budget is only an estimate. We call it 
“estimates” for a good reason. Those are estimates. But how 
accurate are they? Let’s take a look at that. 
 
In the last eight years, this government six out of eight times 
over-estimated the revenues and the fiscal position that they 
were going to end in. In actual times, they were out six out of 
the eight times. The actual amount of money that we had was 
much lower than what the government estimated. Twice it was 
over, and that was 2008-09 when we know there was significant 
resource revenues that came in with . . . Oil I think topped up at 
$140 a barrel, something like that. And in 2013-14 there was 
also an over . . . like they brought in more in their actuals than 
the estimate numbers. 
 
But what really scares me, Mr. Speaker, I mean in 2009-10 they 

were only out by $800 million. ’10-11 they were out by 33 
million. It’s very minor and I think it’s close enough. I could 
write that one off. ’11-12 they were out by $480 million — half 
a billion. That’s a pretty sizable chunk of change. ’12-13 around 
80 million so again, that in the whole scheme of things may not 
be that much. ’14-15 out by a very small amount actually, less 
than $10 million, which is really close. 
 
But what really hurts, Mr. Speaker, is last year. This 
government projected . . . they estimated before the election that 
there would be a surplus of $106 million. That was the estimate. 
Of course we didn’t see a budget leading up to the election in 
April, although normally it would be tabled in March. And 
there was no reason why it couldn’t have been tabled in March. 
So they actually estimated in 2015-16 that there would be a 
surplus of 107 million. Mr. Speaker, do you remember what the 
actual amount of the figures were? We have a deficit. In last 
year alone we were out $1.5 billion. That’s how much they 
were . . . And if you add the 107 million, the mark that they 
missed by was $1.6 billion. 
 
[19:45] 
 
Now that’s terrifying, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I think it just 
speaks volumes to the, maybe the hubris of this government, 
that somehow everything’s just going to work itself out. But 
oops, they drained the rainy day fund. They can’t pull that 
money out. There was over a billion dollars there. There was a 
billion dollars in the Crowns that have been stripped. So this 
government is right out of luck and right out of options. And I 
think that’s the sign of desperation that we’re in now, where 
they’re actually having to have to have this conversation about 
selling off 49 per cent of our Crowns, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They have no money and they have no ability to meet the 
commitments that they’ve made to all the P3s [public-private 
partnership], to the gross overspending of the bypass project 
that’s happening here in the city, to the gross overspending for 
carbon capture and sequestration, one and a half billion dollars. 
We see all the P3s and we know the extra expenses that are 
involved in that. 
 
And so what’s left? They have taken every little cookie out of 
the cookie jar, Mr. Speaker, and I’m worried about what this 
year’s . . . And obviously we haven’t even seen the first quarter 
results. We will see, the minister promises we will see the 
mid-year review soon, so we’ll have a close look at it then. But 
if they continue to miss the mark by over a billion dollars in 
their budgeting, we have a serious issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s another article that I would like to share with the 
Assembly regarding “The Limits of Privatization.” This is by an 
author. His name is Paul Starr, and the source of this is the 
Proceedings of the Academy of Political Science from 1987. So 
it’s somewhat dated but there is some very, very telling 
positions in here that tell us what happens when you pursue a 
privatization agenda. And of course that was at a time when the 
privatization agenda was picking up steam across the world and 
globally, so pundits were having an opportunity to examine 
that. 
 
When you think about the privatization agenda, we’re talking 
about our utilities today but the next question is, what’s 



November 1, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1063 

tomorrow? And this article looks a lot at the impact of 
privatizing hospitals and schools and highways, some of those 
other what we would all consider public institutions primarily. 
So this is Paul Starr, and I will quote: 
 

There is an obvious, radical difference partial and total 
privatization and a subtle but equally important difference 
between privatization and liberalization. By treating these 
heterogeneous measures as members of the same family, 
the advocates of privatization use the more moderate ideas, 
such as vouchers and contracting out [and again, this is 
something we’ve seen on a regular basis from this 
government] to gain plausibility for the more radical goal 
of government disengagement. Milton and Rose Friedman 
have said explicitly that they would prefer ending all 
public financing of primary and secondary education, 
except in hardship cases, but propose vouchers as a more 
acceptable first step. In the most ingenious and 
refreshingly frank case for privatization, Stuart Butler has 
argued that the real objective should be to break up “public 
spending coalitions” to bring about a permanent reduction 
in the base of political support for government growth. So, 
while privatization can be presented as a measure to 
improve the performance of particular services, the larger 
intention of some exponents is to reduce support for public 
provision altogether. Whether partial privatization would 
actually lead to disengagement . . . will be scrutinized 
below, but it is worth noting here that the more moderate 
forms of privatization are for its advocates stepping stones 
toward more radical objectives shared by only a small 
minority of Americans. 
 
The conservative proponents of privatization see a 
zero-sum relationship between government and the 
economy. The bigger the public sector, the smaller the 
private economy. The more public spending, the less 
private savings and investment. Hence, in this simple view, 
privatization is certain to increase savings, investment, 
productivity, and growth. 

 
If government spending truly retarded economic 
development, the Western economies with the highest 
ratios of public expenditures to gross national product 
would grow the slowest. However, comparative studies 
show that not to be the case. The conservative view of 
government as an economic black hole misses what 
government adds to the productive resources of society and 
overstates what government takes away. First, much public 
spending represents investment in human and intangible 
capital as well as physical infrastructure . . . And, second, 
much of the contemporary increase in public spending has 
come in the form of transfer payments, which redistribute 
income but do not exhaust resources that would otherwise 
be available for investment . . . 

 
The case for privatization as a means of bringing about 
deep reductions in government activity also neglects the 
contribution of increased public expenditure to economic 
stabilization . . . 
 
Nor is there the slightest chance that governments will 
unload responsibility for the stability of the economy and 
the financial system. The voters will not allow it. Nor will 

the banks. 
 
And certainly, Mr. Speaker, you can only recall the collapse of 
. . . the imminent collapse of banks in the United States in the 
2000s. The government stepped in. This was when Obama took 
over; he had no choice. And we know that the voters will 
demand that and the public will demand that. 
 

In the current conservative view, the public arena is 
nothing but a political marketplace where politicians, 
public employees, and competing groups of beneficiaries 
seek their narrow interests at the expense of the general 
welfare. Government expands because bureaucrats 
maximize their budgets and because beneficiaries with 
“concentrated” interests in program expansion exercise 
more political muscle than do taxpayers with “diffuse” 
interests in restraint. As an explanation for the 
development of the modern state, the theory is 
unpersuasive; it cannot explain the variations over time or 
across societies. If the influences on the budget were 
always asymmetrical, spending would have grown as much 
in periods when growth was slow. The narrowly 
individualistic view of political choice also provides a 
misleading account of contemporary policies. 

 
He goes on to say, “partial privatization differs from the more 
radical forms.” And I think that’s what we’re talking about 
here, Mr. Speaker, is partial privatization. 
 

Contracting out expands the set of claimants on the public 
treasury. [This is a researched position.] By having defense 
equipment privately produced, we do not reduce the 
pressure on the defense budget. The defense companies 
and their employees are capable of determining their stake 
in higher military expenditures. By having highways 
constructed by private contractors, we do not reduce the 
pressure for bigger construction appropriations. By having 
health services under Medicare provided by private doctors 
and hospitals, we do not obscure from them their interest in 
higher Medicare appropriations . . . 

 
Conservatives who favor privatization read the record as 
proving the superiority of private providers, but this is an 
act of heroically selective attention. 

 
I like that so much, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to read that again. 
“Conservatives who favor privatization read the record as 
proving the superiority of private providers, but this is an act of 
heroically selective attention.” I really like that — heroically 
selective attention. 
 

Given the American experience with defense production, 
construction projects, and health care — all mostly 
produced privately with public dollars — it is remarkable 
that anyone could see a path towards budgetary salvation 
simply by shifting the locus of service production from the 
public sector to the private sector. 

 
Here’s another good phrase, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Advocates of privatization show an undue tenderness 
toward private contractors and an undue hostility toward 
public employees. They indulge private contractors their 



1064 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2016 

history of cost overruns; they rebuke public employees for 
their history of wage increases. But their preference for 
private provision actually reflects a deep underestimate of 
the skills that private firms can deploy. They underestimate 
the capacity of contractors to manipulate to their own 
advantage the incentives that are held out to them for better 
performance. And they underestimate the contractors’ 
capacity to influence political decisions, either 
illegitimately through bribery or legally through campaign 
contributions and lobbying. Missing from the case for 
privatization is any clear sense of feedback effects — the 
reaction back upon the government of the enlarged class of 
private contractors and other providers dependant on 
public money. 
 
So, if partial privatization is to reduce public spending, it 
cannot be expected to achieve its effect by reducing 
spending pressure. Private firms have to be far more 
efficient. Some evidence does suggest that private 
producers have lower costs, but the picture is complicated 
by the following: First, contrary evidence from other 
studies shows no difference in costs or even higher costs 
among commercial providers. Second, there are pervasive 
differences in the services performed by public and private 
organizations [and I think our surgical clinics are a good 
example of that], particularly because of differences in 
their clientele, such as exist between public and private 
schools, hospitals, and social services as a result of the 
“creaming” of client populations by private institutions. 
Third, studies usually lack any evidence about the quality 
of services, thereby making it difficult to judge whether 
lower costs result from greater efficiency or deteriorating 
quality. 
 

And we heard today from my colleague from Douglas Park 
about some of the conditions of the laundry that’s now coming 
back from the privatization of laundry services where surgical 
instruments and needles are being brought in. And this was 
supposed to be an improvement, and the former minister of 
Health was asking about what it was before. This was promised 
to be an improvement, and there is no demonstration that it is, 
Mr. Speaker. If it is an improvement, then we should be able to 
see the differences shared with this government. So maybe 
they’ll bring forth that information; I’m not sure. I’ll continue 
on here. 
 

And, fourth, some private firms’ lower costs stem from 
lower wage levels and greater use of part-time workers 
with fewer fringe benefits. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, we know the impact that has on the 
community when people’s wages aren’t living wages and when 
they can’t pay their mortgage or have the benefits that good 
mortgage-paying jobs would provide. He goes on to say: 
 

If privatization enables governments to cut wages and 
break unions, it is a means of imposing losses on public 
employees. If it enables governments to reduce services 
and allows providers to skim off the best clients, it is a 
means of imposing losses on beneficiaries. Neither of these 
ways of reducing cost has anything to do with 
improvements in efficiency. Perhaps the public wants 
wages and benefits cut. If so, voters and legislators should 

do so with their eyes open. 
 
By emphasizing these considerations, I do not mean to 
suggest that contracting out is never a good idea. It is an 
important and valuable instrument of public management, 
but it is treacherous to generalize about its virtues. 
 

I’m going to move on to the next page here, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and pick it up here. He says: 
 

Although privatization aims to shift services from the 
public to the private sector, it could end up making private 
institutions more like public ones. If public money flows to 
private providers, the voters and their representatives are 
likely to demand greater accountability. The courts are 
likely to demand greater compliance with constitutional 
protections of clients’ and employees’ rights. The very 
distinctiveness of the sector would probably diminish. In 
the extreme case, the privatization of public provision 
could turn out to mean the socialization of private 
provision. 
 

So that’s extreme, but it could lead that way. He goes on to say: 
 

Thus there is much reason to question the seemingly 
straightforward view of privatization as a means of 
reducing government. Butler’s argument that privatization 
would change the dynamics of government expansion is 
unpersuasive on its face. Private contractors make 
aggressive lobbyists, as would other recipients of public 
funds under any proposal to retain government financing 
but to move production into private hands. Asset sales 
[And that’s what we’re talking about here, Mr. Speaker.] 
do provide a temporary budgetary boost [As I showed with 
the numbers, this is a government that is very desperate for 
budgetary boosts.] but only in exchange for public capital; 
a proper accounting would show no improvement in the 
government’s net financial condition. Asset sales improve 
the long-run budgetary picture only if the governments 
avoid future subsidies. 
 

And there’s no indication on any account, Mr. Speaker, that this 
government would even be capable of doing that. 
 

However, privatization is no guarantee that subsidies will 
stop. Private companies are not bashful about asking for 
help, usually in the form of tax benefits. And if 
privatization occurs without liberalization, privatized 
monopolies can obtain subsidies through regulatory 
protection. 

 
I’m going to go forward into this article a little bit further, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. The author was talking a little about choice 
and that, you know, a free market provides choice and he says 
this: 
 

Privatization does not transform constraint into choice; it 
transfers decisions from one realm of choice — and 
constraint — to another. These two realms differ in their 
basic rules for disclosure of information: the public realm 
requires greater access; private firms have fewer 
obligations to conduct open proceedings or to make known 
the reasons for their decisions. 



November 1, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1065 

And that would be . . . A good example, Mr. Speaker, is what 
happened to Kal Tire at the GTH. We know there was a deal for 
them to buy land. Then all of a sudden something happened and 
they up and moved to Edmonton. But we have no way in the 
public sphere of getting answers. Oh, but wait a minute, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re not even getting answers in the public sphere 
right now about what has actually happened in the GTH land 
transactions. And I think that’s something that, well obviously 
we’ve been pushing it as hard as we can here in the House. 
We’re not getting the answers even from the public sphere, but 
you can imagine how protected private companies are when it 
comes to disclosing their business dealings. 
 
He goes on to say: 
 

The two realms differ in their recognition of individual 
desires; the public realm mandates equal voting rights, 
while the market responds to purchasing power. They 
differ in the processes of preference formation: democratic 
politics is a process for articulating, criticizing, and 
adapting preferences in a context where individuals need to 
make a case for interests larger than their own. 
Privatization diminishes the sphere of public information, 
deliberation, and accountability - elements of democracy 
whose value is not reducible to efficiency. 

 
[20:00] 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve talked about a lot in this House 
before, but part of the moral compass that I think we expect 
from our government and the direction that we should see from 
them is accountability. And when we see the refusal on the part 
of this government to answer direct questions about information 
that came to us through the auditor’s report, there are still 
questions that remain, and their absolute failure to answer those 
questions is a failure of accountability, Mr. Speaker, in this 
House, then that is an affront to democracy. 
 
He goes on to say, “. . . the removal of decisions from the 
public arena diminishes the individual incentive for 
participation.” He gives a very good example here, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Public schools in particular are a principal motivation for 
the participation of parents in local elections; the vitality of 
local government depends on their involvement. 
Privatization of the schools would weaken the foundations 
of local democracy. 

 
And I think that’s something my colleague from Lakeview 
would agree with. 
 
He goes on to talk about privatization applied to justice. For 
example, what if we privatize the jails? What if we privatize the 
court systems? 
 

Privatization must be seen not only as a technical 
instrument of policy but also as a political measure of 
symbolic consequence. When applied to the administration 
of justice and exercise of coercive power, the symbolic 
element is of paramount importance. Meting out justice is a 
communicative act; its public character ought not to be 
confused. 

He goes on to say, “Privatization signals diminished access.” 
And the next paragraph I would like to share with you is this 
one: “However, the symbolic load of privatization ought not to 
be a categorical objection to all the various measures that are 
covered by that term.” 
 
So he’s saying the spectrum of privatization is incredibly wide. 
And why this government is narrowing it to the absurd and 
strange definition that it is now inserting into The Interpretation 
Act through the provision of Bill 40 is beyond comprehension, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. He says: 
 

As I indicated at the beginning, the term [and that’s 
privatization] covers a heterogeneous set of policies, some 
more worthy than others. We need not accept or reject all 
the elements as a single package. Like corporations, states 
ought to be able to divest themselves of some activities and 
take on others. They should be able to contemplate 
exchanging or liquidating assets, to compare buying with 
producing services, and to entertain new forms of 
competition within the public sector or between public and 
private organizations. The postal service, for example, no 
longer has the same practical and symbolic importance in 
knitting together the nation that it once did. Its historic 
function has been partly superseded by other means of 
communication. 
 
Yet, like the railroads, which have discovered immense 
value in the real estate, the postal service possesses assets 
that might be more productively used. 

 
So what the author is suggesting here, Mr. Speaker, is that there 
are all kinds of different types of privatization, but not once in 
any of this discussion do we hear the concept of this hybrid 
public-private, semi-public-private beast that this government is 
creating in this bill. 
 
He goes on to talk about housing is another example of the 
potential for restructuring public assets. He says: 
 

In some areas of policy like housing, government ought to 
move its investments into a kind of rolling privatization — 
disposing of some public assets while augmenting others. 

 
And his final sentence, in his final part of his article has this to 
say, and I think what he does is he makes us focus on what the 
debate is. He says: 
 

The illusory appeal of privatization is to provide a single 
solution for many complex problems. But if the idea of 
privatization has any merit, it is to force us to rediscover 
the rationale of the public services we need and to remind 
us, if we had forgotten, that the public-private mix ought 
not to be considered settled for all time. 

 
So that’s what Paul Starr had to say about the debate, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m just going to put this paper back in order. 
 
I think we need to just look a little bit . . . I did want to look a 
little bit at the rights of minority shareholders. And there was an 
article that came out of the Saskatchewan Legal Education 
Society. This is a seminar back in 1998, and the materials were 
prepared by William Hood of Priel Stevenson Hood & 



1066 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2016 

Thornton. This is a Saskatoon law firm and this was a seminar. 
The name of the paper is called, Shareholder’s Rights Without 
Obligations, and there’s a number of points that I want to share 
with the Assembly in regard to these minority shareholder 
rights. 
 
He begins in his article with this following: 
 

It is beyond dispute that shareholders have rights. Indeed, 
those rights, particularly when held by minority 
shareholders, are among the most jealousy guarded by the 
courts. Despite their array of rights and powers, however, 
shareholders owe no obligations to the corporation. In the 
commercial context, the possession of rights, absent any 
corresponding obligations, is quite unique. 
 
Shareholders do not have a fiduciary obligation to the 
corporation or to other shareholders. They need not be 
concerned with the interests of others when they exercise 
their rights as shareholders. They can and do act in their 
own self interest which is not always in the best interests of 
the corporation. 

 
So I mentioned this a little bit earlier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but 
the issue here is that we are going to be selling 49 per cent of 
our Crowns to private minority shareholders. The point is, these 
shareholders have absolutely no obligation to the corporation. 
The corporation has many obligations to these private 
shareholders. That’s the way it’s set up, and that’s the way the 
law exists here in Saskatchewan today.  
 
And as he points out here, not only do they not have any 
obligations to the corporation, but the corporation . . . the 
minority shareholders’ rights will be the ones that are most 
carefully guarded by the courts because they don’t want to see 
these majority — which in this case would be the Crown — 
these majority bullies picking on the little kids in the 
playground, essentially. So we’re creating a situation where our 
common ownership of our public utilities is now being put in 
jeopardy by creating rights for these minority shareholders. 
 
One of the specific rights he mentions in his paper is the 
blocking right, and here’s what he has to say: 
 

Certain corporate activity, even if determined by the 
directors to be in the best interests of the corporation, can 
only be effected if approved by a special resolution of the 
shareholders. Minority shareholders, acting solely in their 
best interests and without regard for the best interests of 
the corporation, can defeat such resolution and block the 
corporation from pursuing such action. 
 

In this case he refers to a special resolution. He says: 
 

A special resolution is a resolution which, in order to be 
effected, requires two-thirds of the votes cast by 
shareholders who voted in respect with the resolution. 

 
And he quotes the section from the Saskatchewan business 
corporations Act which says . . . this is section 2(ff) of the Act: 
 

“special resolution” means a resolution passed by a 
majority of not less than two-thirds of the votes cast by the 

shareholders who voted in respect of that resolution or 
signed by all the shareholders entitled to vote on that 
resolution. 
 

Now again, I’ve raised this earlier, but the question is, will the 
Saskatchewan business corporations Act apply in this context? 
And so we have a legal void here that we don’t quite know 
exactly what this creature’s going to look like and whether or 
not these rules apply. But I can’t imagine a court not 
recognizing the rights of special . . . of minority shareholders, 
and certainly they can do that in the absence of legislation, Mr. 
Speaker. We know that the courts can establish this kind of 
legal precedence. 
 
It goes on to say that: 
 

For example, a blocked resolution can thwart the 
restructuring plans of a growing corporation. In the 
interests of avoiding the impasses which may result from 
failure to pass a special resolution, a majority shareholder 
. . . [should] be well advised in the early stages of a 
corporation’s life to negotiate an option to acquire the 
interest of minority shareholders. Such option would be 
triggered should the minority shareholder block action 
which is strategically important to the corporation. 

 
So I certainly hope, Mr. Speaker, in the event that this bizarre 
Act goes through, that when we are privatizing 49 per cent of 
our public utilities, that we would ensure that we have an option 
to re-acquire those interests in the event that they are trying to 
block restructuring plans is the example that’s given here. So 
that’s something that’s very concerning, and I’m hoping the 
legal analysis will be done and will be presented to the public 
before any of these privatization plans go forward. 
 
On page 5 of the article, he talks about another right of minority 
shareholders. It’s called the dissent right. And he says: 
 

Minority shareholders who do not have sufficient votes to 
block strategic action which requires a special resolution 
may, in certain circumstances, exercise the dissent right. 
The corporate action which gives rise to the dissent right is 
set out in subsection 184(1) . . . [of the Saskatchewan 
business corporations Act]. 

 
And he goes on to explain it here: 
 

The minority shareholder has the right to dissent and put its 
shares to the corporation if: 
 

(a) the special resolution which is passed falls within one 
of the above categories; 
(b) the shareholder dissents to the resolution; 
(c) the directors do not repeal the resolution; and 
(d) the shareholder complies with the technical 
procedures in section 184. 

 
So that’s another example, this blocking right that minority 
shareholders will have in our Crown utilities. 
 
He goes on to discuss the unanimous shareholders agreement on 
page 10. Here he says: 
 



November 1, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1067 

In a carefully drafted USA a minority shareholder can have 
his cake and eat it too. That is, he can exercise greater 
rights without incurring liabilities or giving up any rights 
against the directors. 

 
And he goes on to explain. It’s a fairly technical argument but 
he goes on to explain that. He says: 
 

Often an agreement allows a minority shareholder to elect 
directors to the board who are in a minority position. One’s 
first impression may be that such a right is not of much 
value. To the contrary, a right to representation on the 
board, even if it is not enough in number to control the 
outcome of the board resolutions, it is still a useful tool to 
protect minority shareholder rights. Discussion and debate 
at the director’s level is foreign to a shareholder. 

 
So we are going to be giving, possibly . . . We don’t know what 
these beasts are going to look like but if they follow the course 
of ordinary corporations in Saskatchewan where there is a 
minority majority of shareholders, we could be giving positions 
at the director’s table for these minority shareholders. And we 
don’t know if that’s going to happen or not, but again I think 
the public interest is going to be severely compromised. 
 
On page 16 it talks about another remedy that’s available to 
minority shareholders, and that is the oppression remedy. And 
this is what he has to say: 
 

The oppression remedy found in section 234 of the Act is 
without doubt the most powerful right a shareholder has to 
protect minority interests. Corporate conduct which is 
“oppressive or unfairly prejudicial to, or that unfairly 
disregards the interests” of a shareholder gives rise to a 
statutory cause of action. 
 
The right of action is derived from the legislation of the 
incorporating jurisdiction of the corporation. [And again, 
we don’t know what legislation will govern these creatures 
of this bill.] Most jurisdictions in Canada, including the 
federal legislation, provide for an oppression remedy like 
section 234 of the Act. 

 
So he goes on . . . I’m just going to move further along here. 
He’s talking about the oppression remedy and on page 20 he 
talks about it in terms of some judicial interpretation of it. And 
he says, he quotes here from a case, Eiserman v. Ara Farms 
Ltd. and 347883 Alberta Ltd. v. Producers Pipelines Inc. and he 
says: 
 

As referred to . . . [in these cases], the court will interpret 
oppression broadly. [It] . . . does not mean . . . lack of 
confidence or disagreement between shareholders will give 
rise to an oppression remedy. [But] In Elder v. Elder & 
Watson, Lord Keith remarked: 
 

. . . It is not lack of confidence between shareholders per 
se that brings (the oppression remedy) into play, but lack 
of confidence springing from the oppression of a 
minority by a majority in the management of the 
company’s affairs . . . 

 
So what we’re seeing here is that the right to this remedy is only 

. . . it comes from a lack of confidence springing from 
oppression of a minority. So I always think, okay now, we’ve 
got Sask Government Insurance privatized, 49 per cent, and we 
have this Auto Fund, and the company is making decisions 
regarding what to do with the Auto Fund. And they may decide 
to put some of that in the General Revenue Fund in the form of 
a dividend, which under the Crown investments corporation Act 
they are entitled to do at this point, but that’s affecting the 
minority shareholders’ rights. And that may give rise to an 
oppression remedy. I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, and there’s just 
too many questions coming out of this that certainly make one 
wonder what exactly are we giving away. 
 
On page 27, he talks more about specific conduct giving rise to 
the oppression and here’s what he says: 
 

Bear in mind that oppressive conduct is fact specific. 
Shareholders’ expectations change from the one set of 
circumstances to another. Thus, conduct which may give 
rise to oppression in one set of circumstances may not give 
rise to oppression in . . . [others]. 

 
And then he goes on to say that: 
 

In Arthur v. Signum Communications Ltd., Austin . . . 
[Judge, Judge Austin] summarized patterns of conduct 
which are prone to resulting in oppression as follows: “lack 
of valid corporate purpose for the transaction.” 

 
[20:15] 
 
And immediately, Mr. Speaker, what comes to mind was the 
GTH purchase of 204 acres north of the city of Regina. And 
was there a valid corporate purpose for that transaction? I mean 
when we see all the questions that are coming out of the GTH 
scandal and all the curious behaviour on the part of this 
government and on the part of the board of directors of GTH 
and the firings of key individuals and the many questions that 
come out of the auditor’s report, we’re wondering. 
 
What if GTH was owned 49 per cent by minority shareholders? 
And we look at the actions of the GTH. You know what, Mr. 
Speaker? We’d be in court right now, I’m sure. These minority 
shareholders would have legitimate complaints that their 
minority shares are being oppressed. And this is oppressive 
conduct because right here, the court said that “lack of valid 
corporate purpose for the transaction” can actually constitute 
oppression. 
 
He goes on to list some other examples of oppression, “failure 
on the part of the corporation and its controlling shareholders to 
take reasonable steps to . . . [simulate] an arm’s length 
transaction.” Now we’ve seen what’s happened with the 
conduct of cabinet and the decisions made around the GTH, 
much of which information is still not being provided by this 
government. And we don’t know here whether they took 
reasonable steps to simulate an arm’s-length transaction. 
There’s too many questions about the connections between the 
various players, Mr. Speaker, and we’re certainly not getting 
that information. 
 
You got to wonder about the appraisal that was done for the 
final purchase of land where the land has exploded in value, 10 



1068 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2016 

times its value from previous in the original sale. And the 
reliance of this government on an appraisal that was done 
suspectly, I think, by the land purchaser. And now we can’t 
even look at it, Mr. Speaker. It’s not even available for the 
public to review. So is that, is that . . . Do we know whether the 
GTH took reasonable steps to simulate an arm’s-length 
transaction? If they were privatized, under the 49 per cent rule 
that this government is proposing, the minority shareholders 
would have a legitimate case in the courts showing oppression 
of their minority shareholder rights. 
 
The next thing in this list is an example of oppression and 
oppression of minority shareholder rights is “lack of good faith 
on the part of the director[s] of the corporation.” Again when 
you think of the GTH scandal and what’s going on there, the 
directions that SaskPower was given to purchase land at the 
GTH, which they’re not using at all right now, the timing of 
which allowed the GTH to proceed with the maligned purchase 
that has raised so much question in the eyes of the taxpayers, 
the ratepayers, and certainly the questions that we’re not getting 
answers to. Again is the type of behaviour that could land us up 
in court if these minority shareholders . . . Maybe we need 
minority shareholders in the GTH, Mr. Speaker. Maybe that 
would give us the answers that we need. Because we’re 
certainly not getting them now. So maybe that would actually 
provide us with an outlet for answers to some of the questions 
that the cabinet is not providing at this point in time. 
 
And finally the last one he talks about here is the failure to keep 
any or proper financial records. And of course that would 
amount to oppression as well. We see from the auditor’s report 
a number of the failures on the part of the GTH to properly 
manage its affairs, to properly conduct its affairs. The weird 
situation where, you know, Sask Highways owns the land still 
in some cases that the GTH is operating from. And yet the GTH 
bought land that Sask Highways was going to buy for a much 
cheaper price. I mean the questions raised by the auditor alone 
are ones that would put any kind of relationship with minority 
shareholders into great jeopardy. 
 
Another one that I think is kind of interesting is on page 35, and 
another evidence of oppression is the failure on the part of the 
corporation to provide adequate and timely disclosure to 
minority shareholders of contracts in which the majority 
shareholder has an interest in. So what I’m thinking here is that 
if the majority shareholder in this case is the Crown in right of 
Saskatchewan and that majority shareholder is privy to many, 
many, many cabinet confidences about how taxpayers’ dollars 
are spent . . . So the contracts that majority shareholder has an 
interest in, if you think about the number of contracts that 
Government of Saskatchewan has an interest in, it’s probably 
mind-boggling. There’d be hundreds and thousands of 
contracts. And according to this, if those contracts are not 
disclosed to these minority shareholders in these various public 
utility privatized Crowns, then that would amount to 
oppression. 
 
So I wonder what’s going to happen to cabinet confidences 
when there’s a requirement for disclosure of decisions made by 
the majority shareholder, in this case is the Crown. So it may be 
putting cabinet confidences in jeopardy. These questions are 
troubling, Mr. Speaker, and I think this paper on minority 
shareholders’ rights sort of points out some of the issues that we 

will be facing if we do the hybridization of Crown privatization 
as this bill is suggesting. 
 
Will the cabinet have to disclose dealings with other Crowns? 
We don’t know, Mr. Speaker. Will SaskPower, if it’s privatized 
up to 49 per cent, have to disclose all of its dealings to the 49 
per cent privatized SaskTel because of the rights of the 
shareholders to know what the majority shareholder is up to? 
 
These kinds of things really lead to some troubling questions 
and even more troubling is the fact that we don’t have any 
answers, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just this casual, two paragraph, 
short little comment by the Minister of Justice in his second 
reading comments, and that’s it. That’s all we have. It was just 
tossed out there like yesterday’s breakfast, Mr. Speaker. And 
the complications and the various contortions that this is going 
to lead us into as a majority shareholder in our public Crown 
utilities is beyond the pale, and I cannot, I cannot support this 
kind of callous and cavalier of treatment of what is being 
proposed by this bill. 
 
Another thing that is important and available on page 68, the 
author of this paper indicates something called “injunctive 
relief.” So if the minority shareholder’s rights are being 
oppressed or blocked in any way, what kind of relief can they 
get? And he says: 
 

Injunctive relief is very intrusive into the affairs of the 
corporation. However, an order to restrain oppressive 
conduct is suitable when made in the early stages before 
the damage is done. In Re Little Billy's Restaurant (1977) 
Ltd., Faltakas v. Paskalidis et al., the company was 
enjoined from entering into a franchise agreement which 
had been proposed, and if consummated, would have 
siphoned off the profits to a company in which the 
minority shareholders had no interest. 

 
Now I can think of many examples where, for example, 
SaskPower could enter into agreements, or worse yet, 
SaskPower’s revenues are put into the GRF [General Revenue 
Fund] and then crop insurance is taking those profits and 
applying them to crop insurance payments because the GRF is 
that great melting pot of all these profits. So how can we stop 
those kinds of protections of the minority shareholders, Mr. 
Speaker? Those are questions that need answers and I’m not 
confident that we’re going to be able to get those answers. 
 
I just want to take us back now a little bit to November 22nd, 
2004. And just sort of reviewing some of the comments that this 
government has made about the Crown protection Act, when 
the bill was introduced in 2004, the Sask Party opposition 
indicated their 100 per cent support of the bill. And I just want 
to share with you some of the comments from Hansard on 
November 22nd. This is a second reading speech. There was 
only one member of the Sask Party opposition that actually 
spoke to the bill, and here’s what he had to say. Mr. Elhard was 
the only speaker from the Sask Party on this bill. He said: 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to make a few brief 
comments on The Crown Corporations Public Ownership 
Act. For the record, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party 
supports this Bill. The Saskatchewan Party supports the 
continued public ownership of the major Crowns. 



November 1, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1069 

And he goes on to say: 
 

The Saskatchewan Party, like the majority of 
Saskatchewan people, believe the major Crowns should 
stay in public hands. We believe that the major Crowns 
and their employees do an excellent job of providing 
services to the people of Saskatchewan. Therefore, Mr. 
Speaker, we have no problem supporting this Bill. 

 
Now any rational person who, when they read this, would take 
those words at face value. They wouldn’t be thinking, well they 
could sell off 49 per cent of it and still be supporting the public 
ownership of these Crowns. That just isn’t logical, Mr. Speaker. 
It doesn’t make sense. And I’m pretty sure that this construction 
that we’re dealing with today was a desperate attempt on the 
part of this government to deal with some of its serious, serious 
budgetary shortfalls. 
 
So this is an idea that was cooked up. I don’t think it was in the 
mind of Mr. Elhard when he was speaking back in 2004. It just 
wouldn’t . . . It’s not . . . It defies logic that that is what he was 
thinking is, well yes, we’ll sell off 49 per cent of them because 
then that would still be control. That’s the word that the 
minister keeps focusing on. And it’s interesting. He went on to 
criticize the government of the day for some of the taxpayers’ 
losses that happened in some areas, and it totalled up to $137 
million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen, in at least two projects, the gross 
overspending of billions of dollars. So I mean the order of 
magnitude of these criticisms, when I see what’s happening 
here 12 years later, is almost laughable. But I was kind of 
amused to see that comment. So this was the speech that he 
said, and he ended his comments by saying: 
 

. . . the Saskatchewan Party supports The Crown 
Corporations Public Ownership Act and commits to the 
people of Saskatchewan that a Saskatchewan Party 
government will keep the major Crowns publicly owned 
while focusing on providing the best possible service to 
Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, all the while at the 
lowest possible cost. Thank you. 

 
So this was what this opposite government said when they were 
in opposition. And the people, there are at least six, eight 
members who are still here today who voted in favour of that 
bill. So I think that’s an interesting response. And we all know 
what happened, because of the 2003 election, why some of 
these things happened. 
 
The Sask Party’s 2007 election campaign had a lot to say about 
the Crowns, Mr. Speaker. And I think that was sort of the lesson 
learned when I was reading the Premier’s comments from 
earlier, that the mistakes that were made in the 2003 campaign 
when they dared to venture thinking out loud about selling 
Crowns. 
 
So what did they say in 2007? They said, “Keeping 
Saskatchewan’s Crown . . .” This is their campaign promises: 
 

Keeping Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations public and 
working for Saskatchewan people is an important part of 
the Saskatchewan Party’s plan for Securing the Future. In 

2004, the Saskatchewan Party voted in the Legislature to 
support the Crown Corporations Public Ownership Act. 
 

And they go on to say: 
 

The Saskatchewan Party will ensure Crown Corporations 
continue to provide Saskatchewan people with the highest 
quality utilities at the lowest cost, while directing Crown 
dividends towards priorities like health care, highways, and 
education. 

 
There we see, Mr. Speaker, a commitment to directing the 
Crown dividends towards priorities like health care, highways, 
and education. This 49 per cent scheme does not direct 
dividends towards health care, highways, and education, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s a one-time asset conversion, and then we’re going 
to end up in the same pickle that we are in now because they 
cannot control their spending and they cannot control their 
expenditures. 
 
This promise went on to say: 
 

A Saskatchewan Party government will also strengthen 
Crown investment in our communities and post-secondary 
institutions to build an innovative economy, while helping 
Saskatchewan Go Green through initiatives by SaskPower 
[which is a promise that was not kept, Mr. Speaker], 
SaskEnergy and SGI to help Saskatchewan make smart 
environmental choices in their homes and when they drive. 

 
And that is a complete non-starter at this point, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s gone way out of sight of the public. 
 
Then the Sask Party also put out their position paper after the 
election and again on page 37 they said that they would 
continue to support The Crown Corporations Public Ownership 
Act — this is after the 2007 election — and they would ensure 
Saskatchewan’s Crown utility corporation remain publicly 
owned and focused on delivering high-quality service to 
Saskatchewan people at the lowest cost. Mr. Speaker, I don’t 
think anyone reading that statement could ever infer that they 
intending to divest themselves of the 49 per cent of the Crown 
utilities. 
 
Okay. Moving on, I have a few more comments. Another article 
about privatization. I haven’t shared all the definitions that I 
found yet either, but this is a book called Privatization: 
Successes and Failures, and the editor is Gérard Roland and the 
forward is from Joseph E. Stiglitz. But on page 202 this is what 
this book, Privatization: Successes and Failures, has to say. 
And this is a short quote: 
 
[20:30] 
 

The privatization of public services tends to burden the 
public, especially if charges are raised or if services 
provided are reduced. Obviously, private interests are only 
interested in profitable or potentially profitable activities 
and enterprises. This may mean that the government will 
be left with the unprofitable and less profitable activities, 
which, consequently, will worsen overall public sector 
performance. Public sector inefficiencies and other 
problems need to be overcome, but privatization in many 



1070 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2016 

developing and transition economies has primarily 
enriched the few with strong political connections who 
secure most, if not all, of these profitable opportunities, 
while the public interest is sacrificed and vulnerable to the 
powers of private business interests. 
 
Thus, while the experiences of privatization have been 
shaped by their political economy contexts, its proponents 
claim the moral high ground in assuming that private 
ownership will necessarily eliminate the abuse and 
corruption associated with public ownership. Privatization 
advocates tend to conflate private property with the 
market, and often presume that privatization will 
necessarily engender competition, eliminating rents and 
rent-seeking behaviour. Such presumptions and claims 
have been misguided. Privatization advocates have also 
neglected to consider alternative prescriptions for 
mitigating corrupt behaviour, e.g., by focusing on rent 
management for development by structuring rents to create 
incentives for desired behaviour instead of simply seeking 
the avoidance or elimination of rents. 

 
So that’s another thought from another book on privatization, 
and again I really want to express my gratitude to the library 
staff for helping me find some of these comments. This is 
another book that’s in the library: You Don’t Always Get What 
You Pay For: The Economics of Privatization, by Elliott D. 
Sclar. And in here he makes the following comment: 
 

Contemporary debate, although marked by far fewer 
politically viable options for active government but many 
more for market-sustaining programs, is far more nuanced 
in reality. Indeed, disgruntled conservatives mutter that in 
the two decades or so since they ascended to real political 
power with the election of Ronald Reagan as president, 
regulation of society has increased not decreased. Evidence 
exists in every area of social life, from the environment to 
the right to bear arms. It does not appear to matter whether 
the conservatives politically control the White House 
and/or Congress. At the same time, liberals are forced to 
confront the reality that there is no effective political 
interest in the types of large-scale interventions, such as 
urban renewal and public housing, that marked the middle 
decades of the century. On balance, it is fair to say that 
while the range of policy choices has shifted more in the 
direction of nonintervention, it has not been and is not a 
straightforward move. The notion that government is still 
the proper bulwark to contain social distress abides. 
 

And I think that’s a very powerful statement, Mr. Speaker: “The 
notion that government is still the proper bulwark to contain 
social distress abides.” And I think again the example of the 
banking collapse in the United States in the late 2000s is a good 
example of that, where we expect governments to step in and 
intervene when the market fails. And he goes on to say here, 
“People merely expect government to do more with less.” 

 
And I think that is certainly what our public service is being 
asked to do here in this decade. And it says . . . Yes, that’s 
basically enough from that particular book. But again there is 
much to be said, and I would encourage anyone who’s 
interested to take a look at some of these articles and books. I 
think I’ll leave this one for now, Mr. Speaker. 

I think I’m getting close to the end of my comments. I just want 
to double-check and make sure that I’ve covered all the 
intentions that I had. Yes. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I just want to leave everyone with some thoughts from Maurice 
Sendak. Now Maurice Sendak wrote a very, very popular 
child’s book called Where The Wild Things Are, and I think 
what this bill is doing is creating a monster of some sort. It’s a 
hybridization Frankenstein of some sort where we see this 
weird amalgam of Crown, corporate, public policy interests and 
then mixing it in with these minority shareholder private 
interests that have no interest except profit, and trying to mix 
them together. 
 
And in Where The Wild Things Are, there is a little boy named 
Max. And I sometimes wish we could be more like Max 
because he . . . I’m going to tell you what happened to Max. 
 

The night Max wore his wolf suit and made mischief of 
one kind 
 
and another 
 
his mother called him “WILD THING!” 
and Max said “I’LL EAT YOU UP!” 
so he was sent to bed without eating anything. 
 
That very night in Max’s room a forest grew 
 
and grew 
 
and grew until his ceiling hung with vines 
and the walls became the world all around 
 
and an ocean tumbled by with a private boat for Max 
and he sailed off through night and day 
 
and in and out of weeks 
and almost over a year 
to where the wild things are. 
 
And when he came to the place where the wild things are 
they roared their terrible roars and gnashed their terrible 
teeth 
 
and rolled their terrible eyes and showed their terrible 
claws 
 
till Max said “BE STILL!” 
and tamed with the magic trick 
 
of staring into all their yellow eyes without blinking once 
and they were frightened and called him the most wild 
thing of all 
 
and made him king of all wild things. 
 
“And now,” cried Max, “let the wild rumpus start!” 
 
“Now stop!” Max said and sent the wild things off to bed 
without their supper. And Max the king of all wild things 
was lonely and wanted to be where someone loved him 
best of all. 



November 1, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1071 

Then all around from far away across the world 
he smelled good things to eat 
so he gave up being king of where the wild things are. 
 
But the wild things cried, “Oh please don’t go —  
we’ll eat you up — we love you so!”  
And Max said, “No!” 
 
The wild things roared their terrible roars and gnashed 
their terrible teeth and rolled their terrible eyes and showed 
their terrible claws 
but Max stepped into his private boat and waved goodbye 
 
and sailed back over a year 
and in and out of weeks 
and through a day 
 
and into the night of his very own room 
where he found his supper waiting for him 
 
and it was still hot. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to adjourn debate on Bill No. 
40. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 40, The Interpretation 
Amendment Act, 2016. All those in favour? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 12 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 12 — The Public 
Health (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you. Well this is an interesting bill and I 
do, right off the bat, want to congratulate my colleague from 
Nutana on a very well-researched, well-said speech on a very 
important bill. And I think that was important. And it seems 
better researched, better researched than the actual bill itself, 
when today we asked the question about 10 per cent, and the 
blank looks across the front benches over there were amazing, 
amazing. Jaws dropped — 10 per cent, 10 per cent. So good 
work, good work my colleague. 
 
I digress because I know we are talking about Bill No. 12, An 
Act to amend the Public Health Act, 1994. But I just do have to 
say when I see great stuff, I have to acknowledge it. And when I 
see not great stuff like I did during question period, I have to 
acknowledge that too. I have to acknowledge that too. 
 
But I do want to . . . And I think this is an important bill, and 
actually this is one I, you know . . . It’s interesting that 
sometimes when you stand up and you realize that this is, 
there’s more to this bill than meets the eye. And I’m glad that 

we’re having this discussion tonight because . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Well I got to tell you, who’s got the F in this 
room? Who’s got the F in this room? And I don’t see much 
room for improvement. But we . . . You walked into that one, 
minister. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this is an important piece of legislation and I’ll 
tell you why. Public health is really the foundation of how in a 
modern society we deal with diseases, we deal with health 
issues, and all of that. And so it’s an important piece of 
legislation. 
 
And I’ll talk a little bit about what the minister is bringing 
forward. But then I want to talk a little bit about what I see are 
some of the gaps in a modern public health Act. And I think 
these are the kind of things we should be talking about. 
Particularly I know the folks in Saskatoon Centre for many, 
many years have issues about where they live, and one of them 
is public health and how it’s not being addressed by The Public 
Health Act. 
 
And so he talks about the reasons for this piece of legislation 
were required for several reasons. And I’ll quote, the “. . . 
improved public access to public health inspection 
information.” He talks about that, you know, in terms of eating 
establishments. And I know a few years ago, I did take a look at 
that website. I haven’t recently, but that’s very, very important. 
 
And he goes on to say, “These amendments will allow public 
disclosure of a broader range of public health inspection reports 
and related information.” And so I know that that will be 
interesting to see. One of the big issues we’re dealing with is 
around asbestos. And asbestos where we’ve had a registry . . . 
now and I haven’t looked recently to see how well it’s being 
managed, but I know it’s slow to get up and going in terms of 
adequacy and the ease of accessing information. But we need to 
do much more work on that. 
 
But we need to do much more work in terms of asbestos, not 
only in public buildings but private businesses, private 
residence, any place where there might have been asbestos. If 
we can find that out, that’s hugely important because I think in 
many ways . . . and I know the Minister of Labour will attest to 
this. We see way too many people dying related to workplace 
asbestos exposure. But we don’t know how that’s playing out in 
the private world where people are catching the cancers related 
to asbestos in various other ways. And I can tell you and I can 
relate to you, Mr. Speaker, stories of individual contractors and 
carpenters who were . . . have been exposed to asbestos. But 
foolishly, or not because of their own — but you know, just 
wanted to get the job done — have exposed themselves and 
have not followed proper procedures. 
 
And that’s just unfortunate, because we tend to think asbestos 
happens only in industrial sites, only in places where there is a 
clear union-management relationship and not in private homes 
where it might be in the flooring. The old linoleums that were 
made in the ’40s and ’50s, or even at the Minister of Labour’s 
office just last year. 
 
But so this whole thing about public health inspection reports, 
that’s a big, big area I think that we need to have a good, good 
look at. And so this a . . . This is important. It says, “The 



1072 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2016 

changes reflect our government’s commitment to being open 
and transparent with important health-related information. This 
will bring Saskatchewan in line with disclosure practices in 
other provinces.” And I would even in fact challenge the 
Minister of Health to even go beyond just being in line. I hope 
it’s not behind the line, but actually being in front. 
 
Public health is a hugely, hugely important issue. And this is the 
reason why, Mr. Speaker. If we take a look, if we take a look at 
the reasons that you can have for public health concerns, air 
pollution is an issue. Air contamination is an issue. Ambient air, 
meaning the air surrounding the Earth, including the air within a 
structure, and the communicable diseases and that type of thing. 
 
But one that is missing, which is . . . we are doing a bit of work 
in my office around, is sound. And quite often, Mr. Speaker, we 
often think of sound. Sound is dealt with in occupational health 
and safety, but is not dealt in our communities and our 
neighbourhoods. 
 
And this is an issue. This is a real issue. And we know that in 
Saskatoon there’s been issues around the level of sound created 
by motorcycles or by bars. And I tell you, in my area, in 
Caswell . . . And I know the member who is a former city 
councillor knows this issue well, and one that I’ve been 
wrestling with for 15 years are the bars on Idylwyld just off 
29th Street. 
 
[20:45] 
 
And somehow the hands of city council are tied because they 
can’t act with a couple of bars because somehow they’ve been 
grandfathered in. But to me it is a public health issue. It’s a 
public health issue when people can’t sleep at night. It’s a 
public health issue when children can’t get enough sleep so they 
can learn at school the next day. And I think this is an issue. 
And there has been lots of research about this. In fact again the 
library did a lot of good work for me. Unfortunately that 
research is back in Saskatoon, but I could definitely bring that 
up. 
 
But I do think this is one of my projects for the next four years, 
is to work on The Public Health Act around the level of noise in 
our communities. This is a big deal. And we seem to be tied by 
bylaws, and what the city council can do and can’t do. But I 
think we have to say, you know, noise, no matter where it is, is 
not right at any time of the day, at any place. And whether it’s 
in the workplace, in the factory or whether it’s on the street 
corner or in a bar right across from a home, I think we have to 
have some laws about that. 
 
And we can measure that. We can measure that. We know how 
much, how many decibels a rock band is playing at or a bar’s 
sound system is or whatever. And I think this is a major deal 
because you see some of our communities, some of our 
neighbourhoods where they have bars right across the street. 
And I’ve got to tell you that . . . And actually it’s interesting 
because The Public Health Act, when I think about the city 
congratulating itself for banning smoking inside bars, that was a 
good start. But when they allowed it, and I know in Saskatoon 
they say it’s not allowed on patios, but it is allowed on patios. 
They just don’t have the courage to actually prosecute. And 
we’ve raised this issue. They have some sort of finagling way 

of getting around it. But we need to do more work in this area. 
 
And so when the minister comes forward and we’ll talk about 
getting in line with other provinces in terms of public health, in 
fact we will really want to encourage them to get in front of the 
line and be leading the country, be leading the country. And I 
particularly am interested in the whole issue of noise because I 
think, and we see this research right across the world, right 
across North America and Canada, the noise levels that used to 
be acceptable are no longer acceptable. 
 
You know, I grew up in a small village right along the main CP 
[Canadian Pacific] line. I don’t know how many of us have 
grown up within a block or two of rail lines, but I did. But I just 
got used to that noise. I just got used to that noise. That’s just 
the way it was. But now when I go back and there’s a train 
coming through town, you hear it, you know . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Yes, Moose Jaw. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when we think about and I think about the 
people who live along Idylwyld across from these bars, I mean 
they have just given up on noise. They can’t live there anymore. 
It’s not a decent place for anybody to live, not at all, anyone. 
And this is going to be something that I am going to take on as 
a personal message because I think this is a public health issue. 
It’s a public health issue. We deal with quality of water. We 
deal with quality of air, the land, diseases. But for some reason, 
one sense that we don’t seem to have any concern about is our 
ears and what that means in terms of the quality of sleep that we 
can deal with. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I just want to put that on the record that 
we’ll be looking and we’ll be talking when this bill comes 
forward, that this will be one that I’ll be very interested in some 
of the questions and what they might do to expand The Public 
Health Act and what might be covered in that, because it’s 
already recognized under occupational health and safety noise 
levels and what’s acceptable. But why that isn’t the case for 
people who are trying to get a good night’s sleep is beyond me 
when we know that getting a good night’s sleep is a really good 
way to be able to work better, learn better, and all sorts of other 
better things in our communities. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this is an important piece of legislation that’s 
before us, and I will be asking a lot of questions about that. So 
when he talks about enabling better public access to public 
health inspection information, I think that’s good. But we need 
to expand what does that public health inspections mean? What 
does it really mean? And we need to strengthen that as well and 
so beyond just eating establishments. It will be interesting to 
know as well when the minister brings this forward what kind 
of data they have in terms of what has been the impact of 
making these public health inspection reports public about 
restaurants and what does that . . . why is that giving them 
optimism to move forward with other reports. So that will be 
really important . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, and I 
would be too. And I think this is an area, you know, I think that 
. . . And it is interesting. 
 
The folks across way said they’re optimistic and I think we 
should be optimistic. We should bring what we know from 
occupational health and safety, some other best practices such 
as the restaurants, bring them into the public health sphere 



November 1, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1073 

because I think this could be helpful to our province. Here I’ve 
cited an example of a city council that was hamstrung because 
they couldn’t work through bylaws what they should be able to 
do. But public health does trump some of these things and 
would make some of these things more enforceable. 
 
He also went on and talked about the amendments addressing 
the key public health area in terms of communicable disease 
control, and he wants to make sure that the reporting 
requirements are current and reflect best scope of practices. And 
that’s very, very important, so that’ll be good. And so he 
doesn’t go on to too much further than that. 
 
We see that they’ll be talking about repealing clauses such as 
what the “clinical nurse” means, and “nurse practitioner.” What 
do all those changes mean? And of course those are important. 
And the clinical nurse will be in line with the bylaws of the 
Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association and adding new 
reporting duties of nurse practitioners when treating patients 
with category 2 communicable diseases. And so those will be 
the key pieces before us. But as I said, when we’ve got this 
piece of legislation in front of us, there will be many of us who 
will want to come forward and have a conversation about what 
public health means. 
 
It will be interesting . . . Again the member or the minister 
didn’t talk about who he had consulted with, whether there is 
unanimous decisions within the nursing world about these 
decisions and that they’re supportive. So we’ll have to find out 
about that. And of course, I think this’d be one that we’ll have 
more questions on. 
 
But of course, as I’ve said, once you open up a pretty important 
piece of legislation like An Act to amend The Public Health Act, 
The Public Health Act, then it’s a good time for us to have a 
good conversation about what does that really mean in 2016 
because it’s been over 20 years since this piece of legislation 
has been, it looks like, has been opened up in some 22 years 
now. Now I’m not sure if that’s accurate, but it hasn’t been 
overhauled in 20-some years at least. We’re still using the ’94 
version of The Public Health Act so I know that there will be 
many questions and a good discussion about what could be, 
what should be included in The Public Health Act. What are 
some of the other areas? As I said, I’m very keen about asbestos 
being moved over and how’s it being treated in The Public 
Health Act sphere, because we think of it as occupational health 
and safety but it really should be something that is also included 
in The Public Health Act. 
 
And as well, for me, as I said, sound or noise, and that will be 
something that I hope we can see some movement on, 
recognizing that it is considered an occupational health and 
safety hazard. And there’s settings and levels within that piece 
of legislation, so why can’t that be seen to be appropriate as 
well in a domestic setting? As I said, this has huge impacts and 
we see that. I see that in my own neighbourhood and I know 
there are neighbourhoods right across this province where that’s 
an issue of noise that is not needed and can lead to other serious 
problems. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have much more to add to 
Bill No. 12, An Act to amend The Public Health Act, 1994. So I 
would move adjournment of Bill No. 12. 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 12, the public health 
amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of this Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 13 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 13 — The Cancer 
Agency Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise on this bill, An Act to amend The Cancer 
Agency Act. 
 
It seems to be relatively straightforward. What I’m not sure of, 
what the reason for it but it seems to be really talking about 
moving the word or the phrase “cancer care” to “cancer 
control,” and also allows the Ministry of Health to disclose a 
patient’s cancer diagnosis to the agency. 
 
Now the minister does talk about . . . Actually it’s interesting. 
For the amount that’s in here, the minister does give a pretty 
thorough discussion and so I probably should take a moment for 
the folks at home to just reflect on this. 
 
But I do want to say that just as a shout-out, it’s Movember, 
first day of Movember, so I know folks on both sides of the 
House are getting involved. We have two teams going. I know I 
ran into one member who spotted me the day I got my stache 
happening here. And I’m going to be looking for good things 
happening right across. We’ll see how that turns out in the next 
30 days or so. It’s ironic; it ends on November 30th. So we’ll 
have a good show of what people’s staches look like at the end. 
 
But it is very, very important. And I think the folks, particularly 
in a House, you know, in a Chamber like ours, we have 61 
members, and by far the majority are men over 40, over 50 who 
probably should be making sure they get themselves checked 
out. And the women as well can be suggesting to the men they 
know, they should be getting checked out, I think, as we can all 
relate to folks and friends and family who’ve had to deal with 
cancer. 
 
And so while that one is front and centre in this month, others 
are . . . You know, all cancers are deadly and horrendous, and 
we should be taking our best to prevent and make sure that we 
provide for high-quality cancer care. 
 
Now the minister talks about this, and he says he wants to 
provide some context for the proposed amendments and why 
this is. And he talks about Saskatchewan having a long history 
of innovation in cancer treatment, prevention, early detection, 
research, and technology — and that is so true — and talking 
about the provincial government establishing a Cancer Agency 
more than 85 years ago. So truly, truly we do have a long 



1074 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2016 

history. 
 
And I think of the different types of treatment with radon — I 
think I’ve got that right, radon treatment — and all the, you 
know, the innovation we’ve had in the province here. Really we 
have a lot to be proud of; the pioneers have done some great 
work. But they need to continue to do good work, and they need 
to continue to have that support. 
 
And so he talks about how — and this is a shocking number — 
the number of new cancer cases diagnosed in Saskatchewan is 
projected to increase 54 per cent by 2036. So in the next 20 
years we’ll see a 54 per cent increase. And how is that? Why is 
that? Why is that happening? 
 
I’m not sure. But in order, he talks about how the agency, 
Cancer Agency, has “. . . developed a strategic plan for 
influencing care across the province” while going ahead as 
leaders in “. . . research, treatment, education, population health, 
promotion, and [disease] prevention.” So the goal is “. . . to 
minimize their risk of getting cancer and play an active role in 
their personal health and well-being.” 
 
[21:00] 
 
And that is so, so important to do. So when we’re facing a 54 
per cent increase, we need to do so much more to be out in front 
of that. Because we know the later stages, whether it be the 
hospital care or the drugs, it just becomes very, very, very much 
more, much more expensive. 
 
And so, he suggests, “. . . the proposed amendments in this 
legislation will fill some gaps in The Cancer Agency Act so that 
we can better equip the organization to perform its role in 
strengthening cancer control.” Now I’m not sure, if I look at 
this, whether the word “control” is actually defined. And what 
makes it different? And you know, I mean it really is . . . It 
would be interesting to know what, you know . . . I mean if the 
agency feels it’s important to use that word, that’s fair enough. 
But to go through a legislative process to put one word in and 
take one word out seems to be a significant move. And why is 
that? And so why is “control” better than “care”? I think that 
would be a question that we would have. 
 
And so, you know, and in terms of a government that we’ve 
seen really stuck on definitions, that to have a bill before us that 
is a fairly significant bill because, as we’ve said, if people, 
when they’re touched by cancer it can be so alarming, and so, 
you know, in so many different ways, that to put that out there, 
people may wonder so what is, what comes along with the word 
“control”? You know, we have The Interpretation Act talking 
about definitions of what privatization means, and we’ve talked 
about some of these definitions. But this isn’t defined and I’m 
wondering why. And the minister does go on and seems to go to 
some length to talk about equipping the organization, and he’s 
referring to the Cancer Agency, “. . . to perform its role in 
strengthening cancer control in our province.” So that will be a 
piece of the questions that we’ll have to ask for sure as we see 
this move further down the road, but that’s interesting why so 
much of this legislation is really focused on that language. 
 
As well he talks about the need to make sure that the agency 
“. . . has the statutory authority it needs to request, collect, and 

disclose information in order to effectively meet its 
responsibility to provide cancer control services.” And again, 
that word “control” pops up. And of course, you know, as we 
move forward in the next 20 years and this 50-plus per cent 
increase, there is going to be a lot of questions about that. 
 
And so he talks about how the amendment “. . . clarifies the 
agency’s authority to disclose information to the North 
American and international cancer registries which act as 
central registries for cancer research, surveillance . . . 
[reporting, analysis], and assessment of cancer risks.” So in 
many ways that seems to be relatively straightforward. “All 
central registries in Canada and the United States are members 
of the multinational registries which enable the use by 
authorized organizations of de-identified patient information . . . 
[and] better understand, prevent, and treat cancer.” So in terms 
of privacy, it seems they’ve dealt with that. 
 
Again this is an important area where we might draw on the 
expertise of our Privacy Commissioner. Whenever we have 
governments who are looking to collect and deal with data, I 
think it’s always worthwhile to have our people, our privacy 
people, take a look and say, this makes sense; we can get 
behind this, or no; here are the flags. And so the minister talks 
about de-identifying patient information. So that’s fair enough, 
but does it meet the test of making sure that personal 
information does not get out in a way that can be identifying to 
people? So again we want to make sure that, you know, there’s 
no unintended consequences. That’s part of why we ask the 
questions we do. We throw them out there and hopefully the 
minister can come and be prepared to answer them and be ready 
to go on this. 
 
And as I said the word “control,” I don’t have a real problem 
with it. I just find it odd that as we evolve our language, that 
wasn’t more clearly defined. Are we talking about it in sort of a 
mega provincial way as opposed to at the individual person 
level, and at the personal level we talk about care; at the 
provincial level we talk about control? Maybe that’s the case. I 
don’t know. I think we need to know more about that. 
 
Well here as I check, the minister does say that he will be, “the 
Privacy Commissioner will be consulted about the agency’s 
ability . . .” And it’s interesting that it’s sort of in the future 
tense. We’ve got the bill here. We are going to consult. I would 
have assumed that they would have consulted beforehand and 
we wouldn’t be in this situation where it’s going to be after the 
fact. 
 
Because I can remember one time this government got caught 
consulting with the Privacy Commissioner after the fact and 
they had to withdraw the bill. I think it had to do with super IDs 
[identification] and the fact that they had proposed the bill with 
SGI, and then in the end of the day had to withdraw the bill 
because the information came back that it didn’t meet the test of 
privacy and that the people of Saskatchewan would not be 
served well by the legislation. 
 
So with this piece of legislation, I know many of our folks will 
want to speak to this at some length and also in committee. And 
I would hope the minister then, the new minister, will come 
back with a couple of pieces of information that the old minister 
made the commitment on. The old minister said that they will 



November 1, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1075 

consult with the Privacy Commissioner, so I anticipate that the 
new minister will have that information in committee and be 
ready to talk . . . The new minister should be prepared to talk 
about what does it mean, what’s the definition of “control” 
versus “care” and why is it not defined in the definitions. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we adjourn debate 
on Bill No. 13, An Act to amend The Cancer Agency Act. I do 
so move. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 13, The Cancer Agency 
Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 14 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 14 — The 
Horned Cattle Purchases Repeal Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad 
to join debate this fine evening on Bill No. 14, The Horned 
Cattle Purchases Repeal Act, 2016. And I want to go on record 
right off the top here, Mr. Speaker, that the minister gave a heck 
of a speech when he was talking about the repeal of this Act. 
You can find it in Hansard, May 30th, 2016. It comes in for a 
bit of a star treatment a couple of weeks later in The Western 
Producer. 
 
And certainly, Mr. Speaker, there are pieces of legislation that 
come before this House where they have something of a time 
capsule quality to them, Mr. Speaker, and certainly this would 
be one of them. And again, Mr. Speaker, an Act that was first 
proclaimed in 1939 has gone through a number of twists in the 
trail since then, Mr. Speaker. And we’re coming up . . . I’m not 
sure, but the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy looking to get 
into the debate. I know he’s not trying to steer me wrong. 
That’s probably not where that’s going, Mr. Speaker, but I’ll 
endeavour to do the best I can. 
 
But certainly I also want to thank the Minister of Agriculture 
and the Minister of the Environment for providing the 
opposition with a briefing note consisting of a picture of a nice 
cow with a big old rack of horns on it, you know, calling for the 
repeal of the bill. It was these kind of communications that 
really make the point, Mr. Speaker . . . Now I hear the Deputy 
Premier chiming in. You know, what would be a debate on The 
Horned Cattle Purchases Repeal Act without a bit of heckling 
from the Deputy Premier? I mean it’s hard to imagine it 
otherwise. 
 
But certainly, Mr. Speaker, in terms of, you know, something 
that’s come from 1939, you know, the $2 levy, the $1 levy that 
it initially was in terms of the penalty, and the changes in 
practices that have gone with beef management over the years, 

you know, the levy itself, last significant change was 1949 
when it was increased to $2. There was some consideration at 
the start of the last decade in terms of increasing that amount. 
That was never taken up. But certainly the funds generated 
under this piece of legislation certainly I know in the last 
decade have gone to different endeavours. 
 
In the minister’s remarks he talks about how the fund is nearly 
depleted. It would be interesting to see what the dollar amount 
is on that and, if there are any undertakings out there in terms of 
research or development that had previously been taken up by 
this piece of legislation and funded as such, what will be 
happening with them. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it’s an interesting piece of legislation. The, 
you know, minister’s standing forth to finally knock the horns 
off this piece of legislation. You know, it may be long overdue. 
And again of course we’ve got the Deputy Premier; I don’t 
know if he’s trying to steer me wrong now as well. I have a 
hard time hearing over my own speech, Mr. Speaker, but I 
guess I’ll get them to fill me in on it later perhaps, behind the 
bar. 
 
But certainly the minister makes a number of compelling 
arguments in his piece of . . . in the second reading speech he’d 
given May 30th, available in Hansard, Mr. Speaker, and again, 
given a star treatment later on in The Western Producer. 
 
But in terms of the way that practices have changed, the 
incidence of horned cattle being, you know, markedly less, 
moving from what was once 1 in 5 to, you know, a mere 
fraction of that these days, and the appropriateness of the 
funding, of what it costs to even administer the levy, there are a 
number of arguments why the time has come to arrive at a place 
where we’ve got The Horned Cattle Purchases Repeal Act in 
front of us. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I know that other of my colleagues, you 
know, they’ve given some fine speeches on this subject, and 
I’m sure there’s some fine ones still to come. And with that, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 14, The 
Horned Cattle Purchases Repeal Act, 2016. 
 
[21:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has moved 
adjournment on Bill No. 14, The Horned Cattle Purchases 
Repeal Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 15 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 15 — The 
Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 



1076 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2016 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I feel offended. Everybody 
moved to the back of the room. It’s my turn and they all move 
away. What is the issue here? 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I do want to congratulate my colleague on a 
fine speech, and I’m glad when I came back in the room, 
everybody was listening so intently. I thought he must have 
really hit it on the mark, so great stuff. 
 
But my bill is not quite as exciting, but it is still very, very 
important. It’s Bill No. 15, An Act to amend The Provincial 
Court Act, 1998. And it’s a relatively straightforward one. The 
bill takes the power to create a list of temporary judges from the 
cabinet and gives it to the Minister of Justice, allows the 
judicial court to dismiss frivolous or vexatious complaints 
against judges, and allows the Judicial Council to have one 
member respond to a complaint rather than the whole council 
and changes the rules for court-appointed lawyers by 
introducing new restrictions. 
 
And so we’ve seen several of these. We’ve talked about the 
Queen’s Bench last night, and we talked about the small claims 
court. And this is one that now the minister talked about how 
this is a kind of . . . And he says, “Mr. Speaker, the Provincial 
Court of Saskatchewan is . . . often the first point of contact for 
members of the public with our independent judicial system.” 
And he’s proud and impressed. And I agree that it’s a 
hard-working, professional court. But I’m not, you know, I 
don’t know whether it’s the first point of contact. It wasn’t my 
first point of contact, but there you go. 
 
But anyways, it’s an important one that we deal with, and it 
seems to be part of improving the court systems so that they can 
do their work more effectively. And these are the kind of issues 
that they would like us to deal with. And talks about the process 
for the review of Provincial Court judges who are subject to a 
complaint as to their conduct by the Judicial Council. The 
Judicial Council is comprised by representatives from all levels 
of the judiciary in Saskatchewan as well as members of the bar 
and government appointees, under the chairmanship of the 
Chief Justice of the province. This is an important piece, and 
you know, again being a layperson and not a lawyer who knows 
the ins and outs of the court system. 
 
But we did see an important inquiry into the conduct, the 
comments of an Alberta judge this past while in the conduct of 
a sexual assault case, I believe it was, in Calgary. And it was 
very . . . Some of the comments that were made by the judge 
were out of line and it really showed how important it is to . . . 
Just for us as well, we have our ways of being held accountable. 
Teachers, doctors have their ways of being accountable. So it’s 
important that judges have their ways of being held accountable 
because at the end of the day in society everyone has a role or 
serves the public good and has that public trust, that sacred 
public trust. It’s so critically important, so critically important 
that for there to be confidence, there needs to be transparency 
and accountability. 
 
And so when this comes forward, this will be one that we will 
need to know more about because we hope that we’re not 
closing the door, not streamlining it so much that in fact it will 
hamper and hinder the public’s confidence in the judicial 
system at the Provincial Court level. And while it’s important to 

make sure that the process is streamlined, that in fact some of 
this needs to be a little bit robust. It needs to be robust. It has to 
have rigour. It has to have a way that the public can have due 
course as this woman had in Alberta. And I think all of Canada, 
through the national news, was shocked that the judge did not 
have the appropriate training to deal with these kind of court 
cases that he was hearing, and he was having an old-fashioned, 
out-of-date set of values that was no longer supported in 
Canadian society. 
 
And so we want to make sure that we haven’t lost this with this 
review process. And so we’ll have to have those questions, and 
we’ll have to make sure the minister assures us that the 
Provincial Court and the Judicial Council is as responsive as it 
can be and as accountable and transparent as it can be. Many, 
many people, myself, would not have known we . . . I guess we 
would go to a website and look it up and try to find our way, 
navigate our way through that if one of our family members 
were, or one of our friends were treated in a way that was just 
not right. But we need to make sure that access is there. 
 
So it says the minister goes on talking about “. . . [amending] 
the Act to provide the Judicial Council with greater flexibility 
in the conduct of their reviews of the allegations of judicial 
misconduct and for the remedies that may be imposed.” And so 
that’s exactly what we’re talking about is in light of these, and it 
would be of interest, and I’d just speak offhand of one situation 
in Alberta, and there may be others that I’m not aware of but 
others in the Chamber are. And because no one is perfect and 
that’s why judges, like everyone else, have professional 
development. And it’s an important, it’s a key part of their 
day-to-day upkeep of their knowledge and their values and 
current thinking and best practices. We all need to be doing the 
best that we can to be current. And so this will be very 
interesting to know what they’re doing in terms of that kind of 
work. 
 
It also talks about “. . . [authorizing] the Minister of Justice to 
directly establish the list of temporary judges, including those 
from other jurisdictions, as recommended by the chief judge of 
the Provincial Court.” And I assume . . . Well this is where he 
talks about “Currently this process requires an order in 
council.” So the question I have then is an order in council’s a 
public document, so we will see the names of the list that the 
minister has recommended to the cabinet to approve in terms of 
the temporary judges. But if this is a case of the minister 
establishing a list of their own, of course in conjunction with 
the chief judge of the Provincial Court, is that list a public 
document? Where would that list be found? Will it have the 
same scrutiny? I’m not sure. 
 
You know, we see a movement of this government to move 
towards regulation and again that moves it one step away from 
public scrutiny because we don’t have a chance to participate in 
the debate around regulations until after the fact, until they’re 
published in the Gazette, and online — if they’re published 
online — as such with occupational health and safety. I know 
that’s one set of regulations that’s published online. 
 
But will this be the same, and is that serving the people of 
Saskatchewan well? And I think that’s a question the minister 
will need to answer in committee is, does it serve the people 
better for the minister to be alone in the responsibility of 



November 1, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1077 

developing that list or is it better to have that a cabinet decision 
and then publish as an order in council? And again if this is just 
a streamlining or getting rid of some red tape, I’m not sure, 
when we talk about the confidence in our judiciary system, that 
is serving the people of this province well. 
 
Unfortunately, and we know this to be the case that, you know, 
it’s not an even playing field, that we all get involved with the 
court system once and that’s it. You know, it’s not that way. In 
fact too many people are caught up in the judiciary system way 
too many times. And I see that and we hear. We see that in our 
inner cities, in our communities where young people are 
running. Sometimes they get caught up in the judiciary system 
and they’re getting caught up in not following up on certain 
commitments under the law, and it just gets to be a vicious 
cycle. And so for some people, this is a very, very important 
piece. And I think like the John Howard Society, Elizabeth Fry 
Society, these kind of rules when they’re made public, help 
them feel more confident that the judiciary is a transparent and 
an accountable part of our society. But when we see these 
things being concentrated within the Minister of Justice in his 
office, then that leads us to question is this, how does it serve, 
how does it really serve the people in a better way? 
 
And so the minister does not really talk about that, just says that 
this will be the way it will be, and so that’s really unfortunate. 
And we don’t dispute . . . The minister, maybe at the end of his 
remarks, as I’ve said earlier, he’s impressed by the hard work 
and professionalism of the courts. And we are as well; we are as 
well. But this is our role in the opposition is to give rigorous 
debate about the bills before us and ask those questions that lay 
people, common people, would ask. We aren’t on the inside of 
the decision making of these bills. We don’t know what . . . Are 
these the biggest problems the provincial courts are facing in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
What’s interesting, last night when we had the Court of Queen’s 
Bench come forward, a lot of their concerns were because 
they’re being swamped with business, too much business. This 
sounds like there’s another type of issue with the provincial 
courts, and whether that’s the complaints or frivolous concerns 
raised about judges now. Again the minister doesn’t say we’ve 
had 27 charges or complaints raised last year. That’s up 50 per 
cent in the last four years. He gives us no sort of environmental 
scan of the issues that are facing the provincial court system. 
And that’s unfortunate because we should have a better sense of 
the challenges our judges at the provincial court level are 
facing, and the officers of the court and the system, because 
we’re kind of going in here kind of blind. We don’t know. Is 
this the biggest problem? Are these the biggest problems? 
 
It’s kind of like the definition of privatization. Ten years after, 
12 years after these folks came with the NDP when we were in 
government to vote along, had no problems. But for 12 years, it 
was quite fine. Then all of a sudden, late in October, they had to 
. . . It was a problem. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I do digress on this because I do think the 
judiciary system is one that deserves time in and of itself, but 
again as we’ve said . . . And you know, last week we were 
debating a bill, another Justice bill, and we were talking about 
the innovation agenda that they had. And I have to say, the 
minister has not eluded to whether this is part of a larger 

strategy because we’ve had the small claims court, the Court of 
Queen’s Bench amendment Act before us, and this one now, is 
this a part of a larger strategy that’s been out there? 
 
[21:30] 
 
And again has there been consultation? Now as I said, Elizabeth 
Fry and John Howard both would have opinions, I think, on 
this. There may be other organizations that would have opinions 
on this. Have they been consulted? Because we do not want to 
have the unintended consequences of this kind of thing going 
forward and then finding out, oops, we’ve made some mistakes 
here. 
 
I think these kind of things are a little bit more than 
housekeeping. When we talk about the complaints process, 
clearly we’ve come some ways. We’ve come some ways in our 
province where we do have a complaints process in terms of 
how the police are dealt with. If there’s a complaint against the 
police, we have a process for that. And that’s been pretty much 
out there, so we have a pretty good understanding of that. This 
is something new that we haven’t really heard a lot about. 
 
And so as I said, it would’ve been interesting for the minister to 
say, is this part of a bigger package? This is the process, the 
judiciary system in Saskatchewan, with various levels and these 
are the kind of . . . When we looked at the environmental scan 
of the judiciary system in Saskatchewan, these are the problems 
that we foresee. We don’t see a problem with complaints 
against judges at the Court of Queen’s Bench. That’s not an 
issue. But we see an issue of the courts being clogged at the 
Court of Queen’s Bench but not at the provincial courts. I’m not 
sure, and I’m only speculating here because of what appears to 
be the issues that the minister seems to be raising. 
 
And again, as I said, the fact that the minister himself or herself 
will be completing these lists and whether they would be in the 
public record or some access to the public record. Myself, you 
know, it’s my old saying, if it ain’t broke, why fix it? So why 
are they fixing this way of making the list? What’s broke about 
it? Why is it easier for the minister? It seems that when a 
minister makes a recommendation to cabinet, especially in this 
kind, unless there is a real strong reason for someone not to be 
on that list, they probably would accept the recommendation 
and would move on forward. So I’m not sure what’s trying to 
be fixed here. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know that we may get to a few 
more bills tonight but this is one that I think has some points 
that should be raised in committee. And it’s not a 
straightforward one, but I would move that we would adjourn 
Bill No. 15, An Act to amend The Provincial Court Act, 1998. I 
do so move. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 15, The Provincial Court 
Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 



1078 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2016 

Bill No. 16 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 16 — The 
Adoption Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur 
l’adoption be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again 
good to take my place and join debate this fine evening on Bill 
No. 16, The Adoption Amendment Act, 2016 and of course its 
French language counterpart. 
 
It’s an interesting subject, Mr. Speaker, and it’s one that’s quite 
close to my heart in a couple of different ways, Mr. Speaker, 
and I guess . . . You know, I have immediate family that I love 
very much that know what it is to be adopted. And you know, I 
certainly have friends and acquaintances that have been through 
the whole adoption process as well. 
 
And you come to a number of observations about it, and 
certainly the circumstance I’m most familiar with, Mr. Speaker, 
worked out really, really well and in terms of . . . you know, it 
wasn’t perfect and it wasn’t without some stresses all around 
and some heartache all around, but it worked out really well for 
the person who was adopted, for the family that was immensely 
enriched by the adoption. 
 
When, you know, the time came to re-establish connection, 
when the person adopted had reached the age of majority and, 
you know, got to know the birth parents, that worked out really 
well also. And I guess I’m here to say that, you know, that 
adoption can be a wonderful, wonderful thing. And I know 
that’s not always the case, Mr. Speaker. And I know that it’s a 
complex situation on the face of it, and now ever more complex 
in terms of, you know, international adoptions, in terms of the 
ongoing engagement, involvement of the birth parents, and the 
different sort of factors that are increasingly complex that lead 
to questions of adoption. 
 
So I guess I state that all off the top, Mr. Speaker, by way of 
indicating my interest in this subject, and certainly my hope that 
the amendment Act that we have under consideration here in 
Bill 16 will lead to an improvement of the system and will 
increase the odds of adoptions working out like the one that I 
am most familiar with in a really wonderful way. 
 
But in terms of the particulars of the legislation itself, Mr. 
Speaker, it sets out to accomplish a number of things. Some of 
them fairly, you know, dealing with the nomenclature and 
trying to bring it up to date. Some of it bringing in line with best 
practice, both, you know, jurisdiction to jurisdiction here in 
Canada, but also how Canada interacts with the countries that 
have signed on to the Hague Convention on the Rights of the 
Child, I believe, and as well how non-adherent countries are 
dealt with in that case as well. 
 
But certainly from the top, changing “Crown” ward to 
“permanent” ward, doing so because “Crown” being viewed as 
an outdated term and no longer referenced in other child welfare 
legislation, would seem to be a fair enough proposal, Mr. 
Speaker. In terms of removing “simple adoption” from The 

Adoption Act, 1998, again, fair enough. Where it seeks to 
modernize language around what constitutes the child’s best 
interests, again, fair enough. The Act moves to change 
considerations for the “. . . religious faith, if any, in which the 
child has been raised” to “the child’s cultural and spiritual 
heritage and upbringing.” 
 
Again when determining what’s in the best interest of the child 
that would seem to be a good move, Mr. Speaker, because 
again, on a different but certainly related subject, Mr. Speaker, 
as we’ve seen with the whole question of the Sixties Scoop, 
following on the heels of what happened in the residential 
school system, if you aren’t seeking to nurture that cultural and 
spiritual heritage and upbringing, it can set you on a pretty 
dangerous path in terms of damage to the child as they grow to 
be an adult. And we have far too many examples of how that 
has gone wrong in our society, Mr. Speaker. So that would 
seem to be a reasonable change. 
 
In terms of increasing the amount of time parents can revoke 
their consent to an independent adoption or voluntary committal 
from 14 to 21 days, this moves it to be in line with a majority of 
other jurisdictions. Again, you know, it’s one thing to say that, 
it’s one thing to see it written on a piece of paper; it’s entirely 
another to be the two sets of parents and the child, the newborn, 
involved in those 14 days, or now those 21 days. And certainly 
it’s a pretty wrenching experience, is what I know of it, Mr. 
Speaker, again from both sides. 
 
So you want to be as certain as you can. Perhaps that additional 
time will lend itself to greater certainty on the decision, which 
again is one of life and death in some cases, but certainly a huge 
impact on a life, Mr. Speaker. But we’ll be interested to see if 
that is an improvement and is regarded as such by the parties 
that are involved on either side of an adoption. 
 
Where the bill allows assisted adoption benefits to continue to 
subsequent legal guardians if both adoptive parents pass away, 
again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of adoption it’s really and truly 
adoptions should be about the best interest of the child. And a 
change like that would only further secure those best interests in 
the case of a tragedy such as the passing away of both adoptive 
parents. 
 
The bill allows the Minister to enter into payment agreements 
directly with a youth between ages 18 and 21 if the youth is 
engaged in an educational or vocational plan. The 
agreement-making with the youth recognizes “. . . the youth’s 
independence from the family unit,” as well as allows “. . . the 
Minister to continue to support a transition plan if the adoptive 
parents pass away after the youth turns 18.” 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, it’d be interesting to see what experience 
backs up the need for this particular change in the legislation. 
But usually these things don’t come from nowhere, to mangle a 
phrase, Mr. Speaker. But certainly if this change is there, I 
imagine it was predicated on experience. And if that, again that 
18-to-21 phase and what that means for youth that’s in that 
situation, it’s very important that you ensure security for that 
individual around their education or vocational plan. 
 
The legislation also moves to restrict “. . . the court’s ability to 
hear/take into consideration a child’s voice in court to age seven 



November 1, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1079 

and up.” Again, Mr. Speaker, be interesting to know more about 
what the past practice was, what the experiences in other 
jurisdictions. What is the developmental evidence that is being 
brought to bear to make this determination that seven is the age 
at which that should occur? But that, I’m sure, will await the 
more extensive questioning that is on offer at the committee 
stage. But for the time being, if you think about, you know, 
seven-year-olds, that’s a pretty young age for a human being to 
be speaking for themselves in court. But how that works, again 
we’re presuming this is based on best practice, both in other 
jurisdictions and in terms of what the developmental research 
has to tell us. So we’ll look for affirmation in that regard from 
the minister come the committee stage. 
 
[21:45] 
 
The bill also removes section 28, “Simple adoption orders,” and 
all references to section 28 because of requirements for simple 
adoptions being incompatible with the legal requirements for 
intercountry adoption as they do not require the severing of 
parental ties or informed consent by the birth parents and do not 
prevent birth parents from applying to revoke their consent to 
this type of order. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, this measure certainly speaks to the 
increased complexity and the increasingly global nature of the 
very question of adoption. What used to be very much a local, 
community-focused matter is now certainly a question that 
moves between countries, between continents, and indeed 
around the globe. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, the legislation 
needs to keep up with that, and it would seem to be an effort in 
that regard. 
 
The legislation introduces a new section, section 27.1, laying 
the foundation to support cases involving the adoption of a 
child from a country that is not a signatory to the Convention on 
Protection of Children and Co-operation in Respect of 
Intercountry Adoption, the new measure being consistent with 
the requirement for any type of adoption granted in the 
province. Again, Mr. Speaker, an important step that keeps the 
legislation current with the global situation that we behold in 
the question of adoption in this 21st century. 
 
The legislation ensures that the penalties resulting from the 
release of identifying information on an adult adoptee’s birth 
registration are consistent with the penalties found within the 
updates made to The Adoption Regulations, 2003. 
 
Again in terms of, if I’m remembering the minister’s second 
reading speech correctly, she talks about in the vast majority of 
cases a simple reminder of the non-contact provision, if that’s 
what’s being contravened, that that be respected. And that, in 
most cases, again by the minister’s remarks, is sufficient to 
uphold the provision. And if that is indeed the case, it would be 
good to know a bit more about, you know, what is the incidence 
of this type of thing. And again, having some experience of 
individuals that have sought out that contact after they’ve 
achieved the age of majority with parents, and the kind of 
interest that has to be expressed on both sides of the equation 
for those wishes, for that position to not be respected, I would 
imagine could be quite traumatic, Mr. Speaker. So whatever 
way we can seek to maintain those provisions and is most 
effective, I’m open to those arguments. 

The bill also introduces a new section, section 35.1 allowing the 
minister to apply for a court order against any person who is not 
complying with any provision of the Act, the regulations or a 
decision or an order issued because of the Act. Again. Mr. 
Speaker, it provides a certain differentiation or gradation to the 
steps that the minister can take to ensure that the terms of an 
adoption agreement are respected by the involved parties. 
 
The bill removes the provisions regarding the Family Services 
Board, regarding family services boards. Now, the family 
services boards were established back in the ’90s with The 
Child and Family Services Act, or they were brought into being, 
but they were never established.  
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, someone with a very limited 
knowledge of the child welfare system, but with a fair amount 
of experience with the way that it works or doesn’t work, it 
would be interesting to know what the impetus was around 
family service boards, and why those were not taken up upon. 
And perhaps I can pursue that conversation with certain of my 
colleagues who have a great deal of expertise on that question. 
But if they have never been taken up, it would be good to know 
why not. But if, you know, they were brought into . . . the 
possibility of them was allowed for in the ’90s, here it is 2016 
and they were never realized. It would seem to be a fair enough 
move to repeal those provisions in the Act, and as well, as I 
understand, to align the Act with current practice. 
 
The bill also provides regulation-making authority that 
describes who can complete a report for the court with respect 
to a child who is proposed for adoption, as well as what 
information the report shall contain. Again it would be good to 
know what those current regulations consist of, and if there are 
in fact significant changes considered on those reports, both 
who can fill them out and what they should consist of. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, it’s always exciting to get the 
legislation and to see different of the activities prescribed in the 
legislation be devolved to regulation because it certainly 
doesn’t have the same sort of visibility or transparency, let 
alone scrutiny, that is afforded by the legislation process and the 
work here in the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. But again, that will be 
interesting to get the minister’s response in the more close and 
complex questioning that is afforded by the committee process 
and as well with the expert advice from officials being on offer 
in that circumstance as well. 
 
The bill also supports applications recognizing simple adoption 
orders made prior to the coming into force of The Adoption 
Amendment Act, 2016, and again, Mr. Speaker, again fair 
enough. These adoptions and applications for simple adoption 
orders will be going on and the world, of course, shouldn’t stop 
spinning while we await passage of this bill, but it’ll be 
interesting to, again, get a better understanding of how many 
applications are being made. What’s the rate? What’s the actual 
number involved? 
 
And again, it’s not without precedent certainly, Mr. Speaker, 
but this kind of grandfathering or, you know, telescoping into 
the past from the future date of passage of the legislation is not 
usual practice, Mr. Speaker. That they see fit to bring that 
forward as part of the legislation again begs a more complex 
answer from the minister and officials, and I’m presuming we’ll 



1080 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2016 

get those answers in committee. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, some further considerations have been dealt 
with certainly by other of my colleagues. I know that other of 
my colleagues will have more to add on this subject. But 
certainly when you think about The Adoption Act, when you 
think about The Child and Family Services Act, and you think 
about the basic intent of these pieces of legislation, it’s a very 
simple thing arrayed against something which is very complex, 
which is a situation in modern society, and the situation of far 
too many kids out there. 
 
But if we can keep that best interest of the child to the fore and 
bring everything along in the train of that and to also be very 
thoughtful in how we construe that best interest of the child and 
not, you know, disrespectful or hurtful or harmful, as we’ve 
seen at too many points where horrible things were undertaken 
by people that were proclaiming themselves to be working in 
the best interests of the child, but in fact were doing something 
very much, very much to the opposite. That best interests of the 
child needs to be thoughtful, needs a very refined and 
well-thought-out approach. 
 
And, again, I await further interventions from my colleagues on 
this bill, and I look forward to the minister’s participation in the 
committee stage hearing of this bill when we’ll have, I’m sure, 
a much more finely detailed discussion of the provisions in this 
legislation. But for the time being, Mr. Speaker, I would move 
to adjourn debate on Bill No. 16, The Adoption Amendment Act, 
2016. 
 
The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 16, The Adoption Amendment Act, 
2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 17 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 17 — The Power 
Corporation Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to stand in my place this evening and enter into debate 
on Bill No. 17, An Act to amend The Power Corporation Act. 
Certainly, Mr. Speaker, this is a relatively small bill that we are 
debating today. On its surface, much of it is appears to be 
housekeeping, including changes to make the language in this 
Act more gender neutral, which certainly members on this side 
would concur with. 
 
A substantial number of the changes also involve removing 
unnecessary plural forms and deleting references to persons and 
to representatives, and replacing them with a singular and an 
explanatory note that all singular references also refer to the 
plural. So that certainly doesn’t bear a whole lot of debate or 

attention from this side. 
 
But there certainly were, Mr. Speaker, some clauses in this 
legislation that did capture my attention and the attention of 
members of this side, my colleagues. In the explanatory notes 
that were provided with this bill, Mr. Speaker, it’s noted in 
section 8 in clause 5 that the intent is to clarify what is proposed 
here, is to add to SaskPower’s authorized powers to include 
those that are connected with or incidental to the powers set out 
in other statutes. And the example here that’s given, Mr. 
Speaker, is The Crown Corporations Act. 
 
Also in that clause and section under (j), it’s noted that the 
intent is to clarify — again using that word, Mr. Speaker — 
cabinet’s power to designate additional powers that it considers 
SaskTel requires for efficient operations of its business. 
 
[22:00] 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have not stood in this Assembly for very 
long at this point. I think it’s about six months. But I have 
learned to pay attention when that word “clarify” comes up 
from members opposite, almost as much attention as we saw 
members opposite pay to the bill to repeal The Horned Cattle 
Purchases Act, Mr. Speaker. My colleague says it’s like waving 
a red flag, and certainly it is, Mr. Speaker. I’ve learned that 
much can be packed into that term “clarify,” and sometimes 
what we’re left with is a little less clarity than we had in the 
first place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I pay attention to anything that notes cabinet 
granting itself additional powers regarding our Crown 
corporations, for reasons that might be obvious, but I think I’m 
going to go into them a little bit here, Mr. Speaker. Certainly 
the decision to use SaskPower to purchase lands associated with 
the GTH have proven to be problematic, Mr. Speaker, and we 
have some serious and enduring concerns. I know the members 
opposite aren’t necessarily wanting to talk about it, but I think 
members on this side certainly will continue to seek answers 
and our own clarity, Mr. Speaker, with regard to that decision. 
 
Mr. Speaker, certainly another thing that we will be seeking 
clarity around . . . and my colleague from Nutana certainly did a 
more than capable job this evening seeking some clarity around 
The Interpretation Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker, the previous 
Bill 40 that was spoken to, again reminding all members that 
the stated intent of that Act is to clarify the definition of 
privatization. And again, as my very capable colleague at length 
pointed out, that instead of bringing clarity, Mr. Speaker, what 
it has brought is a whole lot of questions. 
 
So certainly questions as to what some of the consequences 
might be, some that I know that she’s paid a lot of attention to, 
and I think that all members in this Assembly certainly would 
do well to pay that kind of attention to — exactly what might 
that type of endeavour, privatizing up to 49 per cent of our 
Crown corporations, including SaskPower as we’re talking 
about here, what that might entail, what that might mean for 
implications for taxation, what that might mean for implications 
for minority shareholders, Mr. Speaker. And the list goes on. So 
I think that for those reasons and many more, when that term 
“clarity” comes up I do pay some extra attention. 
 



November 1, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1081 

Another thing that certainly warrants attention and further 
debate is it takes all the way up to page 8 of the explanatory 
notes, Mr. Speaker. I’m just going to move to that now, which 
really is probably the main reason for this proposed bill. And 
that is it’s recommended that there’s an amendment to increase 
SaskPower’s current borrowing limit from 8 billion all the way 
up to 10 billion, Mr. Speaker. That’s a lot of money, as my 
colleague says, and I certainly agree with her. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the last time that this legislation was amended to 
increase that borrowing limit was in 2013. At that time the 
amount was raised from $5 billion up to $8 billion, where it 
currently sits. And this proposal would in three years take it up 
another $2 billion. That’s $5 billion, Mr. Speaker, since 2013, a 
doubling of the borrowing limit for SaskPower. And that draws 
a lot of concern, Mr. Speaker, for a number of reasons. I’m just 
going to turn to the minister’s comment — the then minister, I 
should say — his comments when this bill was proposed in this 
legislature back in June, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He noted that “SaskPower has the responsibility to provide safe, 
clean, reliable power to the people of Saskatchewan . . .” and 
certainly we members on this side would agree with that. He 
noted that “SaskPower continues to make substantial capital 
expenditures to replace aging infrastructure and meet the 
province’s energy requirements . . .” And he also makes note of 
the goal of increasing renewable capacity of this province to 50 
per cent. 
 
So certainly, Mr. Speaker, those are reasons that we could look 
at. But I think that there are a few other pieces that are missing 
from his remarks that day, and I think they help us paint a bit of 
a picture as to how we’re in a situation in 2016 contemplating a 
doubling of SaskPower’s borrowing limits in just a few short 
years, Mr. Speaker, so to remind members of course. 
 
Also not present in the former minister’s comments: the 47 
million that was wasted on smart meters, the cost overruns and 
glitches associated with the $1.5 billion Boundary dam 3 carbon 
capture project, as well as the underproduction and the 
subsequent penalties that were paid by SaskPower to Cenovus 
for not meeting their CO2 contractual obligations, Mr. Speaker. 
Those totalled $20 million in 2014 and 2015. So not only is it 
ageing infrastructure, it is mismanagement and frankly scandal 
after scandal that have contributed to this financial picture, and 
now the proposed amendments to increase it yet again, the 
borrowing limits of SaskPower. 
 
And lest you think that the ratepayers are getting off on not 
paying more, Mr. Speaker, that certainly isn’t the case. Rate 
increases have also been put through by SaskPower, the latest 
just earlier this year, and that was the second rate increase, Mr. 
Speaker, in just six months. So on one hand we see this steep 
and consistent rate increase on one hand, and then this increase, 
a very steep rate of borrowing by SaskPower on the other hand, 
Mr. Speaker. And I think some of my colleagues have deemed 
that the carbon capture tax, and I would be inclined to agree 
with them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Going back again to the minister’s comments from June, he 
noted that SaskPower is in the process of moving to 50 per cent 
renewables, increasing that capacity by 2030, including 1600 
megawatts of new wind power and capacity to reduce emissions 

by over 40 per cent below the 2005 levels, Mr. Speaker. I’m not 
sure if the proposed Chaplin wind farm was part of what was 
anticipated in that 1600 megawatts, Mr. Speaker, but we know 
that that proposal has been rejected, and so puts SaskPower 
back at the drawing board. Certainly on the surface . . . I’m not 
an expert in either migratory birds or wind power, but it did 
seem an interesting choice of location to place that wind farm 
right by a major migratory bird preserve. And so we are without 
that particular wind farm, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I do have some questions about this plan for 2030. 
Certainly members on this side would share that we need to 
move to renewables and have a plan for doing that. It’s great to 
have a target, Mr. Speaker, but targets only go so far if you 
don’t have a plan. So certainly this has been a topic of debate. 
 
And while the Premier doesn’t want to talk about some things 
. . . and members opposite, there are things that they certainly 
have made a lot of their own noise about. And one of those is 
the proposal by the federal government to impose a carbon tax. 
And I know that members on this side, and our leader has stated 
this very clearly, that he’s in opposition of any imposed 
measures by the federal government. But I think it is incumbent 
on the Premier and the government to come up with a plan of 
their own frankly, Mr. Speaker. And well I’m not hearing a lot 
of those ideas from that side, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There has been a lot of money and a lot of energy and a lot of 
time invested in the Boundary dam project, which does take a 
small amount of carbon out. But some of those other plans, you 
know, things that we’re hearing in other places where they’re 
coming up with their own ideas, investments in solar, 
investments in wind, geothermal . . . An idea that I recently 
heard, and again I think it warrants looking further into it, is 
using depleted oil wells for geothermal projects. And that’s 
something that holds some promise, Mr. Speaker. But we’re not 
hearing a lot of those ideas here. 
 
And while we are increasing the borrowing again — doubling 
that since 2013 — we’re not seeing that kind of investment in 
those renewables, Mr. Speaker. And I think that that’s a big 
issue. If we are investing in infrastructure, it’s important that we 
have good ideas and plans to further those goals and this 
government’s own target to move to renewables, a 50 per cent 
increase by 2030, Mr. Speaker. Even enacting their own 
legislation that has already been passed but not proclaimed 
regarding targeting high emitters, that would be start, Mr. 
Speaker, but we’re certainly, we’re not seeing that. 
 
By contrast, in Alberta they have invested and put incentives for 
solar installations on a number of public buildings and also in 
schools and farms, areas like arenas, libraries, recreational 
centres, Mr. Speaker. And I think that that’s a really interesting 
idea. Certainly was something when I was on the school board I 
always thought, you know, you have these buildings that are 
sitting empty for good portions of the year, to capture solar 
energy from the roofs, solar panels on the roofs, and when 
they’re sitting idle putting that power back into the grid, I think 
is an idea that is certainly worth looking at and exploring. 
We’re seeing huge uptake in other jurisdictions, and it would be 
interesting and exciting to see that sort of innovation and 
commitment, frankly, Mr. Speaker, to those solutions that we 
are seeing in other jurisdictions. 



1082 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2016 

And you know, another thing that is particularly concerning, 
Mr. Speaker, about this increase in debt and the borrowing 
limits and increased powers to cabinet, Mr. Speaker, with 
regard specifically to SaskPower, is again that GTH land 
scandal. Twenty-five million dollars of that land was bought by 
SaskPower, remarkably just in time to allow the GTH to buy 
another 204 acres, Mr. Speaker. So I know we will have more 
comments about that. 
 
But those kind of decisions where we overpay for land and use 
our Crowns to enter into those type of decisions, Mr. Speaker, 
are deeply concerning, deeply concerning to the people of 
Saskatchewan. I know the government says that they want to 
put that behind them, but we’re not done talking about it, Mr. 
Speaker. And we will continue to talk about it and raise those 
issues when we are speaking to this bill, Mr. Speaker, in 
question period, and wherever we can. Because we simply 
haven’t, haven’t received the answers that the people of 
Saskatchewan frankly deserve. 
 
[22:15] 
 
This over saddling of debt in the Crown corporations, 
particularly in SaskPower, was certainly something that I heard 
on the doorstep a number of times, Mr. Speaker. Not only is the 
government increasing the debt, they’re using Crowns and 
racking up debt within our Crowns at an alarming rate, Mr. 
Speaker. And I think that that leads sometimes to exploring 
really desperate, desperate, very desperate measures such as, 
you know, floating the idea of privatizing up to 49 per cent of 
our Crowns, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So while again this bill is relatively small in being only three 
pages, it holds a whole lot of questions in it, Mr. Speaker, and 
really some questions that are enveloping all of what we’ve 
been talking about here — mismanagement, wasted money, you 
know, increasing debt, and lack of clarity. Ironically, Mr. 
Speaker, that lack of clarity. And I know the people of 
Saskatchewan want us to ask those questions and continue to 
ask those questions, and we will, you know, with regard to this 
bill. 
 
And exactly what is the need for this additional 2 billion where 
that last . . . why we’re coming again in 2016 when we just 
came for 3 million . . . or $3 billion rather, Mr. Speaker, in 
2013. Those are really important questions. And you know, if 
we saddle our Crowns with too much debt, it also places them 
in jeopardy. So it’s something that we will continue to pay very, 
very close attention to, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know that a couple of my colleagues have had opportunity to 
speak to this bill, and I know that we all will want to continue to 
give it the scrutiny that it deserves. And as my colleague from 
Athabasca noted, we need to know where the money is going, 
Mr. Speaker, not only increasing debt, our provincial debt, but 
also increasing our Crown debt. And it is concerning, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s part of a trend, despite the assertions from that side 
that this is simply about clarity, Mr. Speaker. I think that it 
more than anything points to a decided lack of clarity and, 
frankly, of desperation. 
 
I do want to leave room for my colleagues to add their 
questions and concerns to this debate. I know that they will 

have a lot to say, and we certainly aren’t done speaking to it yet, 
Mr. Speaker. But I think that with that I will conclude my 
remarks and adjourn debate on Bill No. 17, the Act to amend 
The Power Corporation Act. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 17, The Power 
Corporation Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 19 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 19 — The Film 
and Video Classification Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I’m 
pleased to enter into the debate tonight on this bill, The Film 
and Video Classification Act, 2016. 
 
One of the things that really bugs me about this bill is that it’s 
being treated as if it’s a brand new bill, and yet it is actually 
very, very similar to its predecessor The Film and Video 
Classification Act which was passed many years ago, with a 
few minor changes. And what makes it really difficult for 
legislators when we are looking at the new bill is to really try 
and ascertain exactly what is new here. Because we had an Act 
very, very similar with a lot of the same wording, a lot of the 
same clauses, a lot of the same ideas, and yet with one change 
to the way the classification board is being removed and being 
replaced with an individual. That’s really the main change, and 
yet we’re dealing with a brand new bill. 
 
So it’s a bit frustrating in that sense because it’s hard to know 
exactly what’s new here. And as a result of that, whenever this 
happens, we’re often fortunate enough to get explanatory notes 
about the changes if the bill is being amended. But 
unfortunately we don’t get any explanatory notes when bills are 
being replaced, even though the similarities are throughout. But 
at any rate, I’ll first start with . . . And that’s just one of my 
annoyances with the way this is structured. 
 
But the bill itself, the minister indicated when he introduced this 
back in June that the main thrust of the new legislation is to 
allow the administration of the industry to be performed by an 
official, a director of film classification, rather than the board. 
This used to be done by a board. And if you look in the old bill, 
there was an establishment of this board, the Film Classification 
Board, and there used to have a chairperson and two other 
board members who were all appointed by the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council. 
 
But the powers or the makeup of the board is now being 
switched out and we have, instead, a director. And the duties of 
the director are very similar to what the board used to do. And 
you’ll find that the former section 3 of the bill, which is what 



November 1, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1083 

the board may do, is now replaced almost verbatim with 
section 5. 
 
So what is it, you may be asking yourself, that the board used to 
do and that the director will be doing? What happens is that the 
board can “charge the owner of a film or any other person who 
proposes to exhibit or distribute a film any fees that may be 
prescribed in the regulations for classification and review of 
films . . .” So apparently he can charge fees, he or she. They can 
also charge fees for registration. We don’t know what those are 
because they’re prescribed in the regulations. 
 
And I guess they can also exempt, in accordance with the 
criteria in the regulations and subject to any terms they consider 
appropriate, any person from all or any provision of this Act or 
the regulations. That’s pretty broad, and that actual right is what 
the board used to have. I’m not sure that is still there for the 
director. That actual right seems to have been removed from the 
board’s . . . The board used to be able to exempt people, but 
now that may be actually buried completely in the regs or 
removed altogether. 
 
So I think the main thrust of a lot of this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
is, as the minister indicated, just to allow this director to replace 
the Film Classification Board. 
 
One of the things I was interested in is to know how the board 
is going to be appointed. And as it turns out, the board . . . 
sorry, the director, how will the director be appointed? Through 
the same process actually. Well it’s a little bit different. The 
board used to be appointed by order in council. Now this is 
devolved down to the minister. 
 
So there’s a little bit less scrutiny involved with the 
appointment of the director. And the director may also . . . The 
minister can appoint the director of film classification and one 
or more deputy directors of film classification. 
 
They have some pretty extensive powers, too. The board used 
to have these powers and now they’re passed on to the director. 
They can actually go into any theatre without a warrant, or any 
place connected with that theatre other than a private dwelling 
place. So the only place they cannot go is to a private dwelling 
place. But they can enter any theatre or place connected with a 
theatre where a film may be located: 
 

enter any premises, other than a private dwelling place, 
where a film is or is to be distributed. 

 
They can: 
 

require the production of a film and any advertising 
associated with the film that the director or person 
considers necessary. 

 
In this case, production, I assume, means to actually produce 
the film itself, not be a film producer. And: 
 

require any owner of a film or any owner, operator or 
person in charge of the theatre or premises to give the 
director or person all reasonable assistance. 

 
So you can walk into the business place of these people who 

show films and just demand all kinds of things. 
 
So there’s very broad, broad rights that are presented here in 
terms of what this director can do. And he can also, as I 
indicated earlier, charge a number of fees. There’s significant 
fines, offences, and penalties that exist in the new Act. Of 
course, they also existed in the old Act and they’re very similar 
although . . . In fact, even the amounts are pretty much the 
same: 5,000 for an individual offence; and in a corporation, 
100,000. Those are the same limits that were in the previous bill 
so that hasn’t been changed either. 
 
So there are some exemptions in the old bill. For example, a 
church is exempt from these requirements under the Act, which 
I find very interesting. And I’m not sure those exemptions . . . 
Oh yes, they’re still there in the new bill under section 13. So 
who is exempt from the film classification? 
 

a church or religious society, if the film is designed for 
purposes of worship or religious instruction. 

 
So that is quite interesting, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the 
freedom that is being afforded here to churches, religious 
societies. 
 
Secondly, the exemption applies to: 
 

a university, school or other educational institution for 
which the minister responsible for the administration of 
The Education Act . . . is responsible, if the film is 
designed for educational purposes. 

 
So you can show pretty much anything in the classroom 
because there is no classifications applied, if I understand this 
correctly. 
 
Also, the Act doesn’t apply to: 
 

a film designed for the purpose of advertising, 
demonstrating or instructing in the use of commercial or 
industrial products. 

 
So those kind of films are exempt. 
 
And then finally, the Act also does not apply to: 
 

any other film or class of films, person or class of persons 
or advertising associated with films that may be exempted 
in the regulations or by the director pursuant to clause 
14(6)(c). 

 
So there’s further exemptions that, of course we have no idea 
what they are because it’s either at the discretion of the director 
herself or the regulations which . . . We haven’t seen the 
regulations for this bill yet and we have no idea when we will 
see them because that is part of the process where we don’t see 
and have an opportunity to comment on the actual regulations 
themself. 
 
If you look at the regulation-making authority, again it’s very 
similar to what it was in the previous Act. But there’s a whole 
list of things that the Lieutenant Governor in general can make 
regulations for, and even the first one itself is quite broad: 



1084 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2016 

“defining, enlarging, or restricting the meaning of any word or 
expression used in this Act but not defined in this Act.” 
Prescribing fees, exempting people, there it is in 21(c). So they 
can make regulations that will exempt any person or class of 
persons on any terms and conditions. 
 
So as you can see, Mr. Speaker, there’s a whole lot of, I’m not 
sure, I want to say non-clarity, but I think it’s rather there’s just 
a lot of questions that would not be available to be answered 
until the regulations are passed. 
 
At any rate, you know, I think it seems the minister is trying to 
make changes that are reflected in other jurisdictions as well, 
and also they’re consistent with programs, other programs 
administered by the Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority. 
So in that sense I think these changes are fairly innocuous. 
 
And it’s just too bad we don’t have a vibrant film industry here 
in Saskatchewan that could be having these films applied to 
them, so that’s what’s missing is an actual film industry here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
At any rate, at this point, Mr. Speaker, I would . . . That’s the 
extent to my comments and I move that we adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 19, The Film and Video Classification Act, 2016. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana has 
moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 19, The Film and 
Video Classification Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. It now being 10:30, this Assembly 
stands adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 40 — The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’interprétation 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1055 
 Bill No. 12 — The Public Health (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2016 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1071 
 Bill No. 13 — The Cancer Agency Amendment Act, 2016 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1073 
 Bill No. 14 — The Horned Cattle Purchases Repeal Act, 2016 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1075 
 Bill No. 15 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2016 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1076 
 Bill No. 16 — The Adoption Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’adoption 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1078 
 Bill No. 17 — The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2016 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1080 
 Bill No. 19 — The Film and Video Classification Act, 2016 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1082 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


