






















































Hansard: May 19, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 3A  THURSDAY, MAY 19, 2016, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Hon. Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Hon. Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Merriman, Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 51; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Maurice Riou http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 41 
 May 19, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Stonebridge-Dakota. 
 
Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through you 
to all members of the Assembly, I have the honour of 
introducing a very important guest who has joined us in the 
legislature today. Child Find Saskatchewan, which was first 
established in 1984, educates and advocates across our province 
for the protection and rights of children and youth. Mr. Speaker, 
I am honoured to introduce the president of Child Find 
Saskatchewan, Phyllis Hallatt who has travelled from 
Saskatoon to be with us today. 
 
Child Find Saskatchewan, along with its network of volunteers 
across our province, works hard to highlight issues relating to 
missing children. It promotes the message that a missing child 
is everyone’s responsibility and all children have a right to be 
safe. I would like to thank Ms. Hallatt and the many individuals 
involved with Child Find Saskatchewan for making a difference 
in the lives of Saskatchewan children and their families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in welcoming Ms. 
Hallatt to the Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you and to 
all the members of this Assembly, I’d like to join with the 
members opposite in welcoming the individuals from Child 
Find Saskatchewan to our Legislative Assembly today. I’d like 
to thank the government for the good work they are doing in 
recognizing this month as Child Find Awareness Month and 
thank the folks at Child Find Saskatchewan for carrying the 
torch on this incredibly important issue. Please join me in 
welcoming them to this legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d ask for leave 
for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from 
Shellbrook. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
members and my colleagues in the House here for granting 
leave for this extended introduction of some very distinguished 

individuals that we have here. We have with us today presidents 
from nine Mexican post-secondary institutions that are visiting 
the province, University of Regina, and they are visiting our 
Legislative Assembly here today. And I’m honoured to 
introduce these guests that are now seated in our west gallery. 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, we do have Lorena — and I do 
apologize in advance for the names — but Lorena Alvarado 
Buendía. She is the national academic director at the 
Technological and Polytechnic Universities in Mexico with the 
Ministry of Education in Mexico. 
 
We have Ana Ydalia Sesma Caballero. She is the director of 
Canada Posible. We have Arturo Fragoso Corral. He is the 
president of the Technological University of Durango. We have 
Elva Patricia Saracho Martinez. She is the president of the 
Technological University of El Retoño. We have Gerardo 
Marcelino Lara Orozco, the president of the Polytechnic 
Metropolitan University of Hidalgo. We have Jesus Oscar 
Ballesteros, the president of the Technological University of 
Tamaulipas Norte. We have Marlene Medina Trejo, the 
president of the Technological University of Saltillo. We have 
Miguel Angel Macías Perez, the president of the Technological 
University of Altamira. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last winter we had four Saskatchewan students 
that attended their post-secondary studies in Mexico. We have 
over 50 Mexican students, Mr. Speaker, that are now attending 
their studies just right here at the University of Regina. 
 
Mexico is the second-largest Latin American source country for 
international students in the nation of Canada. And, Mr. 
Speaker, this interaction of our student studies is important 
between Canada and Mexico, but also important I think 
between Saskatchewan and Mexico, Mr. Speaker. In just the 
last five years, Saskatchewan’s trade with Mexico has increased 
by some 81 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The University of Regina and a number of universities in 
Mexico have had a relationship that dates back 20 years. It’s 
present and strong today, and I think we’re here to discuss how 
to improve on those relations into the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also attending with our delegation are Dave 
Button, I believe, the vice-president of administration at the 
University of Regina. We have Livia Castellanos, the executive 
director and chief international officer at the UR International; 
and we have Sofia Martinez, the manager of the Americas & 
Europe, UR International. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like all members, all members here today 
to join me in welcoming our delegation from Mexico to the 
Saskatchewan legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d just 
like to join with the minister in welcoming these very important 
guests to our Legislative Assembly. Certainly that they’re 
accompanied by Vice-president David Button from the 
University of Regina is signal to the importance of this 
delegation, and certainly we’ve looked on with interest in terms 
of the reports of the great hospitality that was extended 



42 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2016 

yesterday under the heading of President Vianne Timmons from 
the University of Regina. 
 
But I just want to say buenos días, bienvenidos a Saskatchewan. 
And certainly, Mr. Speaker, the relationship between Canada 
and Mexico is one that is strong, one that is enduring, and one 
that stands to grow only stronger in the years to come. But 
certainly in the post-secondary education sector, the 
wide-ranging group of individuals that we’ve got here from 
different post-secondary institutions in Mexico from right 
across the beautiful and diverse country of Mexico is again 
signal to the importance of this relationship and promising for 
the many years to come. 
 
So again, Mr. Speaker, I join with the minister and all members 
in welcoming these individuals to the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
be remiss if I didn’t stand in the House today to acknowledge 
Phyllis Hallatt from Child Find as well. The Ministry of Justice 
enjoys a very good working relationship with Child Find, and I 
wanted to stand and thank her very much for her very hard 
work and for the relationship that we have between the Ministry 
of Justice, the Government of Saskatchewan, and Child Find, 
and thank her for being here today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and to 
you and through you to the House and all members of the 
Assembly, I would like to introduce my family, my beautiful 
son, Nickson, and my baby girl, Claire. They’re up there in the 
west gallery. And the one that keeps the family together and 
does a lot of work when we do our jobs here, my beautiful wife 
Larissa Steinley. I want to thank them for coming down and 
witnessing proceedings today. I believe they have a jam-packed 
day. I think they’re going to go and chase some geese after this 
and maybe pick up a few rocks, and Nickson loves to walk 
around in beautiful Wascana where our Legislative Building is 
situated. So I’d like all members to welcome them to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
just want to say hi and welcome to a constituent from Moose 
Jaw, Dianne Green, that’s up in the west gallery. Dianne comes 
here almost every Thursday and is with the House of Prayer and 
is here to offer support and ask for divine guidance in our 
proceedings, and has come here often. And we want to 
welcome them, and especially the constituent from Moose Jaw. 
So Dianne, welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I too would like to introduce guests. I’m 
lucky enough to have the love of my life, Danielle my wife, in 
the west gallery. And with Danielle is my three-year-old boy, 
Jacob. Jacob, can we give a wave? And somewhere up there I 

believe is James, which is our 15-month-old. And I would like 
to thank them for coming here and having fun, and thanks for 
all the loving and support over the years. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition to improve PTSD 
[post-traumatic stress disorder] coverage for all Saskatchewan 
workers. The petitioners, Mr. Speaker, point out that 
post-traumatic stress disorder can severely impact the lives of 
Saskatchewan workers. They are simply calling on the 
government to make necessary changes to legislation to ensure 
that if a worker is exposed to a traumatic event on the job and 
they after that have a diagnosis of PTSD, that it should be 
presumed that that traumatic or those traumatic events actually 
caused the PTSD. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Saskatchewan government to 
make the necessary changes to ensure that if Saskatchewan 
workers are exposed to traumatic events on the job and are 
then diagnosed with PTSD, it is presumed to be caused by 
the worker’s employment and the worker will be 
subsequently covered under workers’ compensation and 
receive the same benefits as others with work-related 
injuries. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Regina. I so 
submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition in support of funding heritage languages here 
in Saskatchewan. And we know that now, after 25 years, the 
Government of Saskatchewan is discontinuing all support for 
heritage language learning in Saskatchewan. 
 
Since 1991, heritage language schools have depended on this 
modest funding from the Ministry of Education to help sustain 
their programs. Now we know that in addition to providing 
language and cultural classes, these schools offer a welcoming 
environment and crucial support for newcomers who are 
searching for a way to feel at home in their new surroundings 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
These language schools contribute to the retention of 
immigrants in Saskatchewan by helping people to maintain 
their culture, identity, and traditions while at the same time 
learning about Canada and Canadian ways of life. Furthermore, 
studying additional languages offer many benefits for all 
Canadians, especially in today’s growing international markets. 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: 
 



May 19, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 43 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to reconsider this decision and restore funding for heritage 
language education in Saskatchewan heritage language 
schools. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
the city of Regina. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Asking leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to introduce 
guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Coronation 
Park. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
sitting in your gallery, I’m pleased to introduce a class of grade 
7 students from Alameda School seated in your gallery, and 
they’re joining us today. Mr. Speaker, this class recently won a 
provincial fossil video contest held through the Royal 
Saskatchewan Museum, and they’ll be joining me this 
afternoon, an event to unveil the new provincial fossil. 
 
[10:15] 
 
And with us today, Mr. Speaker, is Xavier Gervais. Just give us 
a wave when I say your name. I got Bryce Gibson. I got Kari 
McNabb. I got Dixie Martens. I’ve got Jairyn Ritchie. I’ve got 
Keira Rutten, Lindon Schiestel, and Sophie Tillwach. And the 
teachers that are with them today are Chad Jeannot and 
educational assistant Koreen Kopelchuk. 
 
I’m looking forward to the announcement today of our new 
provincial fossil. I think we’re all on bated breath, wondering 
who it’s going to be. And yes, there’s an awful lot of punchlines 
within that, so . . . [inaudible] . . . But I would ask all members 
to join me, welcoming this school group to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — Reading and receiving petitions . . . Why is 
the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to join the 
minister in welcoming guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved leave to introduce 
guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to the Assembly, I would like to join the minister 
in welcoming the school, grade 7 class from Alameda and their 
participation in the Saskatchewan fossil video. I just want to let 
members know that I am not in that video, and I would also like 
to mention that the grade 7s and their teacher were in to the 
legislature not that long ago and visited my office at the time. 
So I would ask members to welcome them to the Legislative 
Assembly again. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Saskatchewan Outstanding Literacy Program Award 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
to recognize the 2016 recipient of the Saskatchewan 
Outstanding Literacy Program Award, the Prince Albert early 
childhood level 1 and security officer supported program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this program, a project of the Prince Albert 
Literacy Network, was developed in Prince Albert as a means 
of supporting low-literacy adults in their educational journey 
and assisting them to succeed. It is a partnership between the 
Prince Albert Literacy Network, Sask Polytech Prince Albert 
campus, and many industry partners. 
 
This year the program trained 34 adults and helped them 
develop essential skills for the workplace in the areas of early 
childhood education and security officer training. The students 
will leave the program equipped to get a good job and go on to 
lead productive and successful lives. 
 
The award was presented last night at the Saskatchewan 
Literacy Awards ceremony which was hosted by the Lieutenant 
Governor at Government House. Program Director Delphine 
Melchert accepted the award on behalf of the Prince Albert 
early childhood level 1 and security officer supported program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in recognizing 
the vast accomplishments of the Prince Albert early childhood 
level 1 and security officer supported programs, and extending 
congratulations on being the recipient of the 2016 
Saskatchewan Outstanding Literacy Program Award. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Benefits of Genetically Engineered Crops 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr, Speaker. I would like to bring 
to the attention of this Assembly a study outlined in the New 
York Times that speaks to the benefits and safety of genetically 
engineered crops. GECs, commonly referred to as GMOs 
[genetically modified organism], are a significant part of the 
agricultural landscape in Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan is a 
leader in agricultural research and genetically engineered crops 
have been a part of the local agricultural sector for decades. 
Some of them are being developed at agri-science centres 
located right here in Saskatchewan. 
 



44 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2016 

Mr. Speaker, this research, and the crops that benefit from this 
research, contributes billions to the Saskatchewan economy. 
Unfortunately people often look past the science and are quick 
to listen to meritless claims that somehow genetically 
engineered crops are evil. I find it concerning that members 
opposite have been silent when faced with the overwhelming 
evidence saying that GECs are safe to eat and that there are 
other significant benefits in growing them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government supports GECs, supports science, 
and supports agriculture innovation. And as the Premier said 
when the article was released, that this study “puts the myth to 
bed, saying genetically modified crops are safe and have many 
benefits to farmers, consumers, and the environment.” Mr. 
Speaker, from canola to yellow rice to GEC produce, the 
evidence shows that GECs are good for everyone. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Mackenzie Infant Care Centre 
Celebrates 30th Anniversary 

 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Friday, it was my 
pleasure to attend the Mackenzie Infant Care Centre’s 30th 
anniversary celebration at the Wascana Country Club. This was 
an excellent event recognizing the decades of work done by an 
organization that provides important supports for young moms 
in our city. 
 
MICC [Mackenzie Infant Care Centre] is a program run out of 
Balfour Collegiate and it helps to make sure that young moms 
have a safe place for their children to be supervised while they 
work towards completing their schooling. The centre provides 
51 spaces for infants and toddlers whose mothers are taking 
classes through the Shirley Schneider Support Centre. In 
addition to extra help with their studies, these young moms also 
have access to prenatal wellness classes and teen parent support 
programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking all of the 
sponsors who make this important program a reality for teen 
moms in Regina as well as thanking board Chair Shirley 
Schneider, executive director Edie Paquette, and the entire staff 
and board of directors for MICC for the very excellent work 
that they do in making sure that teen moms in Regina have the 
supports that they need to finish their schooling and to find 
success. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 

Sexual Assault Awareness Week 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the House today to announce that this week is Sexual Assault 
Awareness Week in Saskatchewan. This week provides us with 
an opportunity to educate ourselves and the people around us 
about the unfortunate reality of sexual assault. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has the distinction of having the 
highest rate of sexual assault per capita in Canada. This makes 
it even more important that we work together to minimize the 
use of violence against all citizens in this province and make 

Saskatchewan a safer place. It is up to everyone to take a stand 
and support the victims of sexual assault and hold the 
perpetrators of these crimes accountable. 
 
I would like to thank the Sexual Assault Services of 
Saskatchewan and the numerous other organizations in the 
province. They truly are instrumental in raising awareness and 
providing vital services to survivors of sexual assault. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we must work together to ensure that sexual 
assault victims do not face these challenges alone. I ask all the 
members of the House to join me in recognizing Sexual Assault 
Awareness Week in support of victims, survivors, and the 
workers who care for them. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
University. 
 

Ahmadiyya Muslim Jama’at Celebrates 
50th Anniversary in Canada 

 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to bring 
to the attention of this Assembly a special milestone that took 
place yesterday. I had the tremendous opportunity to attend, 
along with my colleague from Regina Pasqua, the 50th 
anniversary of Ahmadiyya Muslim Jama’at in Canada that took 
place at Saskatoon City Hall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mayor Atchison and city council welcomed the 
respectable Lal Khan Malik, national president of Ahmadiyya 
Muslim Jama’at, as well as other local and national dignitaries 
to commemorate this event. The local group of Aymadiyya are 
in the process of building a new mosque, an exciting time for 
adherents as the new facility will provide tremendous 
opportunity for members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the signs at the event last night said simply, 
“love for all, hatred for none.” This outlines the core beliefs of 
the Ahmadiyya. The Ahmadiyya Muslims have a rich history in 
Canada and have become known around the world as a 
peace-loving, generous people who are quick to serve those in 
need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, although they have faced persecution globally for 
their beliefs, they have been welcomed with open arms in 
Saskatchewan and Canada. Mubarik Syed, one of the local 
organizers, shared this last night, and I quote, “When we came 
to Canada we were actually given all the liberties and all the 
freedoms that were snatched away from us when we were 
born.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would invite all members of this Assembly to 
join me in recognizing the Ahmadiyya Muslim Jama’at 50th 
anniversary in Canada. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Stonebridge-Dakota. 
 

Missing Children’s Month 
 
Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to recognize 
that the month of May has been proclaimed Missing Children’s 
Month in the province of Saskatchewan. For many parents, 



May 19, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 45 

having a child go missing is quite simply unimaginable, yet 
every year we hear of Saskatchewan children going missing and 
see the terrible, tragic impact that this has on their family, 
friends, and community. 
 
Missing Children’s Month is an important opportunity to raise 
awareness on behalf of missing children and their families. This 
year marks Child Find Saskatchewan’s 25th annual Green 
Ribbon of Hope campaign which runs throughout the month of 
May. Green ribbons may be obtained at participating 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority stores for a 
donation or by contacting Child Find Saskatchewan. 
 
Child Find Saskatchewan is an important partner. We value the 
role it plays in assisting law enforcement agencies and other 
partners to locate missing children and to educate children and 
adults about staying safe. Our government takes this issue very 
seriously, which is why we have provided $50,000 in funding to 
Child Find Saskatchewan through the Ministry of Justice. 
 
Wearing a green ribbon of hope shows your concern for 
missing children and for their families. I ask that all members 
join me in wearing a green ribbon of hope this month. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 

International Education Strategy 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m honoured to 
rise in the House today to recognize our international education 
strategy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is dedicated to our students, and it 
is a priority of ours to help create as many opportunities to 
enhance their education as possible. With our international 
education strategy, we are showing how much we value not 
only our students going abroad to learn, but expanding 
opportunities for students globally to come to Saskatchewan. In 
fact, last winters’ semester, 31 students from Mexico were 
enrolled in Saskatchewan post-secondary institutions and four 
students from the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] travelled 
to Mexico for their studies. 
 
Mexico is the second-largest Latin American source country for 
international students in Canada. In addition, Saskatchewan’s 
relationship with Mexico has grown as our trade has increased 
by 81 per cent in the last five years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to say that we have Lorena Alvarado 
Buendía with us today. She is the National Academic Director 
of Technological and Polytechnic Universities in Mexico, 
Ministry of Education. With her today are several universities’ 
and polytechnics’ presidents from across Mexico. 
 
During our time with our guests, we look forward to building 
strong relationships that will help support even more students 
coming here to Saskatchewan to study. 
 
I would ask all members to join me in welcoming the delegation 
from Mexico here to the legislature today, as well as wish them 
fruitful meetings while they are here. Thank you. 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Wildfire Management 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the latest information from 
Environment Canada shows that the wildfire that has devastated 
Fort McMurray and area has crossed into our province, and 
there are other fires still burning across the province. 
 
Throughout northern Saskatchewan, communities are faced 
with smoke warnings and now extreme fire conditions, and 
many are understandably very concerned for their safety. In 
matters of crisis, situations so serious, people deserve to know 
fully what their government is doing and what their plan is. 
They want to know what actions are currently being taken to 
ensure that lives and communities are protected. 
 
So to the Premier: what is the budget? How is it allocated? And 
is there an evacuation plan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the Leader of the 
Opposition for his question. And it is true with respect to the 
nature of the former, I guess, Fort McMurray fire that it is 
crossing the border into the province of Saskatchewan, still 
some distance away from the nearest community of La Loche. 
But certainly the level of preparedness has been heightened, not 
just as a result of the last 24 hours, but frankly from the very, 
very beginning of this event of the horrific fires that have 
destroyed so much of Fort McMurray. 
 
As I indicated yesterday in the House, in terms of answers to 
questions, we stand ready to respond in every way, not just in 
terms of actioning the fire, which has been happening. We 
haven’t waited to start fighting the fire on behalf of 
Saskatchewan resources. The actioning began on the Alberta 
side and continues in earnest even now. There was always plans 
ready in terms of evacuation, I would say to the hon. member. 
 
[10:30] 
 
As well, last year we took the time after our fires in the 
province to listen to community leaders and to listen to 
responders with the intent of wanting to improve where we 
could improve. Although I think the response was quite 
effective last year and I’m probably now . . . Time maybe 
elapsing on this answer, but I’d be happy to go through exactly 
the measures that we’ve taken, that we’ve implemented as a 
result of last year’s fire, which are available to us now, as we 
prepare for this fire season and are already responding to this 
fire season. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Global Transportation Hub 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, shifting gears a little bit. 
Yesterday the Premier continued to defend the Sask Party’s 
outrageous and indefensible stonewalling of the public on their 
GTH [Global Transportation Hub] land scandal. And he 



46 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2016 

continues to stand by that scandal-plagued, money-wasting 
minister that should have been punted a long time ago. The 
member from Kindersley has offensively called serious 
questions that have been asked by Saskatchewan people as 
“laughable” and, Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s answers aren’t any 
better. The Premier stands here; he was laughing yesterday and 
says he has nothing to hide. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, why then at every turn are he and his 
minister hiding the facts? Why do we have to wait for the 
auditor’s report? Why won’t he show Saskatchewan people the 
truth now? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it was the NDP [New 
Democratic Party] that asked for the Provincial Auditor’s 
report. They asked for the Provincial Auditor’s report. The 
response from the government, response from myself and my 
office, was to agree to initiate the Provincial Auditor, to request 
that the Provincial Auditor conduct a fulsome review and report 
on the particular transaction in question. And perhaps we 
should let that work continue before we start characterizing in 
ways that indeed may not be accurate, as the Leader of the 
Opposition may have just done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, moreover when concerns were first raised, as I 
indicated yesterday, the minister went directly to the Conflict of 
Interest Commissioner, an independent officer of this 
Legislative Assembly, who reviewed the transaction and the 
nature of the transaction and those who were involved in it and 
said, and I quote . . . The Commissioner wrote, and I quote, “I 
can state unequivocally that you [the minister] are not in breach 
of The Members’ Conflict of Interest Act.” 
 
In addition to that, we’ll have the Provincial Auditor’s report 
here in a number of weeks, I would hope, or sooner perhaps. 
I’m not sure of the timing that the auditor has in mind, but 
we’re going to have the report made very public and we look 
forward to the recommendations that will be made. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, everyone knows that that 
government has been anything but forthright on this matter. 
And let’s be clear, dismissing legitimate concerns and 
defending the actions of the minister is beneath the office of the 
Premier. The Sask Party have been hiding the true state of our 
finances, hiding the budget, hiding their plan, and hiding the 
facts in their GTH land scandal. Yes, an auditor’s report is 
coming, but a judicial inquiry is also possible. There’s been a 
lawsuit that’s been filed. There’s been matters referred and 
information taken to the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police]. 
 
And yes, the Premier has boasted that they’ve just won another 
term of government. So why not start fresh? Why not come 
clean with Saskatchewan people now? And why has this 
Premier still refused to clean that scandal-plagued, 
money-wasting minister out of his cabinet? It’s past time to 
show some leadership and do the right thing. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP opposition asked for 
the Provincial Auditor’s look at this matter, to look at every 
detail of this matter. That’s exactly what’s happening. In fact, 
Mr. Speaker, I can tell members of the House that cabinet 
minutes, cabinet documents, are being made available to the 
Provincial Auditor, all emails that she might need or require to 
conduct her review. The appraisals that have been the subject of 
some debate are all made available. 
 
I would suggest to the hon. member, and I know this doesn’t fit 
his current political agenda that he has for question period, but 
he’s asked for the Provincial Auditor to conduct the review. So 
have we. Let’s let that work be conducted and then let’s see 
what the findings are. We look forward to those findings and 
we look forward to working with the Provincial Auditor on the 
recommendations she may come forth with. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan people have a lot of questions when it comes to 
the GTH and they don’t end with the sketchy deal itself. Access 
to information requests are a key part of our democracy. They 
let sunshine in when the government refuses to be open. For 
example, the Canadian Taxpayers Federation asked about the 
GTH and was handed a bill for just over $7,000, but the CBC 
[Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] was asked to pay more 
than $180,000 for the same documents. Yesterday the Attorney 
General was asked for an explanation in the rotunda. His 
answer was, and I quote, “I can’t explain the difference.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, today does the minister have a better excuse for 
charging such ridiculous fees for access to basic information? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I 
welcome the new member to the House and look forward to 
working with her in her new responsibilities. 
 
Well the simple answer to the question, Mr. Speaker, it’s not 
my question to answer. When these requests are made, they’re 
made through the government officials. Well you know the 
Leader of the Opposition, the Leader of the Opposition, he 
wasn’t completely happy with my answer yesterday either, Mr. 
Speaker. But I’ll tell you what’s outrageous about this is the 
fact that he doesn’t understand how this process works. 
 
These requests are made to members of the civil service. They 
compile the list and they compile a fee schedule based on the 
amount of work that it will take to retrieve those documents and 
the amount of work that it will take to redact those documents 
for personal information, Mr. Speaker. If they’re not happy, if 
the CBC isn’t happy with the fee that’s been quoted by a 
government official, then that can be appealed to the 
Information and Privacy Commissioner. And that’s where the 
answer is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 



May 19, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 47 

minister for welcoming me and I’m looking forward to working 
with him when I can. 
 
But the truth is, in this matter there is absolutely no excuse. 
Michel Drapeau, a national access to information expert, has 
looked at the situation and said that the fees show an attempt to 
deny access. The government is making these fees up as they 
go, and hiding behind the Act is no excuse. 
 
The last two information and privacy commissioners have 
recommended updates that would ensure transparency, and the 
federal government has recently scrapped all fees for requests 
beyond the initial $5 application fee. That means, Mr. Speaker, 
had the CBC asked for the federal government the same 
questions they asked the Sask Party, they would have been 
charged five bucks for a question, not the $180,000 bill the Sask 
Party has slapped them with. 
 
So will the minister do the right thing? Will he ensure these 
punitive fees are withdrawn so the truth can finally come out? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what’s so 
difficult about this for members of the opposition. If the CBC 
does not like the fees that have been quoted by a civil servant 
. . . And quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, this is offensive. These 
questions are offensive to the people that work in the civil 
service that do the very hard work of compiling the list of 
documents and compiling the fee schedule. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if they’re not happy with the fee, they can appeal 
it. And I will tell you this, Mr. Speaker, that our fees are 
generally commensurate with fees that are charged by most 
other provinces. The federal government can do what they like, 
Mr. Speaker, but as far as the provinces are concerned, our fees 
are generally commensurate with what other provinces charge, 
a fee schedule, Mr. Speaker, that was established by the New 
Democrats in 1993 and hasn’t been changed since. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Rural and Remote Health Care Services 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
six-year-old Jackson Strykowski and his family are here with us 
today. They live in Preeceville. On Tuesday they found out that 
their community would no longer have any emergency or acute 
care services. People in Preeceville are understandably upset 
about losing these services and have made these concerns 
known to the Premier, the Minister of Health, and the Minister 
of Rural and Remote Health. 
 
However, the Strykowski family is particularly worried because 
Jackson has a severe anaphylactic peanut allergy. He carries 
two EpiPens but he still needs to be taken to the hospital within 
20 minutes to survive. If they can no longer access these 
services in Preeceville, Jackson will not make it to Canora or 
Yorkton in an ambulance. What does the Minister of Rural and 
Remote Health have to say to this family? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 

Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, the facility in 
Preeceville is very important to us, as are services to people in 
rural Saskatchewan and around the whole province of course. 
Mr. Speaker, in a case as has been brought forward, we do have 
advanced care paramedics in Preeceville with ambulances 
available that can respond very quickly. They are equipped to 
deal with anaphylaxis and other acute emergencies, and as well 
in the need of STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society] 
being dispatched, they can be dispatched immediately as well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, this minister needs to stop the 
political spin and acknowledge that these cuts affect real people 
in very bad ways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last July, Floyd Head suffered a heart attack in his 
home, a home he bought because it was one block away from 
the hospital. But the hospital was closed. It took seven hours for 
him to get the treatment he needed in Regina. It was too late to 
save Mr. Head’s life. Back then the hospital was closed every 
second week. Now it is going to be closed every day. 
 
These cuts are hurting people in a direct way. There are dire 
consequences when services are cut, and the residents of 
Preeceville want to know why this government is not concerned 
about these cuts. What will it take for this government to listen 
to the people of Preeceville and take this issue seriously? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, again, health care in this 
province is a high priority to this government. Rural health care 
is a high priority to this government. The members continually 
twist the facts. Mr. Speaker, there’s been no cuts to the facility. 
The region has made no cuts to this facility. All current systems 
and all current available services are still in place, Mr. Speaker. 
What we have is a case that, not only in Saskatchewan, many 
jurisdictions, provinces, the country, in fact the research articles 
as far away as Australia that have retention and recruitment 
issues in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This province, this government has been very aggressive in 
making sure we have the proper complement of professionals in 
rural Saskatchewan. We’ve got very aggressive training 
schedules. We have increased the training seats in the province, 
almost double. We’ve got double the residency positions in 
rural Saskatchewan. We have in fact 650 more doctors in this 
province. We’ve got a very aggressive international physician 
program that is targeted at rural Saskatchewan. In fact, we have 
180 new SIPPA [Saskatchewan international physician practice 
assessment] doctors in the province. Seventy-five to 90 per cent 
of them are practising in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, today there are services in 
Preeceville, acute services and emergency services in 
Preeceville. On June 1st there no longer will be. In tough times, 
tough decisions have to be made. No one denies that. But this is 



48 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2016 

the government that blew through the rainy day fund and drove 
the province into deficit during our sunniest economic days. 
They are also the ones who allowed the senior administration in 
the health regions to get so bloated — 46 per cent in RQHR 
[Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region], 37 per cent in Five Hills. 
 
They have mismanaged the Saskatchewan economy, and here in 
the home of Canadian public health care, they are failing on 
hospitals. Mr. Speaker, those failures have consequences and 
those consequences are felt by real people. So I ask again, what 
will it take for this minister to listen to the people of Preeceville 
and take this issue seriously? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, again, we take these 
issues very seriously. We work very hard to make sure we have 
a proper complement of services throughout the province. In 
fact, Mr. Speaker, that is why we have done what we have done 
throughout the province. 
 
I mentioned the international physician practice assessment 
which serves rural Saskatchewan very well, something that the 
members opposite denied to do, Mr. Speaker. I mentioned 
STARS, something that was continually brought forward under 
the former administration, under the NDP. They said no to rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. They continually closed facilities. 
They continually got rid of doctors, nurses, and opportunities. 
They continually turned their back on rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
What this government, what this party has done, has hired 650 
more doctors for this province. Again, 180, 190 of those 
doctors, SIPPA doctors, are working in rural Saskatchewan. We 
have 13 new long-term care facilities. We have continued 
investment in facilities in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We 
have more nurses, nurse practitioners, which 75 per cent of 
those nurse practitioners practise in rural settings, which do 
complement the primary health care in our rural settings, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, my first question: I’d like to 
know how that helps the Strykowski family. The minister can 
spout rhetoric as much as he wants, but the Strykowski family 
is here, and they would like to know how his answer helps this 
family and will keep this little boy alive if he has an 
anaphylactic attack. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, again, advanced care 
paramedics, which are the most highly trained paramedics 
available, are available in Preeceville and the Canora area. They 
will be dispatched immediately. I don’t understand — does the 
member disregard, does the member disregard the value of our 
advanced care paramedics or our other health care professionals 
in the continuum? 
 

We have a doctor in the community. We have nurse 
practitioners in the community. We have advanced care 
paramedics in the community. We have surrounding emergency 
departments that will back up this service, Mr. Speaker. So I 
understand the challenges and I understand the concerns of the 
family. But I have confidence in the system. I have confidence 
in the advanced care paramedics in the area. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
[10:45] 
 

Tabling of Budget 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, we know that there are even 
more cuts coming in the budget that the Sask Party has been 
hiding for months, and yet the Premier is making Saskatchewan 
people wait until June to see it. Everyone knows that it was 
ready before the election. Even the Premier himself admitted to 
reporters yesterday that “some of the work had been done last 
year.” 
 
Now let’s look next door in Manitoba, Mr. Speaker. Over there 
the new government is going to present its budget before the 
end of this month, and their election was a week after ours. And 
the Premier wants us to believe that his three-term government 
needs even more time? 
 
To the Premier: when will he drop the excuses and admit that 
his bad news budget was drawn up before the election and that 
he’s waiting until people are out at the lake until he’ll come 
clean? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
contrary to what the members went around the province and 
said during this most recent provincial election campaign, there 
was not a predetermined budget sitting on the Premier’s desk or 
my desk. 
 
I presented a fiscal update on February 29th, just days before 
the election was called, Mr. Speaker. We were going to go 
about the province and campaign on election promises. We 
wanted those fully costed in a new budget we brought down if 
in fact we were fortunate enough to be re-elected, Mr. Speaker. 
We assumed that the opposition wanted to do the same thing. 
 
They went around the province with their so-called fully costed 
platform, Mr. Speaker, promising to run a deficit in this coming 
fiscal year. The problem with their fully costed document, Mr. 
Speaker, was it left out 18 different items that they campaigned 
on and didn’t talk about in their fully costed document, Mr. 
Speaker, including the lowest cost utility bundle in all of 
Canada. It’s not in their document. 
 
It would cost hundreds of millions of dollars to the people of 
this province, if they were in fact elected, to bring down a 
budget after the election, Mr. Speaker. We’re not going to do 
that. June 1st you’ll see the budget. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 



May 19, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 49 

Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, we know treasury board was 
meeting. We know the public officials have been working on 
this, and that kind of response from that minister is completely 
unacceptable. Had this been a good news budget, the Sask Party 
would’ve campaigned on it, but instead they are waiting until 
the last minute to finally bring it out. So now school boards, 
health regions, and municipalities are waiting on tenterhooks. 
They’re waiting for the bad news. And while they wait, budgets 
for our hospitals, our schools, and our communities are faced 
with uncertainty and even greater delays. Does the Sask Party 
really not understand the consequences of those delays? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Finance minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, 
Mr. Speaker, when faced with economic challenges that we’re 
faced with in this province like we are today, like the province 
of Alberta is today, like all energy-producing provinces in 
Canada are today, Mr. Speaker, when I was going around to the 
doorsteps during the most recent campaign, I think I heard at 
the doorstep, like others heard at the doorstep, is that the people 
of this province expect their government to manage through 
difficult economic challenges without shocking the economy, 
Mr. Speaker. That means keeping taxes low and competitive. 
That means not pulling back spending like we’ve seen in the 
province of Newfoundland and Labrador, Mr. Speaker. That 
means not raising taxes like in the province of Alberta to shock 
the economy more. 
 
I’ll tell you what we’re not going to do, Mr. Speaker. We’re not 
going to adopt a radical document like the Leap Manifesto that 
would destroy, that would destroy the economy of this 
province. 
 
This member, who is the Finance critic — and ironically 
enough, Mr. Speaker, also the Agriculture critic — went off to 
Edmonton and, in the heart of the oil and gas sector in our 
country, stood with the eco-activists from downtown Toronto 
and voted in favour of the Leap Manifesto that would destroy 
our energy economy, that would destroy our mining sector, that 
would destroy our agriculture sector as we know it, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re not going to adopt radical policies like that, I 
can tell you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party embarrasses 
themselves when they get the facts so wrong. I will take no 
lessons from the way they have failed our resource sector and 
our workers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Even when there was a Conservative government in Ottawa, 
there was a Conservative government in Alberta, and this 
conservative government in Saskatchewan, their 
heads-in-the-sand, blinders-up approach resulted in no more of 
our resources getting to tidewater, did they. Under their watch, 
we have lost thousands of resource sector jobs. 
 
Now they might get a kick out of their made-up attacks and 
false accusations, but while they’re busy writing fiction and 

attacking me, our focus is on the workers of Saskatchewan, on 
the people of Saskatchewan, and the future of Saskatchewan. 
When will they drop the games, accept the facts, and get to 
work to build and diversify the Saskatchewan economy to 
protect and create good jobs for the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m glad the member is on her 
feet, and I encourage her to stay on her feet perhaps after this 
response and clarify something. 
 
She went to the NDP national convention in Edmonton and she 
voted in favour of the following resolution: “Therefore be it 
resolved that the NDP recognizes and supports the Leap 
Manifesto as a high-level statement of principles . . .” Well 
that’s what she voted for. What are those principles in the 
document, Mr. Speaker? Here’s one: “The drop in oil prices has 
temporarily relieved the pressure to dig up fossil fuels as 
rapidly as high-risk technologies will allow.” 
 
And then the principle she voted for says this: “This pause in 
frenetic expansion should not be viewed as a crisis, but a gift.” 
That’s what she voted for in Edmonton, that the drop in oil 
prices should be considered a gift to this country. There are 
3,000 Saskatchewan families who have lost their job in the 
resource sector who don’t consider it a gift, Mr. Speaker, not 
for a moment. 
 
It is the obligation of every member in this House, regardless of 
what side they stand on in the Assembly, NDP or Sask Party, 
when confronted with a principle like that, to not vote in favour 
of it, but to stand up for Saskatchewan’s interests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 

Sixties Scoop and Government Conversations 
With Interest Groups 

 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday we saw 
the Prime Minister make an historic apology for wrongdoing by 
the Canadian government. It has been almost a year since the 
Premier promised to apologize to the victims of the Sixties 
Scoop. He said that would happen last summer, but still 
nothing. 
 
We’ve heard from many people affected by the Sixties Scoop, 
including First Nations and Métis leaders who haven’t heard a 
single thing from this government. To the Premier: why not? 
What happened to your apology? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it is not entirely true that nobody has heard a word. Myself, 
along with the Minister for Government Relations and the 
Premier’s office, have been working with the Métis Nation and 
FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] to try to 
arrange a mutual date. We have yet to get that date. When the 
Premier is available, the chief of FSIN has not been. There was 
one date set, but unfortunately it had to be cancelled. So we are 
working on that mutual date when this can take place, because 
of course we’re looking forward to this event and we need 



50 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2016 

everyone to be able to participate. So it is something . . . The 
conversation continues with FSIN and the Métis Nation. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
ask for leave to move an order of reference motion. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Organ Donation Rate in Saskatchewan 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That the Standing Committee on Human Services, in 
accordance with rule 149 of the Rules and Procedures of 
the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, shall conduct an 
inquiry and make recommendations to the Assembly 
respecting improving the rate of organ donation in 
Saskatchewan, and 
 
That the said committee shall hold public hearings to 
receive representations from interested individuals and 
groups, and report its recommendations to the Assembly 
by November 30th, 2016. 
 

I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Health has moved a motion. 
Will the members take it as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Buckingham, seconded by Ms. 
Carr, and the proposed amendment to the main motion moved 
by Ms. Sproule.] 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise 
today and enter into the debate on the Speech from the Throne 
2016. 
 
It’s in the start of our new session and we’re all back. And I do 
want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, congratulations to you. This is 
a very critical role that you play. It’s not an easy one. It’s one 
that you have to maintain balance and fairness and a little 
humour. I know we were just talking about some episodes that 
happened a while ago when I forgot to stand up for my 
member’s statement, and I had the good fortune of being looked 
well upon. But, Mr. Speaker, I do want to wish you the very 
best. And it’s not just in here that you serve your role, but also 
throughout Saskatchewan and our role within the Canadian 
parliamentarians association. So I look forward to working with 
you, and I do also want to thank the previous Speaker for his 
good work. He was a fine Speaker, and we appreciated his work 
as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to recognize that we are in Treaty 4 
land, and I do want to recognize that a year ago, approximately 
a year ago in June, we did receive the final report from the 
Truth and Reconciliation Commission. And in that spirit I think 
that the work that we do forward — and I did feel that there was 
a lack of understanding or even a signal from the Throne 
Speech about the truth and reconciliation work that lies ahead 
— is very, very important. And I think the question we had 
today about the Sixties Scoop, and unfortunately . . . This is 
interesting that it’s just a matter of a date. It’s a hugely 
important issue to many, many people, and I hope that we hear 
quickly about that. But I also hope that we hear more from this 
government about their approach to truth and reconciliation 
because it is something. 
 
I do want to recognize all the members who’ve been re-elected 
and the new ones who have been just elected. This is a huge 
honour to be in this House. And it’s one that I know and has 
been mentioned earlier this week, only 800 people have sat in 
this Chamber over the course of 100-plus years, and so it’s very 
much a real privilege. And so congratulations to all, but a 
particular congratulations to the new members. And I just want 
to recognize our three new members that are bringing a new 
spirit to the caucus and want to thank them and congratulate 
them. 
 
I want to say thanks as well, and that’s part of this speech, to 
the many people who have supported me over the years. Of 
course, my own family: my wife, Dawn; my kids; and now, Mr. 
Speaker, my two grandkids. You know, when we launched the 
campaign we had the family picture. We had two new 
additions, two grandkids — Felix and Frances. Now they may 
not understand what we’re doing hanging around this orange 
sign and taking pictures, but it was pretty special and I hope 
over the course of the years that they may come to appreciate 
that. 
 
I do want to single out one person who has been a huge help to 
me over the past few years in my office, Erica Spracklin, who 
was my constituency assistant but who has left my employ. But 
she did work on my campaign; she was my campaign manager 
and was fantastic. She was last time and this time and did an 



May 19, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 51 

incredible job of helping getting me back here. And I sure 
appreciated that. 
 
[11:00] 
 
And there were others. There were Bruce and Darren, the sign 
people; and of course David, who is just a fantastic door 
knocker and so many others, so many others. I just want to say 
a big thank you to all those who helped to get me re-elected, 
more importantly getting a New Democrat elected in Saskatoon 
Centre so that we can raise the issues and have our point of 
view, our set of values represented here in the House. 
 
It’s very, very important that when we have the party system 
that people do think about, what does it mean? What is a 
Conservative? What is a Sask Party? What is a Liberal party? 
What is a New Democratic Party? What are their values in 
making sure that the constituents say, yes I can align; I can 
think along those lines. Those are the kind of values and ideas 
and platforms they can identify with. So I’m happy to be here as 
a New Democrat. 
 
I also want to single out my two main competitors, Brad 
Hoffman, who ran for the Sask Party. He owns a printing shop 
in the riding and, interestingly, I did some printing there. I have 
for many years. So it was interesting to see Brad running 
against me. I was wondering, Brad, what are you doing? But 
anyways, I guess I wasn’t doing enough business there. I’ll 
have to do more. But the other one was Roman Todos. I have to 
say a big shout-out to Roman, the Liberal in Saskatoon Centre. 
He ran a great campaign. But he’s a good stand-up guy in 
Caswell, and both of these fellows I think of as good friends in 
the riding. 
 
Yes, but you know, I just want to say that one of the things that 
I’ve found very interesting . . . This was my fifth campaign and 
it was very interesting, very different than the previous ones. 
You know, as you get a little older you do things a little 
differently but you still . . . Things are always the same. You get 
out and knock on doors, and that’s what you’ve got to do. 
You’ve got to go up and down those streets. 
 
And this time I just want to say that probably the most 
interesting door I knocked upon — when you knock on a door, 
you don’t know what’s behind the door — was a Syrian refugee 
family. And that was pretty neat. They were in a home. They 
were getting set up. They were being Canadian. And I felt like, 
this is great. This is wonderful. This is how we work. And it’s 
very important that we do have Syrian refugees in all our 
ridings, I suppose, but it was very interesting to meet the mom 
and dad and the little one come to the door. 
 
Now they weren’t ready to vote, but we had a little discussion. 
And I said just, you’re welcome. Welcome, welcome to Canada 
and I hope all things go well for you. And it was nice to know 
that, a nice reminder. We can read about refugees in the 
newspapers. We can go out to the airports welcoming them. We 
can do all those things we should be doing. But they are our 
neighbours. They live in our communities. Their kids go to our 
schools. And that’s a super, wonderful thing. 
 
So I do want to speak a bit about my riding, Saskatoon Centre. I 
think it’s one of the most compact, most diverse. Now when I 

look across and I see a lot of the rural people, when I think I can 
walk from one end of my riding to the other — I think in two 
hours I can walk it, you know — and I know some of the folks 
over there, and over here, I look at the folks up north where 
they can’t . . . I don’t think you could fly from one end of your 
riding to the other in two hours. I don’t know. But it’s nice to 
have a pretty compact riding, and after the boundary changes to 
have some of the neighbourhoods.  
 
And you know, I have 20th Street, and 20th Street in Saskatoon 
has had a very colourful reputation. But it’s going through such 
a re-energization with the new people living there, the new 
infill, the condos that are just amazing, the designs. The 
farmers’ market is a wonderful thing. 
 
And some of the restaurants on 20th Street . . . Actually if you 
go down 20th Street and you go to a restaurant on Saturday 
night, it used to be you could get into any restaurant. Now you 
have to go earlier or phone for a reservation. That is so unusual. 
So I just have to say, you know, 20th Street . . . And you have 
to be kind of dressed up. That’s kind of, for me, just out there in 
my jeans and my wife and we’re just taking it easy, it’s not 
what we used to think. 
 
But I just wanted to give a shout-out. There’s some wonderful 
places. The Underground Cafe has great coffee. The Park Cafe 
has been recognized a few times in this, in the legislature I’ve 
spoke about them. And they continue to do a great, great 
breakfast on Sunday morning. But if you . . . And I find 
sometimes my fellow colleague from Nutana comes over to 
have the odd breakfast. And The Hollows, have to give a 
shout-out to The Hollows. But I do have to say, you know, my 
colleague from Nutana and I have this big debate about which is 
the best riding, on one side of the river or the other side of the 
river. 
 
But I have to say as well, the other . . . I mean there’s wonderful 
streets, but the other one that’s going to be coming up pretty 
soon on Spadina Crescent — a beautiful street, a beautiful street 
along the river to walk through by the Bessborough Hotel — 
the jazz festival is coming up. And I have to give a shout-out. I 
think it’s the 30th anniversary for the jazz festival. And I can 
remember I used to drive, I used to be the volunteer 
transportation coordinator back when it was I think 14, 15 years 
old. I remember those days. It was great. But it continues to be 
one of the best, if not the best festival in the province. But then 
there’s others that may debate that: the Regina Folk Festival, 
Ness Creek. There’s so many in this province in the summer. 
But check out the jazz festival. That’s a wonderful thing. 
 
But I have to say that I just want to give a shout-out to my 
neighbourhood, Caswell. Caswell is — and again my friend 
from Nutana may argue this — but Caswell is the original 
neighbourhood for Saskatoon. We did have three communities. 
There was Saskatoon Nutana, Riversdale, and way out there 
was Sutherland. But Saskatoon, the original community, was on 
our side of the river and Caswell was the original 
neighbourhood . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . So anyways, we 
won’t get into that debate, Mr. Speaker. But anyways, 
Caswell’s a great community, and it’s undergoing again a real 
growth spurt with young families coming and moving in, and 
there’s some wonderful things. 
 



52 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2016 

And we’re going to be looking forward to our own festival 
coming up in a few short weeks, Art in the Park, that I think it’s 
celebrating its 11th anniversary, or could be 14th. Actually it’s 
14, 14 years old. And it’s a wonderful thing if you get a chance 
to come. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to enter into the debate on the Throne 
Speech. And when I read it and when we listened to it a few 
short days ago, we were struck by how it was weak on vision 
and really short on anything meaningful that people in this time 
. . . And even the folks over there will recognize that we’re in 
economic difficult times, really difficult times, and that people 
were looking for something more stronger, something they 
could really hang their hat on, something they could grab onto 
and say, hey this is a real plan going forward, a real plan going 
forward. And we see a government instead that really wants to 
deflect attention away from what’s going on in Saskatchewan, 
how they should be working on that, but onto other issues, and 
we are really, really concerned about that. 
 
And I was just struck, and I just want to refer to an article that 
was in the paper a couple of weeks ago that talked about really 
the spin that’s coming from the government side and really 
what’s happening in this province today. And it’s Bruce 
Johnstone’s column: “Stats show Saskies’ strategy in a 
shambles.” This is from May 14th, 2016: “Some recent 
statistics seem to show that the Sask. Party’s economic 
development strategy is in a bit of a shambles.” 
 
Really, and this is from the economic, the business writer from 
the Leader-Post. It’s not from us. But really it’s interesting 
what he wrote about what’s happening in Saskatchewan under 
the Sask Party. And he’s talking . . . I want to quote this time. I 
say, and I quote: 
 

During that time, oil-producing provinces have seen their 
economies shrink, unemployment rates rise, capital 
investment dry up and other economic indicators . . . 
stagnate or decline. 
 
And 2016 looks to be more of the same. BMO forecasts the 
Saskatchewan economy to grow by a minuscule 0.5 per 
cent, which is pretty close to a recession . . . 

 
And so he talks about some of the problems that they’re having 
here. But he goes on, and he gives them a little slack. He says: 
 

I wouldn’t . . . mention it, except for the fact the Sask. 
Party government keeps harping about how much more 
diversified the provincial economy is today than it was 
[when they] . . . took office in 2007. 

 
And they do. They just keep harping on it. And then they talk 
about when they’re doing relatively well, and I’ll quote: 
 

Of course, “doing relatively well” is, well, relative to the 
provinces we’re compared to. Compared with Alberta and 
Newfoundland and Labrador, we’re “doing relatively 
well.” Compared with the other seven provinces . . . [not so 
much]. 
 
More importantly, there’s no evidence to suggest 
Saskatchewan’s economy is . . . more diversified than it 

was eight years ago. In fact, the energy sector currently 
represents 25 per cent of the provincial economy, the same 
as it did in 2007. 
 
[And I’m quoting] What about Wall’s claim the 
government doesn’t “pick winners and losers?” 
 
Yet another report from Statistics Canada this week 
showed that cultural industries made up only 1.3 per cent 
of GDP, the lowest share among the provinces and less 
than half of the national average of 3.0 per cent. 
 
This is the same government that axed the Saskatchewan 
Film Employment Tax Credit in 2012. In an ill-advised, 
politically motivated decision to save about $1.3 million a 
year, the government effectively killed the film and video 
industry in the province. 
 
Hundreds if not thousands of jobs were lost and a 
foundational cultural industry gutted on an ideological 
whim. 

 
So that’s from Bruce Johnstone and he is neither Sask Party or 
NDP. He’s just calling it as it is. And so we have some real 
concerns. And of course we’re hearing . . . And this Minister of 
the Economy that the Premier continues to defend . . . And 
whether the issue is SkipTheDishes or GTH, we have a real 
problem. 
 
And you know the other thing, we haven’t forgotten about 
Enterprise Saskatchewan. Do you remember Enterprise 
Saskatchewan a few years ago? What happened to enterprise 
and Enterprise Saskatchewan, that plan? And now what we 
have from the Throne Speech, what we have from the Throne 
Speech is committing to helping small, home-based food 
businesses grow in Saskatchewan. This is where we’re at now. 
What happened to Enterprise Saskatchewan? And now we’re 
helping cookies by Kevin. That’s incredible. Why are we doing 
that? Why are we doing that? Now there’s nothing wrong with 
that, and we enjoy the farmers’ market, and we understand 
people bring home cooking and home baking to these local 
sales. But really this isn’t where we’ve come from. Enterprise 
Saskatchewan to helping selling cookies. Incredible, incredible. 
 
But the other thing I was struck by . . . And I’m the associate 
Education critic, and I know our Education critic will speak 
more about the education issue here. But how many times was 
education mentioned in the Throne Speech? Or schools? 
Schools was mentioned once under the infrastructure thing. 
That is it. That is it. Here we have a real need. This is the time. 
If there’s ever a time when we should be investing in education, 
this is the time. This is the time. And we hear from a 
government that refuses to really step up and recognize what it 
has to do. And here we have just this one line about schools. 
That is incredible. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, you know . . . And the Minister of Finance, 
he just gets himself in a knot all the time when the critic on our 
side, critic of Finance gets up, and he loves to talk about 
Edmonton and all of that. But I have a question for him. He’s 
talking about different documents. Where is the anti-poverty 
strategy in the Throne Speech? Where is the anti-poverty 
strategy in the Throne Speech? Not a mention about that and the 



May 19, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 53 

Minster of Finance or the Premier doesn’t want to talk about 
that. Where is the mental health strategy? Not a mention about 
that. Not a mention about that. Where is the disability strategy? 
Not a mention about that. 
 
I think when he’s talking about standing up for Saskatchewan, 
he should be standing up for Saskatchewan people. Those who 
are living in difficult times, those who are living in poverty, 
near poverty, and having to use the food banks — that’s what 
he should be talking about. That’s what he needs to be focusing, 
those people who are living with a disability, those people who 
really need more work to make sure our homes and our 
businesses are accessible and they have opportunities for jobs. 
That’s what he needs to be talking about. And he needs to be 
really focusing on mental health as they’ve had the report, 
they’ve had the report for well over a year now. And instead the 
Minister of Finance wants to talk about other documents when 
he’s got documents stacked high on his desk. He should. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — On the shelf. 
 
[11:15] 
 
Mr. Forbes: — On a shelf. On a shelf gathering dust. The 
anti-poverty strategy, the mental health strategy, the disability 
strategy, where are they talking about that? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I know my time is coming close to an end, 
but I do want to talk about the issues around labour. And I am 
looking forward to . . . And I want to say to the Premier that I 
am glad to see that the compassionate leave is recognized and 
we’ll be moving on that. That is a good, good move. 
 
But I am very concerned about what’s happening in 
occupational health and safety in Saskatchewan, and I am 
happy to see some recent statistics to show that there’s been 
improvement in injury time loss due to injuries. That’s a good 
thing. I think we’re at fourth worst instead of being second 
worst. Now we’re fourth. So we are moving up a bit and that’s a 
good thing, and I congratulate all those who are involved in 
making Saskatchewan safer. 
 
But we had a real opportunity this year, a real opportunity. 
There are now . . . The Workers’ Compensation Board has 
reported out at their AGM [annual general meeting] that they 
have a surplus of over $240 million, $240 million. They had the 
same circumstance last year where they had a surplus of $140 
million and they refunded that money back to all the employers. 
And we said last year, and we’re saying again this year that I’ve 
written the board to take some time to think about how they 
should be spending that money. I really urge them not to do a 
quick refund of all that money. You know, the occupational 
health and safety budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is about $8 
million, $9 million. And if you think about since this 
government has taken office, the number of workers that have 
increased in Saskatchewan — that’s great — but also the cost of 
living, the money that this, the dollars that this government is 
spending on occupational safety has actually fallen every year, 
fallen every year. 
 
Here we have a wonderful opportunity to have a legacy around 
occupational health and safety. Now my colleague from 
Saskatoon Riversdale has been raising and will continue to raise 

every day the issue of PTSD, post-traumatic stress disorder. 
This is a critical issue. And we think about what’s happening in, 
whether it’s Fort McMurray or what happened in Moncton with 
the RCMP shootings, where people are in traumatic 
circumstances, and whether it’s the police force or whether it’s 
the firefighters or emergency rescue, we have a situation where 
we could do the right thing. And we have $240 million, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, $240 million. That’s a lot of money. If we 
were to take some of that and put that towards PTSD, it would 
be a wonderful, wonderful thing. And we’re going to be urging 
the government to tell WCB [Workers’ Compensation Board], 
hold back on that money. 
 
Now the other thing that’s happening is the committee of 
review, and the Minister of Labour will be aware of this, should 
be reporting out anytime now, anytime, any day actually. And 
I’m sure they will be saying that there are things we could do in 
Saskatchewan to make sure our workplaces are more safe than 
they were the day before. We need to listen to that report. And 
we have the opportunity, with $240 million, to make a big 
difference, to make a huge difference. So I would urge the 
Minister of Labour, with the spirit of this Throne Speech, 
keeping Saskatchewan strong, let’s keep our workplaces safe 
and strong, and we have an opportunity to do that. So we should 
be standing up for Saskatchewan people, Saskatchewan people, 
and this is hugely, hugely important. 
 
I also want to just talk about briefly that I was struck by the 
silence on this Throne Speech about Saskatchewan diversity. I 
think this is huge. This is huge. We have, as I’ve said, we’ve 
gone through a winter where we’ve brought in and welcomed 
many Syrian refugees, and we know the population and growth 
in Saskatchewan has been largely due to new immigrants 
coming into Saskatchewan, whether they be . . . whatever 
country from around the world. This is a significant thing. This 
is a significant thing and yet, and I will every day stand up, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and present petitions calling for the restoration 
of funding for the heritage language program that’s operated by 
some 17 schools, 17 communities in Saskatchewan. And we 
have a government . . . I mean, today we had people in the 
legislature from Mexico, and they were being welcomed and we 
were saying great things about them. But here for a small 
amount of money, $225,000 that has been cut by this 
government, we’re doing more damage. We have people in 
communities that are calling for this to be restored. And, Mr. 
Speaker, this is a significant, significant issue. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say . . . And in case you’re 
curious, you know, this is . . . The Globe and Mail this last 
week talked about this. This is a piece by Adrienne Clarkson, a 
special to The Globe and Mail on Friday, May 13th. In the 2011 
census, there were more than 200 languages regarded as home 
languages. Can you believe that in Canada? Two hundred 
languages reported as a home language. Nearly six million 
Canadians reported speaking at least two languages at home and 
seven million speak French at home. Interestingly, the rate of 
bilingualism in Quebec among immigrants is higher than the 
rate for those born in Canada. And, Mr. Speaker, that speaks to 
how important heritage languages are. This is huge, 200 
languages, and we’re turning our back and the minister is 
turning his back on this. 
 
And so when I think about this Throne Speech, I think about 



54 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2016 

talking about keeping Saskatchewan strong, and yet they’re 
ignoring some very important sectors of Saskatchewan. And our 
motto is from many hands, strength. And that’s significant 
because we are all immigrants to this province. We were all 
immigrants at one time except for the indigenous folks. And 
this is a very, very important issue. 
 
So it shows that this government has been engaged in a lot of 
small thinking. They’re getting their . . . As I say, the Minister 
of Finance and other ministers in the front row seem to be all 
bent out of shape about some things that . . . They should be just 
taking, you know, not paying so much attention to, but thinking 
about the things at home like the anti-poverty strategy report, 
the mental health report, the disabilities report, but also some of 
the other cuts that are coming up in the budget. And our 
questions about the budget really show that in fact we need to 
be moving on that as quickly as possible. 
 
So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I definitely not, I cannot 
support the main motion but I will be supporting the 
amendment. Thank you very much. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And like many other colleagues in this Legislative Assembly, 
I’ll start my response to the Throne Speech with thank yous to, 
first of all and foremost, I want to thank the constituents of 
Regina Walsh Acres for allowing me to represent them for 
another four and a half years. It’s nice to get that extra six 
months until the next election comes in November 2020. 
 
And I’d also like to put out a congratulations to every member 
that was elected in this House. Sixty-one people were 
successful but our democracy is a fantastic thing. Two hundred 
and sixty people put their name forward to try and represent the 
people of Saskatchewan. Sixty-one were successful, but I think 
all 260 deserve a lot of credit because it takes a lot of guts and a 
lot of courage to put your name forward and want to represent 
the people of the province. And I firmly believe that anyone 
who puts their name forward to run as a candidate in any 
election wants to make the province better. And I think this 
side, the other side, they all agree that Saskatchewan is a 
wonderful place to live, but they want to work hard to make it 
better, and we just have different and better ideas than that side 
over there has. 
 
And I want to say congratulations to all the new members, all 
the new MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly]. It’s a 
wonderful experience to swearing in. I congratulate the new 
members over there: the member from Douglas Park, the 
member from Lakeview, and the member from P.A. [Prince 
Albert] Northcote. I want to say congratulations. 
 
It’s a wonderful lifetime opportunity to be able to represent the 
people that you know and get to know as friends, and in my 
case, twice, maybe three times . . . Interim leader, we’ll see. But 
after that first and foremost, it’s a humbling experience and 
we’re going to try and be as humble as possible when we go 
about our duties and do our duties with humility and try and 
make sure that we do the best for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 

After that the people that I have to thank the most are my 
campaign team, our campaign team in Regina Walsh Acres. We 
had a fun group. It was a bit different in the 2016 as myself and 
the member for Rosemont were able to do a profile on CJME. 
We both had very different campaigns. 
 
In 2011 Larissa and I didn’t have children and neither did the 
member for Rosemont and his wife, and I think it’s a lot 
different going through a campaign in 2016 with kids there. 
You’re missing a lot of family time. And I think him and I 
agree on some things, and I think missing the family time was 
probably the hardest part about this campaign and not being 
able to do the bedtime stories as frequently as we liked. So we 
owe our spouses a lot and great thanks for what they put up 
with during the 30-day campaign. So thank you very much to 
my wife, Larissa. I really appreciate everything she did. 
 
But for us, our kids were not the only kids within the campaign 
office. We had a bit of a day care; we had five or six kids 
running around under the age of four. But it just made us have a 
great feeling in the campaign office. There was always a great 
bunch of kids around there. 
 
And I want to start with thanking all the campaign team. I want 
to thank Jason Wall who was my campaign manager for the 
second year in a row, second election in a row. He did a 
fantastic job. Alicia Hubbard, Chantelle Coderre, Heather 
Howell-Shiplack, Raeleen Hamann, Ashley Boha, Rhys 
Williams, Lance Richards, Chris and Shauna Oyka; Charlie and 
Susan Pirie, my business manager Eric Clark, and my lawyer — 
everyone has a lawyer, and I think he’ll be thanked again later 
— Kevin Mellor who was the lawyer for election day. We 
really appreciate that. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member from Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood on her feet? 
 
Ms. Lambert: — I ask for leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to 
introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you and to 
all members of the Assembly, I’d like to introduce a class from 
Holy Cross High School. They’re waving up in the west 
gallery. There are 52 English as additional language students 
that are all taking an EAL [English as an additional language] 
credit language course. They are accompanied by their teachers, 
Mr. Dale Scott . . . Is Mr. Scott there? I saw him coming in. Hi. 
Yvonne Musey Johnson, hello; Maureen Bzdel; and Barb 
Fredrickson. In addition to Canada, these students come from 
such faraway countries as China, Hong Kong, Philippines, 
Vietnam, Iraq, Mexico, Democratic Republic of Congo, 
Rwanda, and Colombia. This class also helped run the Holy 
Cross student provincial election on March 23rd and 24th. 
 
I attended Holy Cross High School as well as my six brothers 



May 19, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 55 

and sisters. I ask all members to join me in welcoming them to 
their Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 
has asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to 
join in with the member welcoming the students from Holy 
Cross. I just want to say a big shout-out to a good friend, Dale 
Scott, a teacher. And we’ve done a lot of work on teachers’ 
associations and that kind of thing over several years, but 
several years ago. 
 
But welcome to all the kids. And we’ve just been debating 
about heritage languages and all of that. But we won’t get into 
that now. I just want to welcome them all to their legislature. 
Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Buckingham, seconded by Ms. 
Carr, and the proposed amendment to the main motion moved 
by Ms. Sproule.] 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and to you, congratulations on your successful election as 
Deputy Speaker once again. I’m looking forward to working 
with you. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m going to break my Throne Speech 
response into a couple of different parts. I want to talk about the 
election we all went through on April 4th. I think that was a 
monumental . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . No, it’s not. I went 
through the monumental task of running in a provincial-wide 
election, and I want to thank a lot of other people. We had 61 
candidates that stayed on message and did a fantastic job, 
working hard in all 61 constituencies with amazing volunteers 
and great campaign teams. 
 
I’d like to thank our Saskatchewan Party team: Patrick 
Bundrock, JR, Samantha, Mark Shmelinski. They did a 
fantastic job of working hard and making sure that we were 
ready for anything that came up. And we appreciate all the 
support. 
 
And also our Premier: he did a fantastic job going around the 
province and making sure the people of Saskatchewan knew 
what we were going to do to keep Saskatchewan strong. And I 
think that’s the focus of our Throne Speech as well, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, because it really plays off our platform commitments. 

I think it’s important to go through your platform and make sure 
that when you present a platform to the people of 
Saskatchewan, that platform’s realistic; it’s affordable; people 
believe that the promises you make in that platform, you’re 
going to follow through on them in your four years in 
government if you get the wonderful responsibility to try and 
serve the people of the province and form government, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
[11:30] 
 
So I think after a long campaign and getting to swear in, which 
is amazing for all 61 of our candidates, I think we get to the 
business of governing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that’s what 
the Throne Speech is all about. It’s about fulfilling your 
promises in government and your promises you made to the 
people of Saskatchewan. And our Throne Speech was broken 
down into three separate areas: keeping our economy strong, 
keeping the province’s finances strong, keeping Saskatchewan’s 
position in Canada strong by always standing up for the 
Saskatchewan interests of people. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
think that might be one of the most important parts of our 
Throne Speech, ensuring that you always stand up for the 
interests of Saskatchewan people. 
 
And I know that some members over there may not want to talk 
about this, but I think we’re going to have to have a 
conversation about the Leap Manifesto because, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I believe this is one of the most dangerous pieces of 
information written since really . . . Actually the NDP are pretty 
famous for manifestos because I have the Regina Manifesto 
here as well, ironically. So I’ll quote from the Regina 
Manifesto, July 19th to 21st, 1933: 
 

The C.C.F. [which is their parent company] is a federation 
of organizations whose purpose is the establishment in 
Canada, of a Co-operative Commonwealth in which the 
principle regarding production, distribution and exchange 
will be the supplying of human needs and not the making 
of profits. 
 
We aim to replace the present capitalist system [that 
sounds familiar], with its inherent injustice and 
inhumanity, by a social order from which the domination 
and exploitation of one class by another will be 
eliminated . . . 

 
So let’s fast-forward here a lot of decades and see what the 
NDP, the left wing, thinks with . . . It’s interesting that the NDP 
in Saskatchewan are taking their lead from Avi Lewis, Naomi 
Klein, and not really the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
So the member from Nutana says she did not sign the Leap 
Manifesto. So she may not have signed the Leap Manifesto; I’m 
not sure. She could have printed it off and signed it and hung it 
up on her wall in the office, and I’m not sure. But she did have 
a discussion about this in Edmonton at the NDP convention. 
And let’s talk about what the convention . . . what was on the 
convention floor at the NDP convention in Edmonton this year. 
 
Leap Manifesto . . . And I’m quoting, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
“Therefore be it resolved that the NDP recognizes and supports 
the Leap Manifesto as a high-level statement of principles . . .” 



56 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2016 

I’ll read that one more time, Mr. Deputy Speaker: “Therefore be 
it resolved that the NDP recognizes and supports the Leap 
Manifesto as a high-level statement of principles that speaks to 
the aspirations, history, and values of the party.” 
 
I would think that that would mean, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
reading between the lines, that the member from Nutana 
supports the Leap Manifesto. But not only does the member of 
Nutana support the Leap Manifesto. After the election loss, and 
the interim leader — which congratulations to the member from 
Regina Rosemont as being elected interim leader unanimously; 
well done — I think that he made an interesting decision 
because they have a new renewal committee. And the new 
person that’s heading that renewal committee is Nicole White 
who also subscribes to the Leap Manifesto. 
 
So the NDP are trying to renew their party, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, based on — and, Mr. Speaker, this is what they voted 
on — based on, “Therefore be it resolved that the NDP 
recognizes and supports the Leap Manifesto as a high-level 
statement of principles that speaks to the aspirations, history, 
and values of the party.” 
 
So I’m assuming that she’s going to take most of her lead from 
the Leap Manifesto, which I haven’t really got into exactly 
what’s the . . . I’m going to hit the main points of Leap 
Manifesto, which most people in Saskatchewan are going to 
disagree with. I can tell you right now that . . . 
 
So first of all, one of the main points of the Leap Manifesto: 
“There is no longer an excuse for building new infrastructure 
projects that lock us into increased extraction for decades into 
the future.” So I find it somewhat ironic and maybe a little bit 
offside, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the new Finance critic . . . 
Another interesting choice for the interim leader who appointed 
a Finance critic who doesn’t believe in capitalism. That’s quite 
interesting. So I would think that talking to the new Finance 
critic who asked a question yesterday about Evraz, which is a 
huge employer in Regina, which is an important part of 
Regina’s manufacturing industry. So she asked a question about 
Evraz, about 150 people that were laid off, which affects people 
in Regina, and she says something needs to be done so that 
there won’t be more layoffs at Evraz. But yet she supports the 
Leap Manifesto. It says, “There is no longer an excuse for 
building new infrastructure projects that lock us into increased 
extraction decades into the future.” 
 
And the member from Rosemont just said she supports 
pipelines. Those two are diametrically opposed. You cannot 
support the Leap Manifesto and support pipelines, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. It’s actually impossible because you’re going against 
the Leap Manifesto if you support pipelines. It says no 
increased extraction decades into the future. 
 
Not only that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The member from 
Rosemont also appointed the member from Nutana as the Ag 
critic. And believe it or not, the Leap Manifesto says something 
about agriculture as well. It says, “Moving to a far more 
localized and ecologically-based agricultural system would 
reduce reliance on fossil fuels, capture carbon in the soil, and 
absorb sudden shocks in the global supply — as well as produce 
healthier and more affordable food for everyone.” 
 

So I have an idea, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for them, because 
they’re rebranding; they’re focusing on the Leap Manifesto. 
They should go back to the hammer and sickle as well. Because 
this is basically where they want to take agriculture. It’s 
unbelievable. And the fact that they don’t have the knowledge 
that improved technologies in agriculture allows the idea that 
there’s not topsoil blowing all over. 
 
I was talking to one farmer actually a couple of weeks ago. He 
said, if we were doing the same tilling and the same agriculture 
practices that we did in the ’80s, there’d be topsoil blowing all 
over Saskatchewan. And right now because there is zero-till and 
crop rotation, that’s not happening. And that’s an improvement 
in agriculture I think we all believe is healthier for the people of 
Saskatchewan because you can grow more food and be able to 
feed more of the world’s population with these improved 
technologies in agriculture. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s very interesting that the two pieces 
that the Leap Manifesto focuses on, the people of Saskatchewan 
will be strongly opposed to, he appoints the member that signed 
on to the Leap Manifesto as the critic for both of these 
portfolios. Might be a question of leadership there from the 
member for Regina Rosemont which, to be fair, he’s young, 
new, and I think mistakes will be made by all new MLAs. He’s 
third term now so I’m not sure if those mistakes can be just 
swiped under the rug. 
 
Another interesting part of the Leap Manifesto is they like to 
live in a country powered entirely by truly just renewable 
resources — laudable goal. I think that is something that is 
interesting because in Saskatchewan, I believe . . . The member 
from Martensville is very excited about reading this right now 
actually. 
 
Our goal to reach 50 per cent renewable energy by 2030 is I 
think a responsible goal, a goal that can be done without 
harming the economy. I think a lot of these ideas that were 
written in the Leap Manifesto really don’t take into account the 
harm they can cause to the economy. And I think it’s important 
that if we’re going to represent the people of Saskatchewan, try 
and make sure that you represent the economy that these people 
are working in because it affects people’s lives each and every 
day, the jobs they do so they can feed their families, so they can 
supply the necessities that their family needs. 
 
And one thing that I would like to talk about is kind of a focus 
of change that’s been in my life since having a second child, is 
looking towards the future and making sure that our kids have 
opportunities because I think in the past couple of years those 
opportunities have become more and more available to the 
young people of our province. 
 
And I think the Throne Speech talks a little bit about that as 
well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And some of the things when we 
were door knocking before the election on April 4th, I talked to 
the people because in Regina Walsh Acres, there’s a lot of 
schools. And I talked to people about the investments we made 
in the schools — $1 billion in infrastructure over our terms in 
government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think when we talk about 
our commitments, we show our commitments in our actions. 
We show that we take education serious by investing in 
education. 



May 19, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 57 

We show that we take health care serious. I believe our current 
Health minister’s one of the best Health ministers this province 
has ever seen, and he works hard each and every day to ensure 
that the people of Saskatchewan have the basic services that 
they need to ensure that there’s a healthy society within 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I also think that we show our commitment by ensuring that we 
don’t want to take more money out of taxpayers’ pockets. And 
throughout our campaign we said, we want to work towards 
keeping Saskatchewan strong and keeping our finances strong 
and not raise taxes. And I talked with people on the doorsteps 
about that saying, Saskatchewan, the economy’s . . . We’ve hit 
a bump. We’re going through a bit of tough time but we’re 
going to do something different. This is a government problem, 
not a citizen problem, and we’re going to make sure that we try 
and fix this problem by not dipping into your pockets. 
 
We’ve had consistently . . . There’s some things government 
control. We can’t control what the price of resources is. We 
can’t control what the price of commodities are going to be, but 
we can control our expenses. And I think on this side of the 
House, this is something the government’s done very well. 
We’ve been very close on, and I think it’s something where our 
government can be proud of the way that we handle the expense 
side of government, of the government ledger, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s a couple of more things I 
want to talk about. And there’s quite a few differences between 
our side of the House and the opposition side of the House, 
mostly seats, but there’s a few other differences, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker.  
 
And one is, I was listening intently to the member from 
Athabasca’s speeches because I enjoy them. I think he can spin 
a tale better than lots of other members in this Assembly, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And I was listening intently, and lots of his 
speeches could be called tall tales actually because they go in 
and out of the realm of reality. But he made a slip and one thing 
that the NDP do believe is on their side of the House when they 
talk about their 16 years in government, they don’t talk about 
serving the public. They don’t talk about being public servants. 
And this is a direct quote from the member from Athabasca 
yesterday: “. . . Mr. Speaker, for the record, the 16 years that the 
NDP ruled this province . . .” 
 
Mr. Speaker, that says a lot about peoples’ expectations of how 
they feel if they would ever have the honour to be able to serve 
the people of Saskatchewan. How do you . . . I don’t think you 
should say that you rule the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. You 
serve the province. And I think that’s something we’ve been 
very cautious, and I believe that every person on this side of the 
House thinks we don’t rule our constituents. We serve at the 
pleasure of our constituents. We serve to make sure that their 
voice is heard in this Chamber, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I 
believe as long as I have the honour of sitting in one of these 
desks, I will never say that I rule or preside over anyone. I serve 
at the pleasure of the people of the province. And I serve at the 
pleasure of the people of Regina Walsh Acres, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and I think that’s something you can never ever take 
for granted. 
 

I believe on that side of the House I think they’ve maybe lost 
their north star, lost their guiding principles, but they’ve looked 
to the wrong spot for those new guiding principles. They’ve 
looked to a document called the Leap Manifesto for their new 
guiding principles, which no one in Saskatchewan is going to 
strongly support, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think they should be 
talking to Saskatchewan people, not Avi Lewis and Naomi 
Klein, I’m not sure they represent the people’s opinions in their 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I also . . . My time’s getting short here, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, but there’s just a few more things I’d like to talk about 
before I end with my support of the Throne Speech. And one is, 
the election was not too long ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I 
believe that we were given a strong mandate to serve the people 
of Saskatchewan. I believe that we’re going to work hard to 
keep all of our commitments followed up with a Throne Speech 
that outlines those commitments we’ve made and how we’re 
going to commit and follow through on those promises. 
 
But I’ll say one thing, and listening to a couple more speeches 
over there and listening to the member from Athabasca and the 
member from Cumberland, I think they still are of the opinion 
that — and I’m just, I’m trying to get into the head of a member 
opposite which is not easy to do — but I believe they think the 
people of Saskatchewan have just got it wrong again. 
 
I think, and I’ve talked to a lot of people across the province, 
and the attitude that the members opposite still have is they’ll 
come back to us. We can keep doing what we’re doing. They 
just don’t understand it yet because they don’t get it. And I 
think that’s a very dangerous perspective to take on something 
as important as trying to ensure that you represent the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House I believe we’ll 
never have that attitude. We’ll never have the attitude that we 
rule the people of Saskatchewan. We are here to serve, and 
humbly serve at that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And with that and 
for the reasons outlined in my speech, I will definitely be 
supporting the Speech from the Throne. 
 
And I am very grateful for having the honour to represent the 
people of Regina Walsh Acres for a second term. I’ll never take 
that responsibility lightly. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
[11:45] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is an 
absolute honour to be participating in the Throne Speech debate 
while representing the good people of Melville-Saltcoats 
constituency. 
 
First off I’d like to congratulate you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on 
your accomplishment as well as the Speaker on his 
accomplishment as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I stand before this honourable Assembly for the 
first time in awe of those who have gone before us, the 
decisions that they made, and the vision that they had for this 



58 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2016 

great province. And at the same time, as I’ve been reading the 
backgrounds and biographies of those members sitting among 
us, both in government and in opposition, I appreciate the 
diversity and background of all hon. members and can only 
envision the notable discussions, decisions that we’re going to 
be making to provide a direction for this great province into the 
next 100 years. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if I could take a couple of minutes to 
extend my appreciation to the people, the constituents and 
communities in Melville-Saltcoats, for giving me this 
opportunity to serve them with pride. They’ve entrusted me 
with a valuable possession and that is their democratic vote. 
Many men and women around the world have fought for the 
right and lost their lives fighting for and defending our 
democratic rights. And I really do appreciate the fact that this is 
a very hard-earned right and the act of placing that vote with us 
is not to be taken lightly. 
 
As well I would like to thank the constituents for providing me 
their wisdom, their insight, their opinions, their generosity, and 
their support and, not to forget, a lot of coffee and muffins as 
we embarked on the electoral journey. As in typical 
Saskatchewan fashion, if they were not going to vote for me, 
they still invited me in, and we had to have a discussion over 
coffee and muffins. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d not . . . be remiss if I didn’t thank my family 
for being the support network that virtually all members who 
spoke before me have indicated. And first off I would like to 
thank my wife, Carla, who, I’m not sure if the Hon. Minister of 
Advanced Education wanted anyone to know, actually babysat 
the minister when he was a little tyke. And she knew even then 
that he was off to great things. 
 
Carla’s the administrator for the town of Churchbridge, so she 
has provided me with abundant insight into the world of civic 
duties and concerns. She was always in the background 
providing endless support and encouragement and was a 
taskmaster, ensuring deadlines were met and calls were made 
when they needed to be. She knew just the right words of 
encouragement or motivation when it was needed. And as well, 
she endured a lot of alone time as our nomination occurred in 
the fall of 2014 and we began campaigning at every hockey 
rink, curling rink, community barbecue, and fall supper in the 
constituency. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d also like to thank my mom, Phyllis 
Kaeding, who was, like a lot of moms, the unsung hero. She 
was always looking to help. No job was too big or small. Her 
and her grey-haired army, as she called them, would stuff and 
address envelopes, count flyers, and do anything else that I 
could give to them. And all she asked in return was that I keep 
her up to date on the happenings in the constituency and the 
scuttlebutt of what was going on around us. 
 
My father, Roger, had always been involved politically, as I 
remember getting to drive around in the half-ton, out in the 
dusty backroads, putting up signs every election. And I’d be the 
quiet one listening in the corner of the room whenever dad 
hosted a political meeting in our farmhouse. I remember getting 
to tell Premier Devine, a guest of my dad’s, about my intentions 
to farm, over a steak at our kitchen table one evening in the 

early ’80s. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to acknowledge the incredible work 
that my good friend and campaign manager Rick MacIntyre 
provided for the campaign. He was out there door knocking in 
the heat, the rain, the snow, and the ice, as well as hitting every 
sporting and community event and barbecue over the last two 
years with me, all the while trying to maintain his purebred 
Simmental herd. He became a confidante and, as myself, was 
all new to this election process. We definitely learned a lot 
together. We got quite a few high-fives at the door, met a 
couple of angry dogs. But I’m not sure if it’s a reward or a 
sentence, but I’ve since appointed him as my constituency 
assistant. 
 
The majority of our campaign team was a young, energetic 
group that had little to no experience in running a campaign, so 
we learned a lot together. We had a lot of fun. We found out a 
lot more about ourselves, but best of all we became a team. And 
I appreciate their loyalty and dedication even when we took 
them out of their comfort zone and took them to the city to do 
some door knocking. So thanks, Jon Adams, Kelly Fatteicher, 
Pam Marfleet, Blair Harris, Keith Rathgeber, Jack Dawes, Dave 
Nussbaumer, Ed Myers, Char and Randy Slager, Barry Dilts, 
Arlynn and Lillian Kurtz, and the many others that helped us on 
our campaign. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to thank Bob Bjornerud, 
previous member from Melville-Saltcoats. And he provided me 
a tremendous amount of political insight into the process, and I 
consider him to be a mentor as I do many in the caucus today. 
And I see the high regard that he’s got within the legislature and 
as well throughout the constituency, and I understand that really 
his are impossible shoes to fill, and all I want to do is just 
follow in the same path. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as in every democratic process, we had 
competitors, and I would like to take the time to thank all the 
nominees for letting their names stand for the election. In 
particular I would like to recognize Leonard Dales, my main 
opponent with the NDP. It was indicated this is his last go at the 
election process. He worked extremely hard. He actually retired 
from his job to campaign, and he missed, I know, a couple of 
major family events, life events, during the election. And I wish 
him well into the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to acknowledge the leadership 
that we have with this government. To be honest, it was pretty 
easy campaigning when you introduced yourself as being with 
the Premier and the Sask Party. He has always had my respect 
and the respect of voters in our constituency and across the 
province. He earned this respect by being down to earth and 
keeping his promises and defending the province every 
opportunity that he got. The Premier and this government have 
a solid record of doing what they promise, doing what they say 
they’re going to do and that has provided an incredible level of 
trust between this government and its citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the course of the campaign, I made a goal 
for myself, a personal goal, to call on every urban household in 
the Melville-Saltcoats constituency, whether it was the village 
of Bangor or Calder or Tantallon or towns like Langenburg or 
Esterhazy or Stockholm or the city of Melville. And I found 



May 19, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 59 

everyone had a story, whether it was about their family history 
of their parents first emigrating to Canada or maybe it was 
about their personal journey here from other parts of the world. 
And the common theme was that they came to Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what did they see here? What did they stay for? 
Everyone will tell you that they came here because of 
opportunity and, Mr. Speaker, the constituency of 
Melville-Saltcoats has an incredibly diverse economy. Certainly 
the Mosaic potash mines are significant employers, but we also 
have two major railways that go through the constituency, 
major hubs in a CN [Canadian National] hub in Melville, CP 
[Canadian Pacific] hub in Bredenbury. We have a major 
government employer, being crop insurance AgriStability in 
Melville. 
 
Agriculture plays a dominant role in our local economy. We 
have very large high-tech grain farms in the 30- to 40,000-acre 
range, down to small organic farms. We have large cattle herds 
numbering 800 to 1,200 head. We’ve got families raising goat 
herds numbering 10 to 20. Melville-Saltcoats actually has the 
majority of commercial turkeys raised in Saskatchewan, and 
many say there is one standing here right now. We have dairy, 
broiler chicken and egg farms. Northern Quinoa, based in 
Melville, is Canada’s largest commercial quinoa processor and 
exporter. 
 
These are all contributors to the record $15.3 billion of 
agriculture food exports that this province achieved in 2015. 
Mr. Speaker, these are also agricultural enterprises that support 
this government’s position in promoting the Trans-Pacific 
Partnership agreement currently in front of the federal 
government. 
 
From 2009 to 2014, manufacturing sales rose in the province by 
nearly 47 per cent. This was the second-largest growth rate 
among all provinces. Exports from Saskatchewan now total 
over $32.5 billion. Manufacturers in the constituency of 
Melville-Saltcoats play a significant part in that statistic. You’re 
going to find grain and gravel semi-trailers built in Saltcoats. 
You will find pre-made rafters that are shipped all over Western 
Canada from a manufacturer in Bredenbury. You’re going to 
find plastic tanks manufactured in Spy Hill, grain bins, hopper 
cones, harrow bars, and bale shredders manufactured in Gerald. 
There are high-tech agricultural guidance systems being 
developed in Stockholm. Honey is being produced and exported 
around the world from major producers in MacNutt and 
Langenburg. Potash and uranium mine parts are made in 
Esterhazy. And the list goes on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are businesses that have set up in 
Saskatchewan because they see opportunity — opportunity to 
grow and expand, opportunity to earn a fair living for their 
owners and employees. And this Throne Speech continues to 
provide hope and opportunity for these and other businesses in 
Saskatchewan to develop on the provincial, national, and 
international stage. 
 
In the last two months we have had a major industrial company 
located in Saltcoats, EMW Industrial, be asked by a business in 
the United States to establish a parallel business there. Just 
recently they opened their new office in St. James, Missouri. 
EMW Industrial is a privately owned company by local 

shareholders and employees, over 250 local tradesmen, 
millwrights, steelworkers, apprentices, and journeymen. The 
majority are young men and women from this area, from the 
area of Melville-Saltcoats, and EMW has provided them an 
opportunity to develop their trade with the potential of working 
anywhere in the world. And that is opportunity for our young 
people. They live in our towns and villages; they buy goods and 
services, and they have families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my constituency we have the exciting 
developments in our towns, villages, and city and that is 
population growth. Virtually every community in 
Melville-Saltcoats has grown significantly over the past five 
years. Why? Because they have people wanting to live in this 
province because they see opportunity. 
 
As I was door knocking, I came across endless stories of 
parents my age and older thanking this government for helping 
to create opportunities for their kids to come back home. And 
they weren’t just coming back to entry-level jobs. They were 
coming back as professionals, some as engineers in the 
numerous large building projects that we have going on in this 
province such as the new hospitals in Moose Jaw, Saskatoon, 
North Battleford. I met parents who had their kids working on 
the bypass in Regina, the potash projects in Rocanville and 
Esterhazy. I ran into parents whose kids were working at K+S 
near Bethune and Evraz in Regina. 
 
But I also talked to people who have moved in from other 
provinces with no previous ties to this province. Just on the 
block that I live on, in the town of Churchbridge, there is a 
Mosaic employee to the left of me who comes from Manitoba. 
The other side of my house, a mine engineer and his wife who 
is a nurse, who comes from Kenora, Ontario. Another 
neighbour and his family just became Canadian citizens after 
leaving the Philippines. And none of them envision ever 
considering to go back. Saskatchewan is now their home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in our constituency we have another major event 
going on, the building of a brand new school in Langenburg. 
And this is one of the 40 new and replacement schools that this 
government has undertaken in the last eight years. This is part 
of a billion-dollar investment in our children’s future. And this 
government has the vision and fortitude to invest in our 
province’s future. It’s interesting to note that from kindergarten 
to grade 3, we’ve had a significant increase in the number of 
kids going to school. For example we’re accustomed, in our 
local rural schools, to having class sizes from an 8 to 12 kid 
range. Now we’re seeing 20 kids per class, and if we do the 
math we find that this population growth coincides with the 
time the government changed in this province. What a 
tremendous opportunity to develop more home-grown doctors, 
nurses, teachers, tradespeople, and business professionals. 
 
The other factor I noticed while campaigning was the number 
of first-generation Canadians that are now in our province. In 
one area of Esterhazy, I ran into first-generation Canadians of 
five different nationalities. And apart from their reason for 
coming to Saskatchewan, what was so refreshing was their 
willingness and desire to become Canadian citizens and take on 
all the responsibilities that come with that. They wanted a vote 
in the worst way, and were very aware of what full Canadian 
citizenship would provide them. And they represent the 132,000 



60 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2016 

new people that have come to this province in the last 10 years 
because they saw opportunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I directly remember the conversation I had with 
Manny Ada, a new Canadian citizen who brought his family to 
Churchbridge. He’s currently working on our old seed farm. In 
the Philippines, he was an accountant. In Churchbridge, he’s 
managing a poultry barn. He’s not concerned he’s not working 
in his area of expertise because his daughters received a 
tremendous education in a great school in a super learning 
environment. 
 
Last summer he had two daughters who graduated high school 
here and were able to take nursing at the Parkland College in 
Yorkton. This is a new facility that was funded by this 
government. They were able to go to university while staying at 
home in rural Saskatchewan. This is the result of more than 272 
more nurse training seats established by this government over 
the last 10 years. They will also be able to find a job in this 
province in an area they were interested in — nursing. Not a 
likely scenario they would have been afforded back in Manila 
or even back in Saskatchewan 10 years ago. Manny came here 
because he was given an opportunity to make a better life for 
his family in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my wife and I have been blessed with two 
tremendous boys, adults now. Michael is a mechanical engineer 
working for Brandt agriculture. He and his wife, Laine Goertz, 
who has worked for various ministries in this government, have 
made their home here in Regina. They were both offered 
opportunities when they graduated to find work in Alberta and 
BC [British Columbia]. They looked at their options and found 
that Saskatchewan was going to provide them the best 
opportunity now and into the future. 
 
[12:00] 
 
We’re glad for this because we now have a grandchild, Brynn, 
who is a fifth-generation Saskatchewan resident in our family. 
What helped motivate them to stay was the graduate retention 
program and the low personal taxes that this government has 
introduced. When they compare their take-home salary to the 
other cousins they’ve got throughout Canada, they find out 
they’re pretty darn good here. With the assistance they received 
through the Sask advantage scholarship and the graduate 
retention program, they’ve been able to build equity in their 
home and also start providing for their little girl’s future 
education. This is certainly not something that their parents 
were able to achieve in their start, and this contributes once 
again to young people seeing Saskatchewan as a place to be. 
 
Total tax reductions since 2008 have put nearly $6 billion back 
into the hands of Saskatchewan taxpayers. Today a family of 
four with $50,000 annual income will pay no provincial sales 
tax, no provincial tax. So although Michael and Laine already 
own their home, numerous friends of theirs are anxiously 
awaiting their opportunity to use their . . . in the graduate 
retention program first home initiative where they can utilize 
their unused GRP [graduate retention program] credits towards 
a down payment on the purchase of their first home in 
Saskatchewan. This is another tremendous tool in the economic 
tool box to help keep our young people in this province. 
 

Our youngest son, Matthew, is an aerospace engineer located in 
Ottawa. Although we don’t have a large aerospace industry to 
lure him back to Saskatchewan yet, there are positive signs. The 
Throne Speech mentioned the creation of the Saskatchewan 
commercial innovation incentive, providing significant tax 
incentives to the commercialization of patents and qualifying 
intellectual property into new products. As well, we will also 
provide a significant refundable component on the provincial 
research and development tax credit. This intrigues him and the 
company that he works for. This will continue to position 
Saskatchewan as a hotbed for science and innovation, and 
policies such as these continue to show the optimism that this 
government has on the potential of this province. Policies such 
as these show that this province is open to the new and 
innovative ideas of new entrepreneurs, bringing new business to 
our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have continued hope for the citizens of this 
province and continued enthusiasm for the potential of this 
province. But, Mr. Speaker, we must also recognize that there 
are many constituents who have disabilities or have children 
with disabilities. Therefore this government has also lowered 
taxes for persons with disabilities and increased tax benefits for 
their caregivers. 
 
This government is extending job protection to allow 
employees caring for a family member in the final stages of life, 
entitling them to 28 weeks of leave per year. 
 
We’re increasing the funding to the CNIB [Canadian National 
Institute for the Blind] to integrate visual loss rehabilitation 
services into the mainstream health system. 
 
Our government will provide for individualized funding for 
preschool children with autism spectrum disorder, and this will 
provide parents of children with autism the ability to determine 
what the best expenditure of funds is for the benefit of their 
child’s development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, but we also need to look after our seniors, the 
hard-working pillars of our province. By allowing seniors to 
defer the education portion of their property tax enables them to 
utilize their disposable income for more discretionary expenses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to wind up, I’d like to confirm that this Throne 
Speech has fulfilled the desire of the majority of our 
constituents who requested that we not spend beyond our 
means. As we went door to door, the single request many 
taxpayers sent us back with was, keep moving us forward. They 
appreciated the efforts of this government to pay down debt 
when we could. They appreciated that this government needed 
to continue to replace aging infrastructure that has been 
neglected through the previous government’s terms. 
 
Constituents understand there are obvious income deficiencies 
over the last 18 months, and this government has done all that 
they can to keep expenses in check. They appreciate the fact 
that this government didn’t overpromise to spend their way into 
the next election. 
 
This Throne Speech identifies the real and immediate needs of 
Saskatchewan residents, and it shows this government’s 
determination to get back to a balanced budget in short order. 



May 19, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 61 

The Throne Speech outlines our government’s vision of how to 
keep our province competitive with a competitive tax structure, 
incentives to promote ingenuity and entrepreneurship. It 
provides a vision as to how we can continue to make 
Saskatchewan the economic beacon that the rest of the country 
now looks to. And it provides this province with the resolve to 
continue to be proud of who we are, and the vision of what we 
still have yet to become. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, for these reasons I will be supporting 
the motion put forward by the member from Saskatoon 
Westview. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It truly is an honour 
for me to rise in this Legislative Assembly for the first time as 
the MLA from Wood River to address the delegates here. 
 
I just want to say, first of all I want to thank the constituents of 
Wood River for giving me this honour and this privilege to 
serve them as their Sask Party MLA, and I also want to thank 
our former colleague, Yogi Huyghebaert, for all his hard work 
in the past 17 years as our Sask Party MLA. The election 
campaign was a great opportunity for me, Mr. Speaker, to meet 
many people in my constituency: farmers, ranchers, business 
owners, teachers, nurses, seniors, doctors, and children of all 
ages. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to say a few words about my parents, if I 
could, who have both passed on. Our father, Marvin, was a very 
hard worker, as were all farmers. At the age of 19, he owned 
farm land and bought his very first grain truck and custom 
hauled grain to pay for that truck at 1 cent a bushel. At the age 
of 23, he married my mother, Irene, and they started their own 
farm machinery dealership in the community of Fife Lake. 
They owned and operated that business for 17 years, along with 
farming and raising four children. It was our parents’ love of 
farming that got me and my two brothers into farming. Our 
sister Cheryl became an RN [registered nurse] and has had a 
very successful career. I believe it was my father’s strong 
commitment to free enterprise and his passion for politics that 
has led me to where I am here today. 
 
And I must take some time, Mr. Speaker, to thank my family, 
for all those that helped in my campaign. First of all, Mr. 
Speaker, I must thank my wife, Lois, for supporting me in this 
new chapter in my life. My children have also been very 
supportive of the opportunities that have come to me in the past 
15 years. There were many days and nights, Mr. Speaker, when 
my family was home alone while I was off doing SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] business 
on behalf of rural Saskatchewan. And Lois was with the kids, 
and in later years she spent many days and nights at home 
alone. And for her, she’s been my rock and I really have to 
thank her, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also want to take this opportunity to thank a member of my 
family, and that’s my brother Robert and his wife, Viv, Mr. 
Speaker, because without their support none of this would even 
be possible. Robert and I have been farming together since the 
’70s, and he was one of the first to tell me to go for it and take 
the challenge of representing rural Saskatchewan on the SARM 

board. And when I told him I was interested in seeking the 
nomination for the Sask Party for Wood River, he just said, do 
it; we will make the farm work. He has made a huge sacrifice 
for me, Mr. Speaker, to achieve my goals, and I can’t thank him 
enough. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, our youngest brother, Cameron, who 
actually got people to work for him when his shift was due at 
the mine in Coronach so that he could take time off and help 
Robert with harvest or seeding time when I was away on 
SARM business. 
 
There are so many people to thank, Mr. Speaker. My years on 
the SARM board gave me the privilege of working with some 
great board members and some excellent staff that really helped 
me along the way. And if I could, Mr. Speaker, I want to take 
this opportunity to thank some of the them. People like Sinclair 
Harrison, Keith Carleton, Don Taylor, Jim Hallick, Ray Orb, 
and my colleagues here now today: the Minister of Government 
Relations, and the member from Cypress Hills. 
 
And I had the privilege of seeing our first women elected to the 
SARM board: Deb Groning, Mr. Speaker; Judy Harwood and 
Carmen Sterling, which is great for the organization, and many 
great staff that really guided me along the way, Mr. Speaker, 
with all their hard work and knowledge. But one, Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to single out, Mr. Neal Hardy. This gentleman really 
helped me to become the person I am today. It was under his 
guidance as president of SARM that it really prepared for me 
my role as SARM president of a great organization. And I owe 
Neal my greatest gratitude. 
 
I also want to take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to thank all 
the volunteers that have helped me achieve my goal of 
becoming the Sask Party MLA for Wood River. To my 
campaign manager, Randy Clark, we spent a lot of time putting 
signs up and making sure I was where I had to be, and to his 
lovely wife, Sandra, who was also my business manager and 
who also came door knocking with me a lot of times. She 
accounted for every penny, Mr. Speaker, and made sure we 
stayed on budget. I want to say thank you to both of them, and 
also to their boss, Mr. Speaker, Darryl Meyer of Swift Current 
who owns the bulk Petro Canada dealership there, allowed them 
to take that time off to help me during my campaign. 
 
And to Wayne and Rita Royal for putting up signs and door 
knocking. To Curtis Nelson of Nelson Motors for leasing us a 
vehicle during the campaign. To Tim and Penny Dlouhey who 
own a restaurant in Assiniboia, for donating food during the 
campaign. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to Wendel Patzer for putting up signs and taking 
me around the Wymark and Swift Current area and introducing 
me to a lot of people. To my cousin, Bobby Switzer, for 
phoning and making sure people got out to vote. It was 
tremendous what he did. And to Garth Dorgan for introducing 
me at a grand opening at one of his facilities. 
 
I guess what I’m saying, Mr. Speaker, is it takes a lot of people 
and their hard work and sacrifice to help all of us get here to 
this beautiful facility so we can serve them and ensure that they 
have every opportunity to live, work, and raise a family in this 
great province of Saskatchewan. This is why, Mr. Speaker, I 



62 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2016 

wanted to serve as the MLA for Wood River, and to them I say 
thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words on why I decided to run 
for the Sask Party and why I wanted to represent Wood River. 
The Sask Party government has been working very hard to track 
investment for growth and to give our young people every 
opportunity to stay in this province to work, live, and raise their 
families. For years we watched our families and friends leave 
this province for jobs. I come from a large rural constituency 
that saw many of our schools and hospitals close, and many of 
our towns had lost businesses and had vacant homes. Today, 
Mr. Speaker, thanks to the Sask Party government, we are 
seeing those towns become vibrant again. Young people are 
staying and starting their own business. Older people are 
moving back for quality of life. New homes and condos are 
going up in our towns, Mr. Speaker. That is why I wanted to 
become an MLA, to ensure our rural communities have every 
opportunity to grow and for our young people to want to stay in 
this province. 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, let’s talk about the Sask Party 
record in government. And I’m not going to dwell on the past, 
Mr. Speaker, because I’ve heard the saying, the windshield is 
much bigger than the mirror. And let’s look at what they’ve 
done: 85,000 more people in this province since 2007, and 
taxes, property taxes . . . And I have to talk about education 
property tax on property, Mr. Speaker, I have to. As the SARM 
president for years, it was the biggest issue that came to our 
convention floor. And when my colleague, the Minister of 
Government Relations, brought forward the proposal for 
education property tax reduction, it was the biggest tax 
reduction in this province’s history. 
 
Also with hospitals, we’ve seen double the investment in 
hospitals and health care facilities since 2007. Schools, we’re 
seeing more and more schools being built, invested in 40 new 
replacement schools and 25 major renovation projects 
including, Mr. Speaker, a major addition in Gravelbourg. 
 
Highways, we’re looking at in eight years they’d invested $5.2 
billion in repairing Saskatchewan highways and committed to 
another 2.7 billion over the next four years. And we’ve seen 
some very significant highway infrastructure in the 
Gravelbourg-Lafleche area in my riding, and it was great to see. 
 
In finances, you look at Saskatchewan as now a have province 
with a sound record of financial management, and we are a 
AAA rating. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to touch on resource development. We are 
seeing new potash mines being built in this province at K+S 
near Bethune and BHP in LeRoy. We have seen more than 
25,000 new oil wells drilled in this province since 2007. We’re 
seeing a helium plant being built in Mankota. Mr. Speaker, all 
this development has added to the tax base of rural 
municipalities that helps to address their needs for new 
infrastructure and provide thousands of new jobs. Mr. Speaker, 
even in depressed oil prices, there were approximately 1,900 
new wells drilled in this province in 2015. 
 
I want to talk a little bit about agriculture, which is very near 
and dear to my heart, Mr. Speaker. And the Sask Party has 

made agriculture a priority with increased funding in ag 
research at the U of S and many changes to improve crop 
insurance, introducing an affordable livestock insurance 
program, finding new markets globally to see our agriculture 
products grow in value. We’ve seen record exports of 
agriculture products reaching over $15 billion, surpassing our 
government’s growth plan of 15 billion by 2020. As a farmer 
myself, Mr. Speaker, this is great news. 
 
[12:15] 
 
I want to talk about the graduate retention program, Mr. 
Speaker, something that is very near and dear to me. The 
Saskatchewan government introduced the graduate retention 
program where upon post-secondary grads can receive tuition 
rebates of up to $20,000 if they choose to live and work in 
Saskatchewan after graduation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this was an important program to my daughter. 
Our daughter used this program, which really assisted her and 
her husband, Darrel, where they bought their house four years 
ago and have also started a family. And we’re blessed with two 
great granddaughters, Lily and Olivia. Our son, Mr. Speaker, 
who took his medical degree as a doctor at the U of S, also is 
planning to return to Saskatchewan to practise medicine upon 
completion of his residency in Calgary. Once again, Mr. 
Speaker, this government is finding ways to make sense to keep 
our children and grandchildren close to us in this great province 
of Saskatchewan. And now they have the ability to access up to 
10,000 for the down payment on a house. 
 
These are many reasons, Mr. Speaker, why I wanted to run for 
the Sask Party. And I lived and farmed in this province all my 
life and I’m not leaving. And I want to do everything I can that 
our children and grandchildren never want to leave either. 
 
I want to touch on one thing that is very near and dear to my 
heart, Mr. Speaker, before I wind it down, and I do want to talk 
about STARS. I want to thank the Sask Party government for 
bringing STARS to Saskatchewan and not reinventing the 
wheel, but going to STARS and asking them to expand to this 
province. 
 
It was their presentation at a SARM convention a few years ago 
that brought forth the resolution to ask RMs [rural municipality] 
to make a voluntary contribution of up to $2 per capita. Mr. 
Speaker, that resolution has resulted in RMs contributing more 
than $1.3 million into the STARS fund. It shows us how 
important rural Saskatchewan values STARS and does their 
part to ensure its viability. And every year, Mr. Speaker, SARM 
has a . . . and STARS do a presentation at the convention where 
they have a survivor speak of the importance of STARS. And it 
is very important to us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has always stood up for interests 
in Saskatchewan, and we continue to do just that. 
 
Too often in recent years, misguided dogmatists have been 
attacking many of Saskatchewan’s most important industries. 
There are people in this country who don’t like that we in 
Saskatchewan take advantage of our vast natural resources to 
provide our country and the world with the food and the fuel 
and the fertilizer we need to grow. They wish to shut down 



May 19, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 63 

major parts of our economy and put thousands of hardworking 
Saskatchewan people out of work because they believe in some 
ill-conceived notion that these jobs are somehow bad for our 
country. We will never hesitate to stand up for our province and 
our economy by telling those people just how wrong they are. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing I just want to say, I want to thank you 
for allowing me this time to speak on the Throne Speech. I am 
supporting the Throne Speech as is presented, Mr. Speaker. 
Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Steele: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am honoured and 
humbled, the opportunity to represent the constituents of 
Cypress Hills during this 28th sitting of the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to take a moment to recognize some 
of the people who, without their help and support, it would have 
not been possible for me to be here today. First and foremost, I 
want to thank my wife, Phyllis. She is an amazing woman, has 
been with me every step of the way since my nomination and 
throughout the election period. My wife and three children have 
been my strength and encouragement. I would like to sincerely 
thank them for supporting me and being by my side throughout 
it all. 
 
I’m also very thankful for my campaign team for all that they 
did and all the time that they have given for our campaign. I am 
humbled by their generous support to me and to our province. 
They went above and beyond and I would not be here today 
without them. I can never express my sincere gratitude to the 
constituents of Cypress Hills who have given me this 
opportunity to represent them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would now like to address my constituency in 
which I have the pleasure to represent. The Cypress Hills has a 
very strong and diverse economy. Even during this time of 
economic challenge, the Southwest continues to diversify and 
grow strong every day. We have so many precious natural 
resources produced throughout the region, including crude oil, 
natural gas, and now helium. In the agriculture industry, the 
cattle producers are going strong and the grain producers have 
kept their great west rail and grain elevator system operating 
strong. 
 
As a direct result of our government’s goal to have our power 
supply supplied by 50 per cent renewable by 2030, the Cypress 
Hills region has seen an influx of companies looking at the area 
to erect wind turbines for power and generation. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, it is not all work and no play in the 
Cypress Hills. Tourism attractions are plentiful in the 
Southwest, some of which include the National Historic Site of 
Fort Walsh; dino country at Eastend, proud home of the T. Rex; 
festivals; rodeos; parades; fairs; and camping in many of our 
regional parks. 
 
All of these sectors — energy, agriculture, tourism, and 
renewable resources — all require extensive support from local 
services to ensure that projects get completed and their tourism 
destinations are successful. In the Southwest, we have many 
constituents with entrepreneurial spirits to develop and provide 

these services. Some of these new and expanding businesses 
include Fauser Energy Inc., Welltraxx Ltd., Crazy Cowboys 
Instrumentation, Millenium Land, Cypress Hills Winery, and 
the list goes on and on. These successful companies provide 
services to the industry and employment opportunities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of our sectors, including tourism, will only 
flourish under this government as we have strived to grow 
through private and public partnerships. As a government, we’ll 
provide these people and businesses the tools and support they 
need to grow and be successful. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will also continue to keep our economy strong. 
We will consult with the industry on establishment of new and 
growth tax initiatives. This new tax incentive is designed to 
create jobs and investments by our advantages and tax 
advantages, rates for the commercialization and patents and 
copyrights here in the province. 
 
Saskatchewan’s strong and diverse economy will continue to 
attract new investments. Currently a number of companies have 
announced new major investments and expansions within 
Saskatchewan, such as Crescent Point announced a capital 
budget between 950 million and 1.3 billion in 2016, with most 
of this money expected to be committed to Saskatchewan; 
Husky Energy, with more than 1 billion invested in 
Saskatchewan related to the heavy oil thermal project creating 
approximately 90 full-time jobs and 50 construction jobs; Weil 
Group Resources, 10 million at the helium facility; K+S Legacy 
Mine, a 4.1 billion projected; RII North America, with 60 
million enhanced oil recovery operation; BHP Billiton, 20 
million to establish a carbon capture storage knowledge centre 
with SaskPower; Revera, 75 million in retirement community, 
creating 300 jobs during the construction and 150 permanent 
jobs when completed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, highways are identified as an important aspect of 
the undertaking. This government will keep our promise to fix 
more highways through the 70 million surge in highways repair 
and maintenance over the next three years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will also continue to move forward on many 
important projects such as schools, hospitals, long-term care 
facilities using both traditional funding and P3s. These 
important investments by the ministry and the Crowns will total 
3.6 billion this year and a record investment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a child growing up in this province and living 
in rural communities like Gull Lake, I have learned that one of 
the main things that tie the people of this province together is 
their work ethic and their commitment to their families and 
their communities. 
 
I am proud to call Saskatchewan my home and am happy to see 
change in attitude in its people knowing that together we are 
great. Together there are great things that lie ahead. We have a 
quality of life here in Saskatchewan that is unparalleled to 
anywhere else in Canada. From an abundance of natural 
resources to our people, and everything between, Saskatchewan 
is simply the best place to live. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we will make Saskatchewan the best place to 
live, work, and invest as we will do this with action. As stated 



64 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2016 

in the Speech from the Throne, we will take the action to 
sustain growth and opportunity to address affordability issues 
and maintain a competitive tax royalty regime to improve our 
quality of life and to assure we remain responsible, trustworthy, 
and accountable to the people of the province. We are a 
government of action and a government with focus to keep 
Saskatchewan strong. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize Saskatoon Riversdale.  
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise today to provide a response to the Throne Speech. I want to 
start by congratulating all members in the House. As we all 
know, it is quite something to put your name on a ballot and ask 
people to support you and your party, and so to everybody here 
on both sides of the House, congratulations on a job very well 
done. 
 
I also want to recognize the two members . . . or the Sask Party 
candidate and the Liberal candidate, Marv Friesen and Robert 
Rudachyk, who worked very hard. In fact Robert Rudachyk, the 
Liberal, was knocking on my door on the Sunday at 6 o’clock 
before the election, so there was lots of hard work done. So 
congratulations to everyone. It’s no small thing to be able to do 
that. 
 
I have to say, Mr. Speaker, that I was so incredibly proud to be 
part of the team of New Democrats that ran in this last election, 
a historic team in fact. Mr. Speaker, there were more than . . . 
more than half of us were women. And we had a huge diversity 
more reflective of the makeup of this province than has ever 
been seen on a team. 
 
And I would be remiss if I didn’t say thank you to our former 
leader, Cam Broten, for making that happen. He was committed 
to diversity from the time that he ran in the leadership, Mr. 
Speaker, and we have a caucus of half women, Mr. Speaker, 
because of Cam Broten’s leadership. So I’d like to say thank 
you to Cam for the work that he did ensuring that. He 
recognized that diversity around decision-making tables is 
absolutely imperative and I’m quite excited about being part of 
this team, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to say thank you to the people of Saskatoon Riversdale. 
Riversdale has been my home for much of my life, and actually 
my family’s home. My dad, when they moved from the 
homestead, in fact moved to that constituency and he’s been 
there pretty much ever since, Mr. Speaker, from a little boy. So 
my grandparents were there, and my parents chose to build a 
house in Holiday Park when it was a new neighbourhood, and 
they’re still there. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud to call 
Holiday Park and the constituency of Saskatoon Riversdale my 
home. 
 
There are so many people in the constituency who I’ve known 
over the years. It’s funny, when you door knock, you meet 
people who you went to high school with, who you went to 
elementary school with. The one thing that I notice about my 
community is that those of us who grew up there, many of us 
have come back which is kind of neat. So it’s great to see so 
many people I’ve known for so many years. And over my years 
as an MLA, continue to get to meet so many of the wonderful 
community builders and folks who call that constituency home. 

[12:30] 
 
I need to thank the team who’s helped get me elected and 
provided me much needed support, Mr. Speaker. When I really 
needed . . . Actually, this was a tough election campaign for me. 
My dad broke his hip four days into the campaign. My parents 
actually have always been more support to me than I to them, 
and they’re in their 80s, 83 and 84 respectively. And now the 
tables have turned a little bit. But my team have provided me 
support: Lily, Vanessa, Judy, Dianne, Tracy, Grant, Ted, all the 
volunteers who door knocked, made phone calls, brought food, 
put up signs, all those things that I know all of us here really 
appreciate. Those are the things that keep us going, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
My family, I’ve spoken just briefly about my parents. As 
someone who was elected when her daughter was one, Mr. 
Speaker, some of you have seen Ophelia or know Ophelia, my 
now 8-year-old. And an 18-year-old, Mr. Speaker, I have an 
adult child living in my house which is the strangest thing. But 
my youngest daughter was one when I was first elected so she 
doesn’t really know life any different than her mom being an 
MLA. And as such, I’ve needed a whole team of people to 
support me to be here, Mr. Speaker. And as I said, part of that 
team is my parents. 
 
But I come from a big family. I’m the youngest of seven and 
it’s really been my sister Michelle and her husband who have 
been a huge support for me, both when I’m in Saskatoon and 
have events, but also when I’m here in Regina. My sister is a 
pretty amazing person and I’m very lucky to have her, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
My parents, my parents are the reason that I’m here involved in 
politics. I grew up in a political household. My parents were 
both community activists and they were partisans as well. They 
were New Democrats. But the one thing they always taught all 
seven of us growing up is your job . . . But political parties 
reflect values. Political parties have values. Our job growing up 
is to learn about those values, political parties, find out where 
our values match and get involved in that political party. And if 
there’s something you don’t like, you need to fight to make 
change, Mr. Speaker. My parents taught me that. They live that. 
Not only did they say it but they lived it. And I’m grateful for 
not only the support that they’ve provided me over the years, 
but I’m thankful that I had that kind of upbringing, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I have to say thank you to some extended family, my 
neighbours, Anita and Graham Langford. Anita was a former 
city councillor in Saskatoon and is a good family friend and is 
my neighbour. And when my dad broke his hip, all heck broke 
loose in my house. And sort of emotionally, there were some 
concerns about how my dad would fare. But also just the 
logistics of taking care of my dad in the hospital, making sure 
he was okay, making sure my mom was okay, and making sure 
my immediate family was okay, my two kids. And Anita and 
Graham . . . For the duration of the campaign, Anita Langford 
fed my family and I for the whole campaign. And I can tell you, 
much better food than I ever feed my kids, so they were 
incredibly spoiled and very sad to have the campaign come to 
an end. So again, it’s those kinds of things that keep us going on 
those long days of campaigning. 



May 19, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 65 

So all those people have played a part in getting me here, in 
having the privilege to serve. One of my favourite quotes, and I 
actually haven’t been able to find the origin of the quote, but 
it’s, “Leadership is about submission to duty, not elevation to 
power.” And I think that that is really what this is all about for 
all of us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I humbly take on my role as part of Her Majesty’s Loyal 
Opposition. And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, we will hold this 
government to account as that’s our job. But we will continue to 
propose, as we have done throughout the last session, and 
provide solutions, and not just oppose government actions. So I 
look forward to that, Mr. Speaker, to have the opportunity to 
continue to do that. 
 
To that end, I’d like to get down to the real work of this speech. 
It’s always challenging, whether it’s a Throne Speech or a 
budget, to know exactly where you want to put your focus, and 
obviously on this side of the House we have critic 
responsibilities and that’s a logical place. But I can tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, that it’s sometimes hard to narrow the focus in our 
allotted time. There’s so many things to talk about. 
 
So I think I’m going to start framing this conversation . . . I 
think it’s easiest to start the discussion about talking about the 
finances, Mr. Speaker. One of the themes of this government’s 
Throne Speech is keeping our strong finances. That, Mr. 
Speaker, is ironic as this is a government who in just a few 
short weeks from now will be tabling their sixth deficit budget 
out of nine budgets, Mr. Speaker, six deficit budgets in the 
sunniest of economic times. They’ve drained the rainy day 
fund. They have not put a single cent away. And I think as a 
mom of two kids, that’s one of the things that drives me most 
crazy about this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A country like Norway since about 1992 has put $1 trillion 
away in their sovereign wealth fund for when those times when 
oil drops or when resources are no longer available, they can 
rely on their sovereign wealth fund. This government has 
drained the rainy day fund. They have not created a sovereign 
wealth fund, and they have racked up debt and have run six, it’ll 
be six out of nine deficits, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you know, honestly, Mr. Speaker, services, as the Health 
critic I can tell you services . . . People tell me day in and day 
out that services have not improved, despite the government 
having the record revenue that they have had. As a parent of 
kids who attend schools in Saskatoon, I can tell you, speaking 
to other families I hear about the challenges in education. 
Coming from a family where there are three educators in my 
immediate family, I can also tell you the many stories that I 
hear about under-resourced classrooms, overcrowded 
classrooms. Those kinds of stories are regular table 
conversation in my house, and I hear it from all kinds of people. 
 
But I think the reality is, despite having lots of money, one 
should not simply throw money at a problem. That isn’t the 
issue here, Mr. Speaker. One should not simply throw money at 
a problem. One should make good investments. That’s what 
good governance is about, Mr. Speaker. It’s about making good 
investments. 
 
And as the Health critic, Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk about 

good investment in health care. Health care is really where we 
need to make good investments. We had the minister yesterday 
in a scrum pointing out some fairly obvious things that I don’t 
disagree with him. The reality is baby boomers are starting to 
retire. We have an aging population that will have some impact 
on our health care budget, and the minister pointed out that we 
have to be ready for that. And he also pointed out that each year 
we’re being asked to do more for people, and we need to be on 
the right path to make sure we can deliver what we need to 
people. 
 
I couldn’t agree more with the minister, Mr. Speaker, but I 
would disagree about the path he’s chosen to get there. Health 
spending is approximately half our health care budget, so how 
do we reduce some of that spending or at least make sure that it 
isn’t growing exponentially, particularly with the challenges 
that health care with an aging population is going to face? 
 
So I would like to talk about some good investments. Can you 
imagine in a time of prosperity, if the government would have 
spent money in a real and meaningful way on some of these 
issues, the decreased cost to the system rather than dumping 
money into something like lean? 
 
So you think about something like poverty reduction. The real 
costs of poverty are often coming from the social determinants 
of health: making sure people have housing, Mr. Speaker, 
making sure people have education, making sure people have 
good jobs. Could you imagine if $40 million that they spent on 
John Black would have actually been spent on poverty 
reduction? The number that I hear cited quite often: every dollar 
spent on poverty reduction will yield you $2.00 in savings down 
the road in health care savings, justice, social services, all those 
kinds of things. 
 
So think about what this government could have done in the 
sunniest of times in reducing health care costs by making sure 
people had what they need to live healthy lives. And think 
about what that would have meant for the health and well-being 
of people, Mr. Speaker. Not only is it about financial costs but 
it’s also about costs that people face in their daily lives of not 
fulfilling their potential, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So a couple of days ago, the Premier had some comments to say 
about transformational change, not just in health care but in 
education. He said this is going to be a cross-ministry thing that 
they need to look at transformation. Well in health care, Mr. 
Speaker, he also said that this is something he — this is 
paraphrasing — he said that it’s time for us to engage with 
Saskatchewan people and stakeholders in health care, 
education, social services, corrections, and ask them if there are 
opportunities for substantial and major changes. And he said we 
shouldn’t look to the budget to specifically announce immediate 
changes. We want to engage. We want to look at that. 
 
Well I would argue that in health care that conversation has 
been going on for several years. The Canadian Medical 
Association, the national nurses organization, several other 
organizations have been engaged in that health care 
transformation discussion. Patient First, one could argue, is part 
of health care transformation. 
 
So I just want to talk a little bit about what a health care 



66 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2016 

transformation strategy or some principles around health care 
transformation. This is from the CMA [Canadian Medical 
Association] document, Assessing Progress on Health Care 
Transformation: 2010-2014, from May 2014. So some of the 
principles are best health care which means it should be 
patient-centred, improving the patient experience by building a 
culture of patient-centred care across all levels of the system. 
 
Another principle is quality. Under best health care, increase the 
delivery of “services that are appropriate for patient needs, 
respect individual choice and are delivered in a manner that is 
timely, safe, effective and according to the most currently 
available scientific knowledge.” I know from my experience as 
the Health critic, Mr. Speaker, that there are many people who 
don’t feel like they’re getting health care in a timely fashion, 
whether it’s waits for specialists, waits in the ER [emergency 
room] — and I’ll talk about some of this in a few minutes, Mr. 
Speaker — or actually even growing waits in surgeries, and I’ll 
talk about that in a moment as well.  
 
But I’d like to talk about some of these principles. Another 
principle is best health. So that’s about health promotion and 
prevention, increased supports to Canadians to prevent illness 
and enhance their well-being. I could argue and I would argue 
that this government could do a far better job. I think about 
anti-smoking legislation, Mr. Speaker, and the opportunity to 
improve it. There are many organizations who’ve brought really 
positive ideas forward about improving the health and 
well-being of Saskatchewan residents. We haven’t done what 
we need to do around health promotion and health prevention. 
 
Another big piece which is near and dear to my heart, Mr. 
Speaker, is health equity: “Improve equitable access to quality 
care and strengthen advocacy for multi-sectoral policies to 
address the social determinants of health.” So when we talk 
about health equity, I can tell you in my constituency I have 
people who can’t access home care because they live in my 
community, Mr. Speaker. Because of their postal code, they 
have trouble accessing even home care. There’s doctors writing 
a recommendation for home care and because of where they 
live they cannot access home care. And that’s throughout the 
province, Mr. Speaker, that there are people who do not have 
access to the necessary health care that they need. 
 
We had a case today from Preeceville, a six-year-old boy who is 
anaphylactic and he carries two EpiPens but would need to be 
treated within 20 minutes of the exposure to the allergen. And 
by not having a doctor and emergency services in Preeceville 
anymore, this little boy’s life may be in jeopardy. So the reality 
is we haven’t done . . . this government hasn’t done the work 
that they need to do on improving equitable access to quality 
care and strengthen advocacy. 
 
The piece around strengthening advocacy for multi-sectoral 
policies, Mr. Speaker, that is all about addressing social 
determinants of health. That’s all about addressing housing. 
That is about addressing education. That’s about addressing 
child care and jobs. And again this is a government who has an 
anti-poverty strategy that isn’t really a strategy. Someone who 
worked on developing the recommendations, Dr. Ryan Meili 
actually, when this government quietly . . . They’re all . . . 
 
[Interjections] 

Ms. Chartier: — Actually it’s funny that I’m hearing some 
rumbling over there. This is the government that actually put 
Dr. Ryan Meili in their Throne Speech two years and were quite 
proud of that, Mr. Speaker. But Dr. Meili has been less than 
impressed with this government’s anti-poverty strategy as have 
many people who work in . . . as with many people, Mr. 
Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, a quote from The StarPhoenix: 
 

“If you look at what constitutes a poverty reduction 
strategy, if you look at experts in the field and what they 
say has to be in there, we don’t have one,” he said. 

 
So Mr. Speaker, an anti-poverty strategy again is something that 
would go a long way to reducing health care costs, a real 
anti-poverty strategy, Mr. Speaker, with targets and designated 
expenditures, not fobbing them off into the future. When there’s 
money, Mr. Speaker, we might invest in domestic violence 
programming, Mr. Speaker. Those kinds of things cannot wait 
until today, especially when we have some of the rates — I’m 
just thinking domestic violence in particular — especially since 
we have some of the rates that we have, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[12:45] 
 
So some of the things that Dr. Meili and others talk about 
actually, the anti-poverty strategy . . . But one thing I’d like to 
propose for this minister to think about and this government to 
think about is a health-in-all approach to creating public policy, 
Mr. Speaker. So it’s recognizing that health . . . So you can talk 
about prevention and promotion for one individual, Mr. 
Speaker. So get someone to stop smoking. That’s great and that 
is useful. But the reality is it does little to change the underlying 
drivers of health like income, education, and employment. 
 
So we need an anti-poverty strategy, and this government 
should be adopting a health-in-all policy across government. So 
whether it’s transportation or education, whatever policy is 
being implemented, Mr. Speaker, should be done with a lens of 
health in mind. How does this legislation, how does this policy 
impact people’s overall health? That needs to happen, Mr. 
Speaker. Other jurisdictions are moving in that direction and 
that would go a long way. 
 
So this is a government, when they had record resources could 
have made a huge difference in reducing health care costs by 
investing in the right things, Mr. Speaker. And it becomes even 
more imperative at this time when oil is low and many of our 
other resources are being challenged, Mr. Speaker, that we 
make smart investments. And this is a government who just 
doesn’t seem to think that investment in anti-poverty is the way 
to go. The rest of the world seems to think that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Study after study shows this, including one from last month, a 
local study actually. Dr. Cory Neudorf at the U of S points out 
that most health inequalities have either seen no change in 
recent years or are getting worse in our sunniest of days. So 
people, even though that there’s been more money in this 
province, our health outcomes have not gotten better. Those 
health inequalities actually have seen no change or they’ve 
gotten worse in recent years. 
 
And that’s front and centre for me in the community that I call 



May 19, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 67 

home, Mr. Speaker, the community that I have the privilege of 
representing. It’s both the right thing from a financial and a 
moral perspective to invest in poverty reduction. Again, every 
dollar spent will yield two in savings down the road. 
 
I hear stories around what a poverty reduction strategy would 
do. So some of the stories that come in my office . . . Just this 
past year we worked with a mom who had seven kids. She 
moved to Saskatoon to have a fresh start and go to school. She 
struggled to find housing, Mr. Speaker. It was a huge challenge. 
And not everybody I work with has seven kids, but I work with 
many people who struggle finding housing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In my constituency, there are multiple families living in homes 
meant for a single family. The speed of illness, the lack of 
privacy, so . . . Or the spread of illness, sorry. So when so many 
people are living in close proximity, any of us who have 
children all know that children are little germ spreaders when 
they come home from school. But when so many people are 
living in close proximity, people are ill more often. 
 
There’s a lack of privacy when you’ve got multiple families 
living in a single dwelling home. And for example, kids who 
have the inability to study, or you have so many people living in 
a home and so many pressures, so people couch surf. Even with 
families, families couch surf, going from home to home. 
 
So how do you put roots down in a community? How do you 
keep a kid, a child in one school consistently for a year to build 
bonds with teachers and get the best possible education? It 
makes it so hard for kids, that housing piece. 
 
I have constituents who are trying to manage diabetes and a 
diabetes diet on a low income. The lack of access to child care 
becomes a real problem for some people trying to get to work, 
especially those who are working in lower wage jobs in some of 
the vulnerable sectors. 
 
Tim Hortons. If Tim Hortons opens at 6 and you are supposed 
to start at 6 and your child care isn’t available until 7 or 7:30, 
it’s a real problem. And that is a problem for many people I 
speak with, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I worked with a family a couple of years ago who received the 
employment supplement. Both parents were working. One of 
them was a day home provider, and one of them worked as a 
caretaker. The dad had received a slight increase in his income. 
I think it was . . . He got a raise which . . . We should all be 
excited about getting a raise. It was a modest raise, probably 
accounting to the total of about $25 a month. But you know 
what happened with that raise, Mr. Speaker? It bumped them 
out of being able to receive the employment supplement. And 
the employment supplement itself wasn’t the big deal, but it 
was the employment supplement makes you eligible for family 
health benefits. And the father was diabetic, the mother had 
fibromyalgia and some other challenges, the kids had some 
health issues. So losing those family health benefits really made 
a difference. 
 
And this government hasn’t made . . . They’ve made changes. 
They’ve pulled families out of the employment supplement. I 
believe it’s those families over the age of 12. Forgive me, I 
might have that number wrong, but I believe it’s those children 

over 12 now are no longer eligible for the employment 
supplement. That was a change made in last year’s budget. I can 
tell you as having an 18-year-old in my house, it’s those 
families who have the older kids that have some real financial 
challenges. So that was not a smart move. 
 
People, as I’ve said earlier, people who don’t get home care 
because of where they live, so what they end up doing is 
showing up, presenting at the ER to have a bandage changed or 
at the ER because things have gotten worse for them, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So a poverty reduction strategy and using a health-in-all policy 
would make a big difference. And as I said, I think everybody 
else around the world and in Canada is realizing that. That 
would be a smart investment, Mr. Speaker. And instead this 
government is refusing to do that. 
 
I think about this Throne Speech and some of the pieces that are 
missing. I talked, Mr. Speaker, about health care 
transformation, some of the principles, best health care, best 
health, and best value. So we’ll wait and see for the budget. So 
we’ll be up having this conversation here again in a few weeks. 
 
But the things that I’ve talked about—being patient centred, 
quality health promotion and prevention, health equity, 
sustainable, and accountable — some of the things that I’ve 
heard rumblings and we’ll hear in the budget about what 
transformation looks like, is the possibility of reducing the 
number of health regions. If that’s what the government thinks, 
that would fall under accountability — strengthening the system 
accountability through good governance, responsible use of 
resources, public reporting, enforcement, and innovation. That’s 
a part of that piece, Mr. Speaker. But you can’t just . . . There’s 
no one issue in this world that has a silver bullet. There are 
many parts and pieces to fixing a system that is under stress, 
Mr. Speaker, and I would argue that this government has not 
taken that big-picture view. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’ve talked about the need about poverty 
reduction and using a health-in-all policy for the reason, again, 
this is a government who had lots of money, lots of resources 
available, didn’t make those transformational changes at this 
time, and now it becomes even more important, sort of that 
overall picture. But I want to talk about a few individual pieces. 
 
So in this Throne Speech, we hear about a committee that’s 
going to be struck on organ donation — and the minister 
actually read the bill today — which, as the Health critic, I 
suspect it will likely be me as one of the members on that 
committee from this side of the House. We’ll wait and see from 
our leadership here. And I’d be very happy to serve on that 
committee. I lost a friend about four years ago, Mr. Speaker, 
because she didn’t get a timely lung transplant. She did end up 
getting a lung transplant, but she’d already progressed so far in 
her illness that her body was weak and she passed away. So it’s 
quite near and dear to my heart, Mr. Speaker. So I will be 
grateful to sit on that committee. 
 
But I do know a year ago we had The Human Tissue Gift Act 
before us and in that bill . . . I’m assuming that the government 
did some consultation and did some legwork prior to that bill. 
When you open up a piece of legislation, I guess you should 



68 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2016 

never assume anything, Mr. Speaker. But so this government 
would have done or should have done some serious and 
meaningful consultation before bringing that bill forward. So 
you’d think a good chunk of this work is already done. But 
again I will happily hear evidence from all kinds of people, 
stakeholders, people who know this much better than I do. 
 
But I want to point out that the one thing, when I did my 
consultation and due diligence on this bill, the one thing that I 
heard from people who work in organ donation and transplants, 
the one thing that would really, really help improve our organ 
donation rates is hiring donor physicians. They’re called donor 
physicians. And people who work in this area had asked for 
four donor physicians, two in Saskatoon and two in Regina. So 
these donor physicians would likely be intensivists and they 
wouldn’t be full time in this role. But what their role would be, 
to educate their colleagues about donation. Their job would be 
to review any missed opportunities on a case-by-case basis and 
find out how we can do things better. 
 
Ontario has been using donor physicians for many years, and I 
understand that they’re increasing the number of donor 
physicians that they have. Because death, Mr. Speaker, is 
awkward and often what happens is physicians are 
uncomfortable having that conversation with families. So these 
donor physicians are outside of the circle of care and (a) can 
have some of those conversations, but can also support their 
colleagues to be able to do that more effectively. 
 
One of the things I’ve heard from people is that really the ask, 
and having trained professionals being able to do this, is a huge 
part of increasing the number of donors that we have here, Mr. 
Speaker. So as I said, I’ll happily sit on this committee. 
 
But I would like . . . And I’ll have an opportunity to ask the 
minister in estimates, post-budget, but from what I understand 
there aren’t any donor physicians. But I look forward to having 
the opportunity to have that conversation with them, as that was 
one of the recommendations: start with four and then expand to 
other health regions as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
ER wait times. I think when we talk about ER wait times, we 
look at the commitment that this Premier made in 2012 to end 
ER waits by March 31st, 2017. What has ended up happening is 
the government has walked away from that commitment in the 
2014-15 annual report. So the reality is, if any of us have visited 
an emergency room in Saskatchewan, we would know that 
we’re nowhere near no wait, and in many cases, there are very, 
very long waits. 
 
There are stories . . . Actually just last year the overall wait 
times have not gotten better, according to the Ministry of 
Health’s own annual numbers. But if we can look in 2015, and 
in four health regions in . . . Sorry. In 2014-2015, more than 
18,000 patients registered but left without seeing a doctor. And 
those aren’t people who maybe just have an earache, Mr. 
Speaker. Some of those were . . . So more than 1 in 4 
semi-urgent patients left the ER without being seen, and 3 in 10 
patients assessed as non-urgent left the ER, and more than 1 in 
10 patients left without being seen. So the reality is you think 
about those 1 in 4 semi-urgent patients leaving the ER without 
being seen. What happens then? So they go home either to get 
sicker and end up having to come back to the ER or they 

self-medicate, which can sometimes make matters worse, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I think we’ve all heard scary ER stories, and as the Health 
critic, I hear those on a regular basis. One that just happened a 
few months ago, Mr. Speaker, a woman who was 15 weeks 
pregnant went to the ER at noon on Saturday. She was finally 
seen by a doctor at 4:30. He took some blood, checked her 
vitals, gave her Tylenol and Gravol, and sent her home at 
around 6. 
 
She came back at 11 o’clock that night feeling worse. So she’s 
pregnant. At this point in time she’s 15 weeks pregnant. She 
calls her midwife, and her midwife tells her, get back to the 
hospital; it sounds like it’s your appendix. So she went back to 
the hospital that night, at 11 o’clock at night, and lay on a 
stretcher in the hallway all night long. The night shift doctor ran 
more tests and said her white blood cells were higher than they 
were earlier, but they could only try to keep her comfortable 
until the morning because they couldn’t do an ultrasound. They 
don’t do tests. Some of those tests don’t happen overnight, Mr. 
Speaker. So she was on morphine for pain. 
 
In the morning at 9:30, she was finally taken for an ultrasound 
and they discovered that her appendix had been perforated and 
was leaking. So a woman who’s pregnant, who’s lied all night 
on a hospital bed, is very sick. She needed immediate surgery 
and was finally taken to the OR [operating room] at 2:30. She 
slept on that stretcher for two nights. She spent her nights on 
that stretcher throwing up. Awful story. 
 
And those are not uncommon stories, Mr. Speaker. Not 
everybody feels like they can come to the legislature and share 
those stories, but I’m sure we have all heard those stories, Mr. 
Speaker. So ER waits, this government has certainly not 
improved ER wait times. 
 
Surgical wait times. So this is an area in which the government 
had made some progress, and I have commended them on that 
progress in the past. But the reality is that they have gone 
exactly the opposite direction. So I would argue that their 
progress . . . They talk about their progress being made because 
of innovation. I would argue the progress they made was 
because they threw lots of money at an issue. So when you pay 
for surgeries, you can do more surgeries, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what has happened since then? Starting on March 2015, wait 
times for surgeries have . . . Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, what has 
happened since March of 2015? When the surgical initiative 
ended, wait times for surgeries across the province started 
increasing. So those waiting more than three months, the 
number of people waiting over three months for their surgeries 
has tripled in just 11 months. In Regina, the amount of people 
waiting more than three months for surgery has increased by 
285 per cent in a year. 
 
The member from Moose Jaw who always shouts, what are you 
talking about, I’m talking about his record, Mr. Speaker, his 
record, his government’s record on surgeries. So they made 
some progress. The one thing on which they made progress in 
in health care, they’ve gone exactly the opposite direction. It’s 
very . . . 
 



May 19, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 69 

The Speaker: — It now being 1 p.m., this Assembly stands 
adjourned until Tuesday at 1:30. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Eyre .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 41 
  Sarauer ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 41 
  Moe ............................................................................................................................................................................................... 41 
  McCall ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 41 
  Wyant ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 42 
  Steinley ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 42 
  Michelson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 42 
  The Speaker ................................................................................................................................................................................. 42 
  Docherty ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 43 
  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................... 43 
  Lambert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 54 
  Forbes .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 55 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 42 
  Forbes .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 42 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Outstanding Literacy Program Award 
  Rancourt ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 43 
 Benefits of Genetically Engineered Crops 
  Kaeding ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 43 
 Mackenzie Infant Care Centre Celebrates 30th Anniversary 
  Beck .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 44 
 Sexual Assault Awareness Week 
  Lambert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 44 
 Ahmadiyya Muslim Jama’at Celebrates 50th Anniversary in Canada 
  Olauson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 44 
 Missing Children’s Month 
  Eyre .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 44 
 International Education Strategy 
  Wilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 45 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Wildfire Management 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................... 45 
  Wall .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 45 
 Global Transportation Hub 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................... 45 
  Wall .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 46 
  Sarauer ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 46 
  Wyant ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 46 
 Rural and Remote Health Care Services 
  Chartier ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 47 
  Ottenbreit .................................................................................................................................................................................... 47 
 Tabling of Budget 
  Sproule ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 48 
  Doherty ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 48 
  Wall .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 49 
 Sixties Scoop and Government Conversations with Interest Groups 
  Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 49 
  Harpauer ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 49 
MOTIONS 
 Organ Donation Rate in Saskatchewan 
  Duncan ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 50 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Forbes .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 50 
  Steinley ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 54 
  Kaeding ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 57 
  Marit ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 61 
  Steele ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 63 
  Chartier ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 64 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


