






















































Hansard: May 31, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 8A  TUESDAY, MAY 31, 2016, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Hon. Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Hon. Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Merriman, Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 51; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Maurice Riou http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 215 
 May 31, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
University. 
 
Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask for 
leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from Regina 
University. 
 
Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have two 
introductions to make while I’m on my feet. To you and 
through you and to all members of the House, I would like to 
introduce you to my Saskatchewan legislative program intern, 
Ms. Marie Digney. Can you just maybe give a wave, Marie? As 
part of her internship, Ms. Digney has already had the 
opportunity to work with the opposition member from 
Saskatoon Nutana and now will spend the next six weeks 
working with me. I am very excited to have the opportunity to 
work with her. 
 
Ms. Digney is a very accomplished young lady. She graduated 
at the top of her class from Luther High School in the IB 
[international baccalaureate] program. She has also received not 
one but two degrees from the U of R [University of Regina], a 
Bachelor of Education and a Bachelor of Arts with distinction, 
Mr. Speaker. She is fluently bilingual, a vocalist and musician, 
and a former officer with visitor services here at the Legislative 
Assembly, so she can help me not get lost. I am very proud and 
privileged to work with such a promising young woman. I ask 
all members to join me in welcoming Ms. Digney to her 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to introduce all members to 
grade 8 students from the Regina Christian School, and their 
teacher, Mrs. Jane Robertson, who are visiting us today from 
my constituency and are seated in the west gallery. Good, 
they’ve got the wave down. I would also like to introduce 
Tysen Cross and his educational assistant, Wade Robertson, 
who are seated here on the floor of the Chamber. I’m looking 
forward to spending time with them after question period today. 
Please join me in welcoming the students and their teachers 
from Regina Christian School to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I too 
would like to take this opportunity to acknowledge Marie 
Digney who was my intern before the House was sitting. And 
we had a short time together before the election. That kind of 

got in the way of our normal length of time that we work with 
the interns. But in that short period of time I found her to be 
very resourceful, very intelligent, very hard working, and very 
responsive to all the research requests that I had. So again on 
behalf of the official opposition, I would like to welcome Marie 
to her Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Westview. 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Mr. Speaker, can I ask for leave for an 
extended introduction? 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Westview. 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you I 
would like to introduce the Legislative Assembly to a few 
people. Karen Buckingham, my wife of 32 years, is in the 
gallery. Karen is here to hear the budget to be delivered 
tomorrow. Please help me welcome Karen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to introduce my intern, Maeve 
McLean. Maeve is a part of the SLIP [Saskatchewan 
Legislative Intern Program] program and will be working with 
the Saskatoon Westview constituency office for the next six 
weeks. She’s a fourth-year student at the University of 
Saskatchewan. Please help me welcome Maeve to her 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to welcome Cameron Scott. Cam 
works for Corrections Canada and was my e-day [election day] 
Chair on April 4th. Please help me welcome Cam to his 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to rise in my place to welcome, in your gallery, Jeff 
Hryhoriw of Cameco Corporation. 
 
Just to point out that Cameco Corporation is a great company 
doing wonderful things in the North, and Jeff’s part of the staff 
that complements the many efforts that many northerners 
appreciate. So once again, Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, 
I want to welcome Jeff Hryhoriw of Cameco to the Legislative 
Building today. Welcome, Jeff. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar-Sask 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, it’s a pleasure to welcome three guests in the west gallery, 
Kandis and Jamie Brandrick. Jamie was the candidate for us in 
Saskatoon Nutana, so welcome. 
 
And with them, I’d like to introduce their friend, Gurpartap 
Kals. He is a gentleman who was born in India. He has a 



216 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2016 

passion for politics, and I understand he helped Jamie quite a bit 
and he’s going to soon become a Canadian citizen. So please 
join me in welcoming them to the legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Carlton. 
 
Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, I would like to 
introduce Conrad Burns, sitting in your gallery. He’s a 
constituent from Prince Albert. 
 
Conrad is walking across Canada to raise awareness about 
domestic violence and abuse. On Friday, Conrad completed the 
Saskatchewan leg of his journey when he arrived here at the 
legislature. Mr. Speaker, I’ll have more to say about Conrad and 
his Rise Up Walk to End Violence during members’ statements 
in just a few minutes. I ask all members to join me in 
welcoming Conrad to his Legislative Assembly. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to you and through you to all members of the Legislative 
Assembly, I am very pleased to welcome 16 grade 7 and 8 
students from Gladmar Regional School in Gladmar, in my 
constituency. Mr. Speaker, they are accompanied by chaperones 
Ron Hoffart and Laura Hoimyr and, Mr. Speaker, as well their 
teacher, Chris Abtosway. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’ve been spending the day here in Regina, 
toured the legislature earlier this morning, and I had an 
opportunity to meet with them. Mr. Speaker, later this afternoon 
I think they’re going to be going to the Science Centre and the 
IMAX. In fact I think they invited me to go with them, and 
depending on how question period goes, I might be joining 
them on the tour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to mention their teacher though, Chris. 
Mr. Speaker, Chris certainly has a heart for young people in our 
province. He began his educational career I believe in northern 
Saskatchewan teaching at La Ronge and other communities, 
Mr. Speaker. And I first got to know him in residence at Luther 
College when we were both in the University of Regina, and 
maybe that’s as far as we’ll go with that, Mr. Speaker. And so I 
would ask all members to help me welcome these students from 
Gladmar Regional School. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you, through 
you, and to all the members of the Legislative Assembly, I’d 
also like to welcome Conrad Burns to this Legislative 
Assembly. Conrad is a Northcote constituent but also he is a big 
social advocate in the city of Prince Albert. So I’ve worked 
with Conrad for a lot of different organizations and such, and 
right now he is bringing awareness to domestic violence which 
we all know is a big issue in Saskatchewan. I really appreciate 
all the hard work that he’s doing to bring awareness, not only in 
our province of Saskatchewan but in the country of Canada. 
And like the minister across said, he just finished his leg in 

Saskatchewan and he’s working on walking across Canada. 
And again I truly appreciate all the work he’s doing to address 
domestic violence. So I’d like other members to also join with 
me to welcome him to his Legislative Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
proud to stand in my place to present a petition as it refers to 
protecting the wetlands: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the Government of Saskatchewan to: increase funding to 
do the proper inventory work, putting Saskatchewan in a 
better position to manage the resource instead of the 
piecemeal approach that has been going on for the last 
couple of decades; speed up the evaluation of high-risk 
watersheds where there’s significant damage annually from 
flooding, and also to alleviate some of the issues 
downstream with respect to nutrient loading; and third [Mr. 
Speaker], to create a sound and transparent mitigation 
process that focuses on avoiding the harm, then 
minimizing the harm before compensating for the harm. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is a very important issue for the 
people of Saskatchewan. And the people that have signed this 
petition and many other pages are primarily from Saskatoon. 
And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to present a petition 
to the Legislative Assembly presented on the topic of the 
community pasture program and native grasslands. The 
concerns are about the transfer of the community pasture 
program under the Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Act in the 1930s 
to restore marginal lands subject to erosion and manage them 
for livestock grazing. This land is being transferred to the 
Saskatchewan government which has offered some of these 
pastures for sale. So the prayer reads as follows: 
 

They respectfully request the Government of 
Saskatchewan to halt the sale of public land with 
ecological value including Crown lands that, until removed 
by recent order in council, had been protected under The 
Wildlife Habitat Protection Act; conduct a complete 
inventory of our remaining native grasslands; create 
legislation that recognizes the value of our remaining 
native grassland; protect native prairie, including 
monitoring and enforcing conservation easements 
preventing the breaking of these lands. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Saskatoon. I so 
present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
University. 
 



May 31, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 217 

University of Regina Professors 
Recognized for Excellence 

 
Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
honoured to rise in the House today to congratulate five 
professors and former colleagues from the University of 
Regina. All five are known for their scholarly innovation and 
dedication to their field of study and teaching excellence. That 
is why Dr. Gordon Asmundson, Dr. Raymond Blake, Dr. Alec 
Couros, Dr. Gerhard, and Ms. Kelsey have been honoured with 
Excellence Awards from the University of Regina Alumni 
Association. 
 
There is no need to look elsewhere for examples of high-quality 
and innovative educators, Mr. Speaker. They are right here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I have personally benefited from the pioneering work of Dr. 
Couros on integrating technology and technological 
applications, and have often watched his Twitter chats with 
educators who follow and engage with him from all over the 
world. And I cannot stress enough how important Ms. Kelsey’s 
work on the Man Up Against Violence campaign is. Though I 
do not have any personal experiences with the work of Dr. 
Asmundson, Dr. Blake, and Dr. Gerhard, I can say their 
reputations precede them and they are loved by many, many of 
the students at the U of R, both past and present. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 
five exceptional educators and thanking them for their 
commitment, not only to their students but to the entire 
province of Saskatchewan which we mutually all serve. Very 
well deserved. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Prince Albert Educator Receives 
Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal 

 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to 
recognize Jeannette Eddolls of Prince Albert. Jeannette was one 
of the recipients of this year’s Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal 
at the ceremony held at Government House on April 26. 
 
Jeanette is a retired teacher, principal, and administrator in the 
Saskatchewan Rivers School Division. She teaches reading to 
adult learners, is a council member of St. Michael Church 
parish, and volunteers with the food bank and the women’s 
shelter. She is the Saskatchewan regional manager for Global 
Partners, working with Japanese students. She teaches part time 
at SUNTEP [Saskatchewan urban native teacher education 
program] and at First Nations University. 
 
Jeanette created and administers the Operation Christmas store 
at St. Michael Community School. This is a store consisting of 
donated items from which children, many of them from 
low-income families, can purchase Christmas presents for a 
very low price. She is the board Chair and very active board 
member of Catholic Family Services. 
 
[13:45] 
 

Mr. Speaker, Jeannette received the 2014 Prince Albert Citizen 
of the Year Award. As well she was named Woman of 
Distinction by the Prince Albert YWCA [Young Women’s 
Christian Association] in 2005 and was named administrator of 
the year by the Saskatchewan Council for Exceptional Children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Jeannette Eddolls has contributed so much to the 
community of Prince Albert and is most deserving of this 
recognition. I ask that all members join with me in recognizing 
Jeannette Eddolls’s contributions and extending congratulations 
on being the recipient of the Volunteer Medal. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Carlton. 
 

Rise Up National Walk to End Violence 
 
Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Friday 
Conrad Burns arrived here at the Legislative Building after 
walking across Saskatchewan for the past two weeks. Conrad, 
who’s from Prince Albert and has joined us in the gallery today, 
is walking across Canada to raise awareness about domestic 
violence and abuse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this cross-Canada trek, named Rise Up National 
Walk to End Violence, began on April 1st in St. John’s, 
Newfoundland. Over the past two months, Conrad has walked 
over 2700 kilometres from St. John’s to Ottawa and from La 
Ronge to Regina. He averages about 50 kilometres per day, and 
he tells me he’s gone through five pairs of shoes so far. 
 
On Wednesday Conrad will visit Parliament Hill in Ottawa 
before resuming his westward walk. He plans to finish in 
Victoria, BC [British Columbia] sometime in mid-August. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Conrad notes that one in four women and one in 
six men in Canada have suffered from some form of abuse. He 
himself was once stuck in an abusive relationship. Conrad says 
that for a time he didn’t even realize that the relationship was 
abusive because the abuse was emotional, which can be harder 
to recognize than physical abuse. These are some of the reasons 
why he wants to bring more awareness to the issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
Conrad on completing the first 2700 kilometres of his journey 
and wishing him the best during the remainder of his walk. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Saskatoon YWCA Women of Distinction Awards 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to take a moment to 
recognize an important awards dinner I attended on Thursday, 
May 26th. The YWCA in Saskatoon held its 35th annual 
Women of Distinction Awards Dinner honouring the 
contributions and accomplishments of 55 amazing and inspiring 
nominees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce the winners: Jeanette Lynes 
in the category of arts, culture and heritage; Muriel Gieni in the 
athletics category; Maria Jane Linklater for community 



218 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2016 

building; Daphne Taras in the education category; Chantal 
Hounjet for entrepreneurship; Leah Ferguson for health and 
wellness; Peta Bonham-Smith for leadership and professions; 
Lalita Bharadwaj in the category of research and technology. 
Devon Fiddler won the under 29 category, and Maureen Reed 
of the University of Saskatchewan’s School of Environment 
and Sustainability was honoured with the YWCA’s Lifetime 
Achievement Award. 
 
The Women of Distinction Awards is a celebration of women 
making a big impact in our community as well as an important 
fundraiser for the YWCA’s essential community programs 
helping thousands of people thrive. All of the nominees’ and 
recipients’ contributions and accomplishments are very 
inspiring as they set high standards and provide leadership for 
us all. We all benefit from their hard work, expertise, and 
passion for what they do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 
award winners, the Saskatoon YWCA board, and organizing 
committee on their 35th annual Women of Distinction Dinner 
and also in thanking them for all of their contributions to our 
province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm River. 
 

Davidson Residents Travel to Costa Rica 
With Operation Christmas Child 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you. I want to take the time today to 
speak about the generosity of two Davidson residents, Dave and 
Colleen Spelliscy, people I’m privileged to represent. 
 
In early May of this year, the Spelliscys, along with others, 
travelled to Costa Rica to give shoeboxes filled with toys, 
games, and other gifts to underprivileged children. This project 
is headed by Samaritan’s Purse. Donors from Canada and other 
countries fill these shoeboxes with various gifts which are given 
to the children by volunteers that travel to Costa Rica. 
 
Dave and Colleen have been filling these shoeboxes themselves 
for the past few years and decided that this year they were going 
to travel with the Samaritan’s Purse to give the boxes to the 
children in person. 
 
They were part of a team of volunteers that visited several 
churches and schools, giving about 400 shoeboxes during their 
time in Costa Rica. In addition to the shoeboxes filled with 
gifts, they also handed out 100 pairs of shoes to the children. 
 
As well, Colleen brought with them knitted dolls which were 
handmade by the volunteers in Davidson and Elbow. These 
hand-knitted dolls were given to the children under two years of 
age. 
 
Although this is the first time the Spelliscys have travelled to 
deliver the shoeboxes in person, they indicated that it definitely 
would not be their last. They were able to see first-hand the 
excitement and joy these children had in opening their 
shoeboxes and discovering the surprises inside. 
 
I’m proud to represent the Spelliscys and would like all 
members to join me in thanking Dave and Colleen for their 

efforts to help the children of Costa Rica. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Canora-Pelly. 
 

Breakfast Café in Preeceville Wins Bursary 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A few short years ago 
in Preeceville, a school breakfast program aptly named 
Breakfast Café started with a few boxes of cereal and toast for a 
couple of students, and is now serving a wholesome breakfast 
for about 40 students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a great community program, but today I 
wanted to specifically congratulate them on being the recipient 
of a $10,000 bursary from Mosaic Extreme Makeover 
Challenge. 
 
Mosaic, in partnership with the Breakfast for Learning and the 
Saskatchewan School Boards Association, have been helping to 
provide breakfast for the school students in Saskatchewan for 
the past 10 years. We started as a small effort by a few parents 
and some staff from the Preeceville School . . . has grown. They 
have added a dishwasher, a fridge, and trolleys to the home 
economics lab where hot and cold breakfasts are served each 
day. Mr. Speaker, the community is totally behind this program 
with service clubs, parent volunteers, staff volunteers willing to 
pitch in. This hard work ensures that all students have 
nourishment that they need to get through the day, starting at 
breakfast. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the members to join me in 
congratulating the Breakfast Café on receiving the Mosaic 
award, as well as thanking the sponsors and volunteers and the 
staff of the school for helping provide nutritious breakfasts for 
students. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 
 

Yorkton Film Festival Golden Sheaf Awards 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On 
Saturday I joined the Lieutenant Governor; the Minister of 
Parks, Culture and Sport; the member from Melville-Saltcoats 
at the 69th annual Yorkton Film Festival Golden Sheaf Awards. 
 
This is the longest running film festival in North America and is 
an event the Yorkton community looks forward to each and 
every year. The evening was hosted by my former schoolmate 
Alvin Law, now an internationally recognized author and 
inspirational speaker. Alvin has also done some acting and was 
featured on an episode of The X-Files years back. I should 
mention, Mr. Speaker, that Alvin has been able to achieve all 
this even though he was born with no arms. 
 
The event continues to attract local, provincial, and national 
filmmakers, industry members, enthusiasts, each and every 
year. The festival features more than 100 nominations in 23 
categories, highlights how popular this event is for the industry. 
The Golden Sheaf Award has become a symbol of excellence in 
Canadian short film and is a coveted award for many Canadian 
filmmakers. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan supports the festival in 



May 31, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 219 

several ways, through Saskatchewan Arts Board, SaskTel, 
funding from artsVest Saskatchewan, and the Ministry of Parks, 
Culture and Sport. Our government supports the film and 
television industry through Creative Saskatchewan and, since 
its inception, Creative Saskatchewan has invested more than $6 
million into the industry. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I thank all the businesses and private 
sponsors as well as the city of Yorkton for the support of this 
great event. I also congratulate winners and nominees and wish 
continued success to volunteers and organizers in the future. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Government’s Fiscal Management 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday when asked 
about why he was scrapping an affordable, effective, and 
important education program, the minister said that it was 
because of a surprise $1 billion shortfall caused by falling 
commodity prices — a surprise, Mr. Speaker. Now I don’t 
know, maybe the minister only gets his news from the Sask 
Party leaflets or TV ads or the Premier himself, but in a news 
flash, commodity prices have been down for a long period of 
time. It’s obvious that the budget was going to be much worse 
than that Premier has been pretending. That’s why he 
shamefully hid it from Saskatchewan people during the last 
election. 
 
Let’s remember, this is the government that came into office 
and picked up a massive surplus, a rainy day fund nearly $2 
billion, but they blew through it during the best of times when 
oil prices were high on their mismanaged projects. Piled on 
debt, in fact $5 billion of debt in the last term alone, and now 
the cupboards are bare. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the Premier tell us why he refused to tell the 
true state of the economy, the budget, and his mismanagement 
to the people of Saskatchewan and obviously also his cabinet? 
Why did he hide the truth? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I completely reject the 
premise of the hon. member’s question. The member will know 
that just prior to the election campaign, the full third quarter 
report of the Government of Saskatchewan’s finances was 
released. Mr. Speaker, it not just provided for an updated status 
of the province’s finances but also a forecast as to the next 
period of time in terms of what the forecasters were saying with 
respect to our budget, the revenue, and expenditures. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would also share with this, these facts with 
the hon. member. He references the historical facts of what was 
in place when we were first elected in 2007, and then answers 
as his predecessor did. The previous leader of the opposition 
would always ask this question, and did during the campaign. 
But he’s no longer here, Mr. Speaker, because here’s, in part at 
least I think, because here’s the answer: $2.7 billion in 
operating debt paid off by this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

Double . . . We took that debt inherited from the previous 
government, paid off $2.7 billion off of that big orange credit 
card that was inherited, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve doubled the infrastructure investments in eight years. 
One point two billion in health, that’s were the money went. 
One billion dollars to finally repair roads. And the member for 
Athabasca, who’s yelling from his seat, was the Highways 
minister. He was good at talking about highways, but never 
fixed any. Since we were in government, $1 billion to fix those 
highways, and more to come tomorrow in the budget. And I 
look forward to the next question from the hon. member. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Funding for Education Infrastructure 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, every Saskatchewan 
person knows that that Premier hid the budget from 
Saskatchewan people. They also know where the money went 
— obscene waste on project after project after project that that 
Premier mismanaged. And you know, that sort of 
mismanagement has real consequences for Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
In fact the Minister of Education was asked yesterday about a 
facility failure drill to help students, teachers, and staff escape 
their school if it falls apart. Mr. Speaker, a school boards report 
shows that 75 per cent of school roofs could fail in the next five 
years. The minister brushed that off. He said schools should 
contact the ministry or use their PMR [preventative 
maintenance and renewal] funding. And of course, Mr. Speaker, 
they’ve thought of that, but the PMR funding is only $31.6 
million, and our schools need $1.5 billion in needed 
infrastructure funding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again their math just doesn’t add up. Would the 
minister consider sitting in a math class or two? And frankly the 
Minister of Finance and Premier should join him as well; I think 
there they’ll find that their math is less stable than the schools 
that they’re neglecting. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m glad that the Leader of the 
Opposition has referenced questions raised by his Education 
critic yesterday in this House, in terms of the drill that was 
occurring in Saskatoon’s schools. 
 
Here are the facts, Mr. Speaker. The fact of the matter is that 
Saskatoon Public held an emergency drill to teach students how 
to respond in the event of a boiler explosion. As a former 
trustee and the critic that asked the question is a former trustee, 
now the member for Regina Lakeview, she should know that 
this drill happens on a routine and regular basis. Her former 
school division, her former school division, the Regina Public 
School Division, has a policy for such a drill entitled 
Administrative Procedure 170, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now would be a good time for the Leader of the Opposition in 
his next question to explain why his Education critic, who was 
also a trustee on the school division, is trying to hype a routine 
drill as some sort, of some sort of problem with respect to 



220 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2016 

government capital. Because here is the truth, Mr. Speaker. 
Where did the money go over the last eight years? Well I can 
inform members of the House that, in addition to the list that 
I’ve just read, this side of the House has built 40 brand new 
replacement schools in the province of Saskatchewan, 25 major 
school renovations, Mr. Speaker, finally money for PMR. 
 
When we were first elected in ’08, there was nothing left by 
members opposite for basic maintenance of schools. That has 
also changed. It is a far cry from the days when members 
opposite closed 176 schools in this province. This issue was 
featured in the general election decided on the 4th of April. And 
I’d say based on the seats in this House, people have made their 
choice, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the Premier for his 
recognition, and certainly as a former trustee, I do recognize 
and understand the consequences of chronic underfunding in 
education in this province. And the minister continues to brush 
off these concerns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday he was quoted as saying that this is a 
sign of the times. We now have drills for terrorist attacks. Mr. 
Speaker, the only terror here is the risk of roofs collapsing, 
walls falling over, and pipes bursting. I need to add to it, Mr. 
Speaker, 499 schools are on the provincial asbestos registry. 
Undisturbed, Mr. Speaker, that’s less of a concern, but take the 
Rosthern Elementary School for example. It has a sinking 
structural pad that according to one report is “causing large 
gaps in the walls and concerns of plumbing line failure.” The 
same documents note that the Rosthern High School is 
“leaking, rotting, and in danger of collapse.” 
 
Pretty clear, Mr. Speaker. We all know that asbestos is only 
harmful if it is disturbed, but what does the minister think is 
happening with these gaping walls and collapsing roofs? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m glad that this issue 
came up again. I’d like to give the member opposite the ability 
to withdraw the nature of the question that she asked yesterday. 
What she did yesterday, by having posed that question, was put 
a fear factor in students that was unnecessary and improper, and 
something that a member who was a former member of the 
Regina Public School Board should not have asked. It is a 
question that she should apologize for. The preamble to that 
question clearly was done with the intent of putting a fear and 
an unnecessary fear in students and in parents in our province, 
and I’d like to give her the opportunity to withdraw that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, she also raised the issue . . . And I heard the 
Leader of the Opposition talking about how much money we 
put into preventative maintenance and repair, and he talked 
about $25 million in preventative maintenance and repair. Mr. 
Speaker, under the NDP [New Democratic Party] for 
preventative maintenance and repair — zero. Zero each and 
every year — zero, zero, zero. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that we talk about 
fear because there is fear in the education sector right now. 
After being forced to wait and stress for months, tomorrow 
school boards will finally find out what the Sask Party’s 
transformational change will mean for our kids. Mr. Speaker, 
just two months ago the Minister of Education said that he 
wouldn’t cut school divisions. Now he’s suddenly calling for 
transformational change and questioning the number of school 
divisions and saying, “We’re not taking anything off the table.” 
Mr. Speaker, how did the minister flip his position so quickly? 
If his excuse is the drop in commodity prices, can he explain 
how he didn’t see this coming two months ago when it had 
already happened? 
 
Mr. Speaker, in a news release yesterday the Saskatchewan 
School Boards Association called for the government to engage 
and collaborate with locally elected school boards about their 
plans. Why has the government refused to communicate and 
work with these people running our schools about their plans 
for so-called transformational change in education? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about 
transformational change because we want to make sure that we 
have the most effective use for our tax dollars. We’ve made a 
major investment in our schools in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the last year that the NDP were in office, the 
last year, their total investment in capital — their total 
investment including new capital, preventing maintenance, 
everything else — was under $3 million. Under $3 million, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Under this government, since ’07-08 we have spent on capital 
$966 million; 40 new schools, including the nine joint-use 
schools; 25 major renovations and additions. The budget year 
allocation last year was the highest in history, some $248.5 
million. Mr. Speaker, the members opposite want to talk about 
new schools. I’ve got a long list. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Support for Education in Northern Communities 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. There’s 
still no clear answer on what transformational change is going 
to mean for teachers and students in Saskatchewan. The 
minister won’t rule out forced amalgamation of school divisions 
and you won’t rule out government appointments of school 
board trustees. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, northerners have fought tooth and nail for 
decades to ensure northern and Aboriginal input and control 
over northern education. The Ile-a-la-Crosse School Board, 
Creighton, and Northern Lights School Division are working 
hard to help First Nations and Métis to ensure that classrooms 
include our culture, our language, and our heritage. This 
government has not been able to enhance Aboriginal 
participation in schools, and the last thing our teachers and our 



May 31, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 221 

students need is the Sask Party telling them how to run and do 
their jobs from a distance. 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, this is very important. Will the 
government commit to allowing the people of the North to keep 
control in the hands of northerners and maintain the 
independence of our northern schools? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I want to advise the public 
— and I met with members of the SSBA [Saskatchewan School 
Boards Association] earlier today — collaboration and 
consultation is something that’s absolutely critical to us. We 
have every intention of going through a thorough, detailed 
consultative process. We look to them as education partners, 
and we want to make sure that we do adequately consult and we 
hear from them. We need their input. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is from the North. I 
appreciate and respect where he comes from, but I want to 
reassure him that northern education is something that’s 
absolutely important to us. We have made significant 
investments in our budget for First Nations and Métis 
initiatives, and I want to just list a few of them, Mr. Speaker: $6 
million for recommendations of the joint task force; $3.8 
million for First Nations- and Métis-specific initiatives in 
school divisions; $600,000 for summer literacy camps targeted 
primarily at remote northern communities; $500,000 for a 
community literacy fund which goes to organizations such as 
North Central Family Centre. Mr. Speaker, I have more if the 
member has more questions. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party is failing 
Aboriginal people at many steps: off-reserve First Nations, 
Métis people living in Saskatchewan have the lowest literacy 
and numeracy rates in the country. Only about 60 per cent of 
First Nations and 26 per cent of Métis people living in 
Saskatchewan have sufficient numeracy skills. Does the 
minister think this situation is acceptable? Northern 
communities need more support and input to educate our youth, 
not less. Why has the Sask Party government not made this 
more of a priority? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly agree with the 
member opposite that our current outcomes for First Nations 
graduates are not what it should be. Since we have formed 
government, Mr. Speaker, the First Nations graduate in our 
province has gone from a little over 30 per cent to just over 40 
per cent — a step in the right direction, but a long ways from 
where it should be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re working with our First Nations partners. For 
the first time in the history of our province, we have an 
invitational shared-service initiative to provide on-reserve 
schools with the same supports to students and teachers that are 
available at all provincial schools. We’ve set targets, significant 
targets, to increase the outcomes for First Nations and Métis 
students. We’ve created Following Their Voices, a 

made-in-Saskatchewan initiative designed to improve First 
Nations and Métis student outcomes by engaging and 
supporting students through changes in student-teacher 
relationships and interactions. Mr. Speaker, we have more 
things. If the member has more questions, I’d be pleased to 
provide more information. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

Provincial Funding for First Nations and 
Métis Education 

 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, the government’s trying to 
defend their record on this, but these low literacy and numeracy 
rates translate into less access for the job market, and that hurts 
everyone in Saskatchewan. Refusing to properly fund education 
has resulted in the Sask Party’s abysmal record when it comes 
to First Nations and Métis graduate rates. Last year just 40 per 
cent of First Nations and Métis students got to celebrate 
graduating from high school, Mr. Speaker. 
 
For all the rhetoric and the talk of their 2020 goals in the growth 
plan, this Sask Party government hasn’t done very much. 
Graduation rates have only increased by an anemic 1 per cent a 
year. The government’s own goal of 85 per cent by 2020 would 
be laughable if the reality wasn’t so tragic and damaging to our 
economy and our society. 
 
Ministry officials call this a grave concern. Will the minister 
acknowledge that they’re failing the students miserably? Will 
he admit that they have done little, and without a significant 
change, they will fail to reach their 2020 goals? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you one thing that 
we won’t be doing and that’s taking lessons from the members 
opposite. The members opposite were in government for 16 
years. During that time, they never set a target. They never 
made a commitment; they never met a commitment. They never 
made any progress in this area whatsoever. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are bold enough to set a target. If we’re not 
meeting that target, we will make changes and, Mr. Speaker, it 
is our goal to meet that target. We are on track to meet that 
target. And, Mr. Speaker, when that one’s met, we’re going to 
set another one that is higher. And we’re going to continue until 
the First Nations and Métis people in our province are able to 
share fully in the wealth, prosperity, and growth of our 
province. 
 
These are people that we owe a debt of gratitude for letting 
them share our province with them, and we want to make sure 
that we do everything we can to make sure that they are well 
educated and fully able to participate in the growth of our 
province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Federal Funding for First Nations Education 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the condescending and 
arrogant approach of ministers opposite and government 



222 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2016 

opposite is absolutely a disgrace, Mr. Speaker. Serious question 
after serious question about tragic circumstances, and we hear 
brushing off and dismissal of these very serious concerns, a 
government unwilling to act and address what are very tragic 
disparities in this province. 
 
So let me try another item that doesn’t cost the province a dime. 
Mr. Speaker, the federal government has promised to close the 
disgraceful funding gap for students in First Nations schools. 
They may follow through on their own, but they haven’t yet. If 
the Premier puts forward the necessary funding, I will join him 
in bringing the bill to Ottawa and ensuring that they pay. This is 
a historic injustice that must be fixed. 
 
So my question’s to the Premier, pretty simple: will he stand up 
for Saskatchewan people? Will he work with us to hold the 
government accountable to their promise and to their treaty and 
constitutional responsibilities or will he refuse to act and give 
these kids more cheap rhetoric? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to make sure I 
have this right. I think it’s the counsel of my friend, the Leader 
of the Opposition, that we would move to fill the gap that does 
exist in terms of on-reserve First Nations education and what 
we provide for students in the province of Saskatchewan, that 
we would do so unilaterally and hope that the federal 
government would then pay the province back. I think that’s 
what the hon. member is suggesting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would just caution him, and all of us I guess, to 
think very carefully about this. We now have a new federal 
government that in their campaign platform and in their 
campaign commitments indicated that they will close the gap, 
that they will provide the funding. So, Mr. Speaker, this is why 
when I met with the Prime Minister, I guess a few weeks before 
this session began, I raised this issue. I congratulated them for 
campaigning on it, encouraged them to keep the commitment. I 
have every expectation they will do just that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think the first step is that we should join 
together and work together — and I welcome his offer — to 
make sure they keep that commitment because we know this: as 
the provinces have moved into federal jurisdiction in terms of 
on-reserve funding, the federal governments of all different 
stripes have been happy to walk away from that obligation to 
the point where it might become unsustainable. And I don’t 
think that’s what any of us would want. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, let’s work together to make sure this federal 
government in the near term keeps its promise to eliminate that 
gap that they say exists before we would move forward with 
some sort of a unilateral measure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Reaction to SaskPower Rate Increases 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday when asked about the 
consequences of the Sask Party’s job-killing carbon capture tax, 
the Premier put rhetoric over facts. The facts are the Sask Party 

dumped one and a half billion dollars into their carbon capture 
fiasco and burned tens of millions with the smart meter debacle. 
 
So now cash-strapped and deep in debt, SaskPower is being 
asked to hike up rates again by 5 per cent in a month, and then 
again 5 per cent six months later. Now we’ve heard from 
farmers and business owners that these two hikes will hurt them 
and they may have to cut jobs, but the Premier was dismissive. 
Now I have the letter he was referring to and it clearly says that 
they are “very concerned.” So will the minister admit that the 
Premier should not have dismissed those concerns, and that that 
letter is no retraction at all? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, we would never be dismissive 
of business owners or farmers in this province when it comes to 
rates for SaskPower, or anything else for that matter. They are 
the very people who elected us in this legislature, and we take 
their views very, very seriously. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the facts of the matter are that since 2007 when we 
formed government, there are 60,000 new customers here in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and it is projected over the next 
number of years that there will be 82,000 more customers for 
SaskPower. We will need about 2000 megawatts of power in 
the future of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When this government took over office, we were about $1 
billion alone in SaskPower lacking in terms of infrastructure as 
a result of the actions of the NDP, Mr. Speaker. And as a result 
of that, and the investment that SaskPower has made — $1 
billion year after year after year without stripping dividends to 
the extent that the NDP did — we now, Mr. Speaker, find 
ourselves in a position where we are looking at increasing 
power rates to meet that demand going forward. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the dismissiveness of this 
minister over the concerns that are being raised about these 
incessant rate hikes is alarming actually. Maybe the minister 
didn’t actually read that letter. The company says that they are 
so very concerned about the increases that they’ve actually been 
discussing them with SaskPower and the government. So what 
is the nature of those conversations, Mr. Speaker? Is it, as has 
been reported, that they are trying to get an exemption from 
those increases? 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what about the people of Saskatchewan and 
the families? The Sask Party failures have pushed SaskPower 
into so much trouble that they need these increases. So if Paper 
Excellence wants . . . gets to avoid the rate hikes, and the 
Premier wants to keep trying to pick winners and losers, who’s 
going to have to pick up the slack? Is it Saskatchewan 
businesses? School boards? Hospitals? Farmers? Mr. Speaker, 
is it Saskatchewan families that will once again pay the price? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Economy. 
 



May 31, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 223 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, Meadow Lake Mechanical 
Pulp was so concerned about the way this story was printed in 
the P.A. [Prince Albert] times herald that they put out a release 
with respect to it. And as a result of that, they said that the 
media took out of context their comments. Paper Excellence 
does not have any plans for layoffs, Mr. Speaker. So for the 
member to fearmonger and suggest to the people of 
Saskatchewan that Meadow Lake Mechanical Pulp is looking at 
layoffs, this simply isn’t the truth at all, Mr. Speaker. And I 
think the member opposite knows that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It reminds me back a number of years ago in Saskatchewan. 
The NDP, when they were in charge of SaskPower, they had a 
program, Mr. Speaker, where they went around the province of 
Saskatchewan. They contracted with a company out of Alberta, 
I believe it was. They went around and they had an instrument 
where they tested poles. They tested the soundness of the power 
poles here in Saskatchewan. Then they put a great big red X on 
a power pole if it wasn’t sound any longer, Mr. Speaker, and 
they also checked the headframe of those power poles, Mr. 
Speaker. And unfortunately what’s happened since then, it was 
so long ago that the paint has weathered off to the point where 
we can’t even tell any longer. And now the people in our area of 
the province call them NDP poles — hollow in the middle and 
not a darned thing in their head. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, it’s very rich listening to this 
scandal-plagued minister go on and on and when he’s not 
dealing with the questions that are being tabled here today. 
 
Here’s the letter from Simon Imray to the employees from 
Meadow Lake. It’s been tabled by the Premier, and here’s what 
it says: “Paper Excellence is very concerned about the increase 
to the power price and has been discussing this with SaskPower 
and the provincial government.” 
 
The question is, what exactly are they discussing? Are we again 
talking about winners and losers here? Who’s going to pay for 
this and what’s in discussion with Paper Excellence? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — The opposition critic and the Leader of the 
Opposition said that there would be significant layoffs, but the 
people from Mechanical Pulp say that is not the case, Mr. 
Speaker. The member knows it very, very well. 
 
The media took out of context her comments. The media . . . 
Paper Excellence does not have any plans for layoff here in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And the fact of the matter is, is 
they don’t have plans for layoffs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Clearly they understand the challenges that SaskPower has in 
this province. That’s why they’ve invested hundreds of millions 
of dollars in this province. That’s why businesses are expanding 
here in Saskatchewan. That’s why we have some 82,000 clients 
coming up that want to deal with SaskPower in the future and 
not have anything to do with the NDP. 
 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, in accordance with 
subsection 7(6) of The Election Act, 1996, I hereby table a 
report from the Chief Electoral Officer regarding actions taken 
during Saskatchewan’s 28th general election. 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I caution the members . . . I caution the 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 9 through 24. 
 
The Speaker: — The Whip has tabled the questions from 9 to 
24. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 15 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2016 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of The Provincial 
Court Amendment Act, 2016. As you know, Mr. Speaker, The 
Provincial Court Act, 1998 establishes the powers, duties, 
procedures for the operation of the Provincial Court here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Part 5 of that Act sets out the process for the review of 
provincial court judges who are the subject of a complaint as to 
their conduct by the Judicial Council. The Judicial Council is 
comprised of representatives from all levels of the judiciary in 
Saskatchewan, as well as members of the bar and government 
appointees under the chairmanship of the Chief Justice of the 
province. 
 
This bill will amend the Act to provide the Judicial Council 
with greater flexibility in the conduct of their reviews of the 
allegations of judicial misconduct and for the remedies that may 
be imposed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this bill will authorize the Minister of Justice to 
directly establish the list of temporary judges, including those 
from other jurisdictions, as recommended by the chief judge of 
the Provincial Court. That list would be published in the 
Gazette. Currently this process requires an order in council. 
 
This bill will also create a notice requirement specifically for 
the appointment of court-appointed legal counsel. Amendments 
to this Act, The Queen’s Bench Act, 1998, and The 
Constitutional Questions Act, 2012 are being proposed to 



224 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2016 

improve consistency in the application of the rules for the 
appointment of court-appointed lawyers. 
 
Finally, broader authority is set out to establish fees through the 
regulations in order to allow for the introduction of further cost 
recovery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Court of Saskatchewan is most 
often the first point of contact for members of the public with 
our independent judicial system. I’m proud of and constantly 
impressed with this hard work and the professional court, and I 
think these changes will further facilitate their very, very good 
work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with that I’m pleased to move second reading 
of The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the Minister of Justice and Attorney General that Bill No. 
15, The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2016 be read a 
second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased once again to stand in my place to give the initial 
comments about Bill No. 15, The Provincial Court Amendment 
Act. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s certainly a learning experience 
sitting here as an MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 
with no legal background to certainly hear and try and 
understand the terminology attached and associated with our 
justice system here in Saskatchewan. I certainly want to point 
out, Mr. Speaker, that for the average citizen like myself, it 
certainly is a learning experience to understand how the 
provincial court system works and how certain Acts are 
intertwined and certainly how the justice system is administered 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So that’s why it’s really important that we tell people that may 
be listening that it is crucial that we do our very best, especially 
a guy like me with limited intelligence and certainly the 
inability to understand the justice system to the extent that I 
should, that it’s important to pay as much attention as we can to 
what is being proposed and what is being changed within our 
justice system. 
 
And we made comments here yesterday about the importance of 
having a couple of things occur within the justice system just 
from the layperson’s perspective. And one is that to try, as I 
mentioned, to try and understand what the changes are about 
but most certainly to try and invite people out there in 
Saskatchewanland that may want to add some information and 
share some of their concerns as it relates to every piece of 
legislative information or updates or changes that might be 
proposed by the Minister of Justice. And while a layperson like 
myself and many others that might be watching this have a 
limited background in law and certainly have a difficult time in 
understanding all the terminology, we know others that can help 
us interpret those definitions and certainly make us much more 
aware of what the intended changes are and the consequences of 
those changes. 
 
And of course the second, more important item is to make sure 
that our justice system operates as effectively, as efficiently, 

and certainly as neutral as we can, but as we all know that 
justice can be improved on an absolute day-by-day basis. And 
anything to improve the system to ensure that we are able to 
deal with the individuals that break the law and those that are 
harmed by those individuals, I believe that it is important that, 
as legislators, that we continue to support that effort to 
streamline and make our justice system more effective, more 
responsive, and of course more independent as time goes on. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, on this particular bill, Bill No. 15, there is a 
number of changes being proposed, and I want to be able to 
explain to people what those changes are from the layperson’s 
perspective. And the first part of the bill itself, it actually takes 
the power to create a list of temporary judges from the cabinet, 
who have that authority, and actually transfers or gives it to the 
Minister of Justice. Mr. Speaker, to a large extent this is 
probably something that we need to pay a bit of attention to, but 
at the first look at this you would assume that there would be 
more autonomy given to the Minister of Justice and less control 
of the cabinet as to who’s appointed, you know, to be a judge. 
That in itself may have some merit, but we need to examine 
how the process worked before and what were the challenges 
attached to that process, but more so, Mr. Speaker, how this 
change may improve our justice system and what particular 
challenges are attached to that process. 
 
So this is what I mean by ensuring that we pay attention to these 
particular bills by saying, what was the system before and 
what’s the system now, and what are the changes, what are the 
dynamics, like all the different particular aspects of what is 
being proposed. We need to examine those and examine them 
as thoroughly as we can. 
 
And this is where it’s important to say, those that have good 
knowledge, a critical knowledge of law — but in this particular 
case, how the Provincial Court works — that if they have 
advice for the opposition, or for the government, you know, for 
that sake, that they are able to participate by simply calling us 
or emailing some of their concerns, or giving us their opinion 
and their input on what the proposed changes are. 
 
So again, Mr. Speaker, it’s really important to look at what the 
process is going to change and what are the dangers attached to 
each of the proposed changes, and what are the opportunities. 
There may be some particular perspective we’re not aware of as 
a result of the changes, where you take the power to create a list 
of temporary judges from the cabinet and gives it to the minister 
himself. 
 
The second part of the bill, Mr. Speaker, talks about the judicial 
council in which the bill allows this judicial council . . . If 
somebody has a particular concern that relates to a judge of 
sort, then they go to this council, Mr. Speaker. And this judicial 
council, made up of judges, they are there to ascertain if there 
was certain activity by any particular judge, whether there is 
cause to be concerned or cause to be a major problem for the 
justice system overall. 
 
And that certainly is a good stopgap measure, Mr. Speaker, in 
the sense of making sure that judges, who are all very 
professional and have years of experience — they’re very 
careful in this regard — that if there is a mistake, if there is a 
slip-up, or if there is, heaven forbid, but a malicious act on the 



May 31, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 225 

part of a judge, that there is the avenue of a peer of his or her 
council to be able to look at the situation and provide discipline 
or certainly provide the appropriate measures to ensure that if 
there was no particular case against a particular judge, that 
they’re also found to be not guilty or certainly not guilty of 
some of the activities that they’re being charged or being 
accused of. And what this does, Mr. Speaker, the second part of 
the bill, it says, allow the Judicial Council to dismiss frivolous 
or vexatious complaints against judges. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s important to know that, again as I 
mentioned earlier, that the language that is used in many of our 
legal systems is certainly a complex language, Mr. Speaker. 
And I always make the connection to the average citizen out 
there. It’s very difficult to understand when lawyers use their 
particular language, which is a very gifted language, but it’s 
much similar to the doctors’ language, Mr. Speaker, where you 
can’t understand half the words and the terminology that they 
use. And certainly, it really confuses a lot of . . . the average 
person out there. 
 
But the perspective of the second part of the bill, where it says 
that the Judicial Council has a right to dismiss frivolous or 
vexatious complaints against judges . . . And the word 
frivolous, Mr. Speaker, for the record, under Merriam-Webster 
dictionary, it has two particular meanings. Frivolous is “of little 
weight or importance” as one interpretation of the word. And 
the second interpretation, Mr. Speaker, is “having no sound 
basis as in fact or law.” So there’s two components of the 
understanding of what the word frivolous is. 
 
So one word, to really put this into the context, it allows this 
Judicial Council to dismiss claims against any judge that has 
little weight or importance, and of having no sound basis. And 
that’s the definition of frivolous. 
 
Now the vexation interpretation, Mr. Speaker, there’s two 
particular parts of the dictionary that explains what vexatious 
actually means. The first one is “causing vexation, distressing.” 
And the second one is “intended to harass.” And when you 
intend to harass anyone or distress anyone, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
generally the interpretation of vexatious. 
 
So you look at some of the important parts of the bill. When the 
minister gets up and points out that this council has the ability 
to dismiss frivolous or no sound basis or vexatious complaints 
which is meant to harass the judges, then they have the ability 
to not hear those cases and simply rule them out of order. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the other part of the bill certainly talks about 
the Judicial Council having one member respond to a complaint 
rather than the whole council. 
 
So I think those changes itself, Mr. Speaker, begs to ask the 
question: will this help make our justice system more 
streamlined? Will this help make our justice system more 
effective? Well, Mr. Speaker, I am not certain if it does because 
one judge deciding another judge’s fate in the case that there is 
some merit or some complaint against him or her, is that better 
than having four or five of their peers that they’d have to appeal 
to or appear in front of? 

This is the part that’s really important, Mr. Speaker. This is why 
these changes within our system have got to be understood by 
as many people as possible. And I don’t know the consequences 
of having one judge on this judicial panel versus four or five. 
Which is the better system? Is one better for the streamlining 
purpose, or is four or five better to ensure that there’s 
independence of our judicial system here in Saskatchewan? 
Well I don’t have that information, Mr. Speaker. I don’t have 
the ability to analyze this, and this is why we reach out to 
people out there that may have that information or may have 
that skill set or may have that experience as a lawyer that’s able 
to give us some of the advice that really gives us a good 
perspective that we’re able to share with the public through this 
legislative process and make sure that our justice system 
certainly is the best it could be. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s also a couple of minor changes. The 
one that’s important right now I want to point out is the change 
in the rules for court-appointed lawyers by introducing new 
restrictions. Now, Mr. Speaker, we don’t know what those 
restrictions are. We need to find exactly what the minister is 
trying to do with that particular part of this bill. So there’s four 
components that we really need to pay attention to. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it is going to be a significant effort by a lot of us to try 
and make sure we follow the changes being proposed in a 
number of Acts — not just this particular Act, but a number of 
Acts and how it impacts the laws of Saskatchewan overall. 
 
So Bill No. 15, The Provincial Court Amendment Act, Mr. 
Speaker, it really has on the face value not a lot of dangerous 
concerns that we can see that jumps out at us. And, mind you, 
again we say so because we are not familiar with the entire 
application of law and the terminology of law and how the 
justice system works, and that’s why it’s important that we 
point out that at face value there may not be many concerns. 
But we don’t know that for certain, and that’s the reason why 
we ask people to participate in this process by giving us advice, 
by giving us information. They could email us. They could 
phone us and they could even text us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These are some of the things that we would encourage people in 
the province of Saskatchewan and associations that might have 
some input or advice for us on this particular bill, and this is an 
important effort that we as MLAs try to undertake, to connect 
with people and to network with people. And that certainly 
gives us a better ability to serve the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, again in summarizing Bill No. 15, The 
Provincial Court Amendment Act, there are three or four things 
that the minister wishes to do, and of course I’ll just quickly 
summarize them. It takes the power to create a list of temporary 
judges from the cabinet and gives it to the Minister of Justice; 
allows the judicial council to dismiss frivolous or vexatious 
complaints against the judges; allows the judicial council to 
have one member respond to a complaint rather than the whole 
council; and finally, Mr. Speaker, changes the rules for 
court-appointed lawyers by introducing new restrictions. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s really important that we ask the 
public out there that if you have any concerns on this bill, we 
will certainly appreciate and value your input and that we 
obviously as an opposition are going to take time to read 
through the bill, look at what is being proposed. And I can 



226 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2016 

assure the people of Saskatchewan we do have two lawyers on 
our team as opposition MLAs, and they certainly have the 
ability to understand the legal interpretations a heck of a lot 
better than I do, Mr. Speaker. But they will certainly have their 
take on it, and they have a network of people that they can also 
connect with to ensure that this system that’s being proposed by 
the minister is not going to be a hindrance or is going to limit 
the power of the court system or justice system to do its job 
effectively and without bias. 
 
So on that point, Mr. Speaker, there are a lot more comments 
we will have on this particular bill, and I move that we adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 15. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has adjourned 
debate on Bill No. 15, The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 
2016. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 16 — The Adoption Amendment Act, 2016 
Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’adoption 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I move that Bill No. 12, The Adoption Amendment Act, 2016 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, section 7(2) of The Adoption Act, 1998 will be 
amended to increase the adoption revocation period for 
independent adoptions and voluntary committals from 14 days 
to 21 days to provide birth parents with additional time to 
consider the impacts of such a life-changing decision. 
 
In 1988-89, Saskatchewan reduced its revocation period from 
30 days to 14 days. The rationale for this reduction was that a 
longer period of time would possibly unnecessarily put a child’s 
future in doubt. The focus has since shifted to the needs of the 
child to remain connected to its birth family and for birth 
parents to have sufficient time to consider this very important 
decision. 
 
At present, only Saskatchewan and Prince Edward Island have a 
14-day revocation period. Alberta allows for revocation up to 
10 days after signing, and Nova Scotia does not permit 
revocation unless the court rules it is in the best interests of the 
child. In British Columbia, revocation must occur within 30 
days of the child’s birth. New Brunswick and the Northwest 
Territories and Nunavut provide birth parents with 30 days after 
signing to revoke their decision. Manitoba, Ontario, 
Newfoundland, and the Yukon provide 21 days. Moving to a 
21-day revocation period will better align Saskatchewan with 
revocation timelines in other provinces and territories. 
 
Secondly, The Adoption Act, 1998 gives the judge the discretion 
to order that a child of any age be interviewed before the court 
to hear their understanding and wishes regarding their adoption. 
The judge may also appoint a third party to interview the child 
and report their findings to the court. These provisions do not 
have any regard for the child’s age, nor do they identify what 

information should be obtained from the child or who should be 
able to file a report with the court. The proposed legislative 
amendments define the age parameters for a child and enable 
the establishment in regulations of guidelines for completion of 
the interview with the child. 
 
The amendments are neither intended to change the practice nor 
to require the completion of a third party report in every 
adoption case. The court currently requests a report only in 
exceptional circumstances, for instance if a birth family 
member objects to the placement and the judge requires a 
child’s point of view to be provided by an impartial report. The 
proposed changes are not expected to increase the number of 
reports required. 
 
The court will no longer be able to interview or order a report 
being completed for a child under the age of seven. However, 
current development theory supports the concept that a child 
under the age of seven does not fully understand abstract 
concepts or the long-term effects of their decisions. 
Caseworkers preparing children for adoption do talk to them 
about their thoughts on adoption and the family with whom 
they are to be placed. This information is documented and 
submitted when an application is made to the court for 
adoption, and the judge would base his decision to grant an 
order of adoption in part on this information. It is felt by 
stakeholders providing feedback on the legislative proposals 
that the age of seven would be an appropriate one for optional 
reports to be ordered by the court. An average of 35 children 
age seven and older are adopted each year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, new section 27.1 will ensure requirements will 
now be the same for children being adopted by Saskatchewan 
residents no matter if the child’s country of origin is a signatory 
of the Hague Convention or not. The Hague Convention on 
prevention of children and co-operation in respect of 
intercountry adoption, known as the convention, safeguards the 
rights of children and birth parents, and is intended to reduce 
incidents of child trafficking or unlawful financial gain. It also 
protects adoptive parents from unknowingly becoming involved 
in illegal practices for which they may become liable. 
 
Countries that are not signatories to the convention are not 
bound by specific agreements regarding international adoption. 
This can lead to unregulated practice, and no legal entity 
ensuring the rights of the children, birth parents, and the 
adoptive parents are being protected. 
 
Canada is a signatory to the convention. In Saskatchewan we 
take our convention obligations very seriously. To this end, we 
propose to strengthen provisions pertaining to intercountry 
adoptions. 
 
New section 27.1 would require the prospective adoptive 
parents of a child from a non-convention country to provide 
evidence to assure the minister that the child was adopted 
according to the laws of the child’s country of origin or the 
country where the adoption occurred. 
 
The assurances include evidence of the termination of parental 
rights and that the consent to the termination of parental rights 
was freely given, that consent was not withdrawn, and the 
decision was not made for financial gain. Evidence of the facts 



May 31, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 227 

relating to the child’s birth, circumstances, and reasons for 
adoption, along with the certified copy of the adoption order 
granted in the child’s country of origin, will also be required. 
 
Manitoba and British Columbia include some provisions 
regarding adoption cases associated with non-convention 
countries. The Hague’s Guide to Good Practice recommends 
that convention countries consider adding such safeguards to 
their adoption legislation. By providing a legislative framework 
for non-convention cases of intercountry adoptions, 
Saskatchewan will minimize potential risks for children and 
their prospective adoptive parents. 
 
Along with these three major changes to The Adoption Act, 
1998, we are proposing several administrative amendments. 
Section 9 is being amended to allow the minister, subject to the 
regulations, to continue assisted adoption benefit payments to 
subsequent legal guardians if a child’s adoptive parents both 
die. Such financial supports will follow the adoptee. Should the 
adoptee be 18 to 21 years of age on the death of their adoptive 
parents, the amendment will permit agreement-making directly 
with the adoptee to continue to support a transition plan. 
 
The amendment also allows the minister to, subject to 
regulations, enter into payment agreements with youth aged 18 
to 21 years directly in support of the youth’s educational and 
vocational plans. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Current regulations allow assisted adoption payments for youth 
aged 18 to 21, but payments can only be made to the adoptive 
parents through their agreement with the minister. We will 
repeal the provision and associated references related to the 
simple adoption orders, section 28. 
 
The provisions for simple adoptions granted outside of Canada 
was introduced in the 1990s prior to the implementation of the 
convention. The requirements for simple adoptions are not 
compatible with the requirements for intercountry adoptions 
and adoptions in general, because they do not require the 
severing of parental ties, and because birth parents who commit 
to a simple adoption arrangement may revoke their consent. 
This creates a risk in an intercountry adoption due to a lack of 
clarity regarding which entity has authority over the affairs of 
the child, and it is not known what would occur if birth parents 
requested the return of their child. 
 
There is little to no documented history of simple adoption in 
Saskatchewan. Cases of this kind can be dealt with under the 
proposed new section 27.1. References in the Act to the family 
services boards, example section 41, are being repealed. Family 
services boards were introduced in The Child and Family 
Services Act in the 1990s. The boards were never 
operationalized, had no impact on adoption legislation, and 
similar references in The Child and Family Services Act will be 
repealed in the future. 
 
A provision will be added to The Adoption Act, 1998 to allow 
the minister to apply for an order against any person who does 
not comply with any provision of the Act, the regulations, or a 
decision or order issued pursuant to the Act or the regulations. 
This provision is most directly related to The Adoption Act, to 

the adoption, birth registration amendment regulations, 2016 
which will come into effect in January 2017. It will allow the 
minister to apply for an order against any person not complying 
with the Act or regulations or a decision or order issued 
pursuant to the Act or regulations. If a birth parent, for example, 
stipulated in their contact preference that they wanted no 
contact from the adult adoptee, but the adoptee tracked down 
their information and contacted the birth parent, the birth parent 
and the minister must have some method by which to enforce 
compliance. Should the noncompliant individual continue to 
contravene contact preferences following a reminder of their 
agreement, the minister, through the child and family programs 
division, would engage civil law to make application to the 
court for a compliance order. 
 
No jurisdiction using contact preferences reports a high rate of 
contravention, and it is anticipated most contraventions would 
be effectively dealt with by just a reminder. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the Minister of Social Services that Bill No. 15, The 
Adoption Amendment Act, 2016 be read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? I recognize the 
member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I paid 
special interest to this particular bill. I think it’s really, really 
important that we take, again, take the time to understand what 
the bill is intended to do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The adoption process in Saskatchewan is really a process that 
one has to pay very, very close attention to, Mr. Speaker. We 
have certainly in all of our lives, whether you’re from Yorkton, 
whether you’re from Buffalo Narrows, or whether you’re from 
Prince Albert, adoption processes and frameworks are really 
important to many, many families all throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I listened with great interest to some of the 
comments made by the minister. And I can tell you that it’s 
important to note that one of the things that is primary to many 
people in the province of Saskatchewan is the phrase that’s 
often used in the Assembly, and something that I think many 
agencies use as well, and many people like the child advocate 
and many other organizations like that when they talk about the 
best interests of the child. 
 
That phrase itself really gives us . . . spurs a lot of thought in a 
lot of people’s minds as to what is the best interest of a child. 
When they’re facing certain traumas and when they’re facing 
certain challenges, Mr. Speaker, we need to find out what is 
meant by that phrase. And there’s so many different 
connotations attached to that phrase and so many different 
interpretations attached to the whole process, the best interest of 
the child. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what’s really important is that the bill itself, 
we want to make sure that we have the mechanics right in a 
sense of making sure that our adoption laws, our adoption Acts, 
and certainly the people that we’re intending to support and 
help — and those of course are the children — that the process 
is as refined as possible, and that it’s also really important to 
note that it’s also funded accordingly, Mr. Speaker. You and I 



228 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2016 

probably in our lifetime have bumped into a number of people 
that adopted children, whether it’s from their own family or 
whether it’s from out of country or whether it’s from different 
families. There’s so many foster parents out there as well. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you from experience that many 
families do their own . . . help when certain circumstances 
affect their particular family, and it’s something that’s really 
beautiful to see, Mr. Speaker. We have tons of stories in the 
Aboriginal community of how aunts and uncles and 
grandparents and older nephews and nieces have taken children 
from certain families that were affected adversely by either a 
death or a separation or some other family challenges, Mr. 
Speaker. I think it’s really important to know that many family 
members will step up to the plate and raise these children as 
their own, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it’s really a beautiful system of how we are able to support 
our own and how people are really caring for one another and 
particularly their family members. And in many instances, it’s 
not their family as well. We have stories of tremendous value, 
Mr. Speaker, of how people have risen to the occasion and done 
their part to help adopt the children or simply taking children 
under their wing. 
 
So these are some of the people that we’re dealing with and 
certainly some of the issues that we’re faced with as an MLA. 
And I can tell you that if any changes to the Act would really 
make the system much more compassionate, make the system 
much more effective by ensuring that we have proper processes 
for all jurisdictions, I think it’s really important that we do what 
we can to move that system along. 
 
So some of the aspects of the bill are it places the simple 
adoption category within a framework for adoption from 
countries that haven’t signed on to international conventions 
that regulate adoptions between countries. Now obviously, Mr. 
Speaker, as the adoption process becomes more complex, you’ll 
see that there are many families that want to adopt children 
from other countries and countries a long distance from 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So it’s important for us to know that if there are ways that we 
could certainly coordinate our adoption policy with that of 
countries that are following the proper process, that protect the 
interests of children, and that are certainly also rigid in the 
sense of making sure that there’s things such as child trafficking 
not occurring within their boundaries or within their country, to 
make sure, Mr. Speaker, that that activity is not happening. And 
as we have more and more countries elevate themselves to the 
status of being a caring, compassionate country in the sense of 
trying to have the adoption process streamlined, rigid in the 
sense of protecting the interests of that child, and certainly 
visionary in terms of providing the support that many of our 
children need. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s a couple of other changes which I 
think are also important to note, that the changes to The 
Adoption Amendment Act includes increasing the amount of 
time birth parents can revoke their consent to adoption from 14 
days to 30 days. Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m assuming, never having 
gone through that process myself, I’m assuming that in the 
situation of adoption the process is much longer than 30 days, 

but they can arbitrarily make the decision that they don’t want 
to give up their child, and they simply want the child back. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that many adoptive parents really go 
through a lot of processes to actually have their child under 
their name and certainly under their care. And it’s not just the 
30-day time frame, Mr. Speaker; it probably takes 30 months, 
you know, at a minimum to go through the proper process, and 
I’m just speculating here on the time frame. But I know a lot of 
adoptive parents struggle with the length in time and the cost it 
takes to really adopt a child and put them under their care, Mr. 
Speaker. And what the bill talks a bit about is the fact that birth 
parents can actually now change their mind and not just a 
14-day time frame — that it’s actually extended to 30 days. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it also talks about allowing support 
payments that continue after the death of the adoptive parents 
and go directly to the child when they are the ages of between 
18 and 21 and in need of additional supports. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, I really think that this is something that’s important to 
note. I think the greatest challenge . . . We all know how 
difficult it is to adopt a child. But the ones, the people, the 
families that go above and beyond, when it’s just a beautiful 
thing to see, Mr. Speaker, when some of these families adopt a 
child with special needs. That’s an incredible show of 
compassion; it’s an incredible show of humanity overall, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And these are the people that used to inspire me when I served 
as the minister for a short time. When you saw that the children 
that they were caring for and the children that they love and the 
children that they want to adopt, they had special needs and 
tremendously challenging special needs and yet the love was 
there for the child. And, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that 
particular feeling of confidence in the human race so to speak, 
Mr. Speaker, I still feel that powerful feeling to this day because 
of those parents that done so much for our children and 
especially those with special needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, part of the bill too I believe talks about the 
requirement for a child to be able to speak in court. Obviously 
the provision now is seven years of age or older. How they’re 
able to arrive at that particular age, I’m not certain of the 
background and the reason for that, and that’s why it’s 
important to go through these bills to see exactly what is 
happening. 
 
And the final thing that I can just quickly pick up, Mr. Speaker, 
it also allows the government to apply for a court order when an 
adopted person or a birth parent fails to follow the rules laid out 
in the Act or the regulations. Now I’m assuming, Mr. Speaker, 
that we don’t see a lot of that, that there is a system in place that 
with the ICFS [Indian Child and Family Services] agreements 
and with their own staff, that there is a rigorous process in 
place. And while it’s so sad, Mr. Speaker, when the system does 
fail a particular child or some children that it really does have a 
dramatic and negative effect on many of the players or the 
people that are involved with this process, and they’re always 
trying to find ways in which they could fix the system better. 
 
So as I look at some of the issues around the bill itself, Mr. 
Speaker, it really talks about basic language changes as well. It 
changes Crown ward to permanent ward, and what does that 



May 31, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 229 

mean in the scheme of things? Is it part of the countries 
worldwide that signed on to this convention? It talks about 
valuing the children by having mutual processes to adopt 
children between a large number of countries. These are some 
of the questions that we need to ask, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And all the while, the underlying theme and the underlying 
thought that what is in the best interests of the child, that is the 
key thing that drives the agenda for it from our perspective, and 
I’m sure from any government perspective as well. Because 
that’s what we’re in the business of doing in the event that we 
do want to help people with adoption, is to make sure that the 
rules and roles and regulations are protective of the child. Yet 
also at the same time, you’ve got to be receptive of the parents 
that want to do this, and it’s always a difficult task to do both, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the system itself is always constantly undergoing 
improvements. And while it’s sad to say that there are occasions 
where there has been some incidences where children do suffer 
some of the consequences of the adoption process, Mr. Speaker, 
our job is to minimize that as best we can and to totally 
eliminate that and that’s the number one objective overall. So I 
think, Mr. Speaker, after looking at the bill, there are so many 
twists and turns to how this could help the process along.  
 
As we embark on a worldwide effort, we have to learn so much 
from our mistakes and build a good system here at home so we 
are able to showcase that through our international discussions 
and in our meetings. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s important to also 
recognize that grandparents throughout our province and 
especially in my particular culture and in my community, 
grandparents play a pivotal role in helping look after 
grandchildren and even great-grandchildren. And there’s so 
many examples out there, Mr. Speaker, they’re too numerous to 
mention as to the people that do this kind of work. But I would 
point out extra work . . . I would point out, Mr. Speaker, that 
again in our community, the best interests of the child, there’s 
three or four things that we look at, and we need to get more 
and more focused on this particular issue.  
 
[15:00] 
 
As I mentioned in the past, there are some people raised in a 
generation where families would assume the children in the 
case of a tragic event or a family breakdown. And I say this 
from experience, Mr. Speaker. When I was five years old, there 
was eight of us in our family and we lost our mother. Our 
mother perished in a plane accident and at five years of age we 
basically had our father who was the pilot at the time, and he 
was laid up in the hospital. And I can tell you that our aunts 
stepped up to the plate. And even though, as young children, we 
don’t know what’s going on a lot of times, Mr. Speaker, we 
knew that we had a lot of love and support from our father, of 
course, but more so from the aunts. And it almost seemed, Mr. 
Speaker, that it was . . . Again as I mentioned in the past, a lot 
of families are assuming the role of parenting in a sense if there 
is some tragic loss of life, in my instance, or there’s some 
extenuating circumstances where families start breaking apart. 
 
And nowadays, Mr. Speaker, we have many more younger 
families and people, you know, have been parents at a younger 
age more so than ever, and we see a lot of distress a lot of times 

in the community and amongst families, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 
got to get a good system in place that continues to protect that 
child the same. Although the event that we went through as a 
family was very tragic, we felt the support, we felt the love, and 
we felt the humanity from our own family. And they done their 
very best to help my father raise all the small ones. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, out of all the children in the house, I was one 
that was most best behaved, Mr. Speaker. So I want to put that 
on record. And there was not a lot of the aunts that wanted my 
older brother or younger brother because they’re kind of 
trouble. I was the most behaved one. 
 
So I think, Mr. Speaker, I think in that instance it’s really, really 
important that we recognize the value of families simply having 
their children assumed by an aunt or by an uncle or even by 
grandparents. This practice has been happening in our 
communities for years. It happens in the non-Aboriginal 
communities as well. It’s a beautiful thing to see, and that’s 
why it’s important to recognize and incorporate that. 
 
Because in my instance, at the time it was not designed by any 
particular government. But the best interest of that child at the 
time in 1965 was that the aunts would care for the children 
while the dad healed. And of course we eventually recovered 
from that tragic event and all eight of us have done well. We’ve 
lost a couple, Mr. Speaker, but by and large the family survived 
that and we done well. And again it’s a nice thing to see, and 
we see it happening all throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
So in closing, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that we pay 
very close attention to The Adoption Amendment Act because it 
does have a most valuable opportunity presented to adoptive 
parents and that we must do everything we can to strengthen 
those parents and support those parents because often as things 
go along, they have much more challenges that they have to 
overcome. 
 
And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that some of the experience 
that I’ve had with families is that once you transfer from being 
a foster parent, then after a number of years you grow attached 
to these children and then you want to become the actual parent 
of those child, and you go through the legal process. So you go 
from a foster parent to a full parent like with the full 
responsibilities and care of that particular child. And what 
happens, Mr. Speaker, a lot of time the supports are cut at that 
point, and the logic behind the system is that if you wish to 
adopt this child then you must assume the responsibilities of 
that child as a parent. So no longer are they wards of the state or 
no longer are they custody of the state, that they’re now your 
children so you look after them. So all supports are now cut. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the parents still go through that. They 
understand it’s going to cost them a lot of money, but the love 
that they have for these children dictates the fact that they don’t 
want any more financial support from the government. Once 
they adopt them, they assume the full custody of that child, and 
with the full custody, I mean, the ability to raise, to protect, to 
love, to nurture, to discipline in the most appropriate way, Mr. 
Speaker. These are some of the things I think that, you know, 
another inspirational part of the adoption process. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think there’s so many moving parts to how 



230 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2016 

we want to do the adoption better. I think at face value some of 
the adjustments here will certainly . . . and especially around the 
category of working in the framework agreement with other 
countries. These are some of the things that we look as being 
positive. But nonetheless, Mr. Speaker, we need to take the time 
to understand the bill better, and we certainly need to talk to a 
network of people that help with this process, the adoption 
process, and we’ll certainly undertake that as the official 
opposition. 
 
So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I’ve made my comments on what 
I think is important around this particular bill, and my other 
colleagues will have an opportunity to add their perspective as 
well. So on that note, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 
16, The Adoption Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has moved 
adjournment on debate number . . . Bill 15, The Adoption 
Amendment Act, 2016. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 3 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 3 — The 
Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits Amendment 
Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Regarding Bill 3, The 
Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits Amendment 
Act, 2016, we’ve been in communication with both the STF 
[Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation] and the SSBA on this 
matter. And in addition I received a briefing yesterday from the 
ministry staff, and I thank both those staff members and the 
minister for that briefing. 
 
Through those discussions we understand that the amendments 
contained in this bill were agreed to by both parties as part of 
the collective bargaining process, so respecting that process and 
the wishes of both parties, we are prepared to see this bill move 
forward without delay. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Education that Bill No. 3, the 
teachers . . . [inaudible] . . . and disabilities benefits amendment 
Act, 2016 now be read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 

The Speaker: — To which area shall this bill be committed? I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I designate that Bill No. 3, The Teachers 
Superannuation and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2016 
be committed to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 2 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 2 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Crown Corporations’ Fiscal Year 
End Standardization) Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to join debate today on Bill No. 2, An Act to amend 
certain Statutes to Standardize Provisions respecting the Fiscal 
Year End of certain Crown Corporations. 
 
This is sort of a . . . it’s part of a trend on the part of members 
opposite to, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the way that they’ve 
approached the Crown sector in this province. And it’s again, 
on its face it’s, you know, seemingly a fair enough piece of 
standardization and would appear to be innocuous enough. 
 
But you know, I’m always sort of of the belief that there are 
few, if any, coincidences in public life, Mr. Speaker. And when 
it comes to Bill No. 2 and the way that the timing of this 
particular piece of legislation and the fiscal situation of this 
particular government, when you add those two things together, 
Mr. Speaker, it makes a lot of sense that for this particular year, 
the government of the day would want three more months of 
income on the books when it comes to managing the looks of 
the books. And putting forward a case again that wasn’t audited 
by the Provincial Auditor was, you know, signed off on by the 
. . . I’m not sure if the Ministry of Finance is writing these 
things anymore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, or if they’re running 
everything out of the Premier’s office when it comes to the 
statements on the financial health — or lack thereof — of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But when it comes to this particular piece of legislation, you 
have to ask two questions. Why now? And what on earth could 
the possible motives for it be? And in terms of the summary 
financials, and again the minister who moved it, who’s also part 
of a little star chamber group over there with the . . . You know, 
they used to have treasury board, Mr. Speaker, where they’d go 
through the books and they’d present in the cabinet and then, 
you know, you’d go on from there. But yesterday we find out 
that the Deputy Premier is part of a little star chamber group 
with the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Justice where 
they’re going through everything again. 
 
So I don’t know if it’s a program review that they’re going 
through, Mr. Speaker, or if it’s, you know, a super treasury 
board, or how it fits into the org chart over there, but obviously 



May 31, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 231 

it’s pretty high powered, pretty powerful. And we’ll be seeing 
more of their handiwork tomorrow, I’m sure. And in terms of 
the people that are promoting, you know, transformational 
change, which of course was the battle cry on every Sask Party 
partisan I ran into . . . It was on all their lips in the campaign, 
Mr. Speaker. Of course I’m being ironic. I’m joking. Because 
transformational change in the way that these members 
approach the finances in the campaign, it was very much a 
matter of, there’s nothing to see here; keep it moving. 
 
Now if this was a business transaction, Mr. Speaker, and the bill 
of goods came due tomorrow and the people that had bought the 
bill of goods, say in this case the people of Saskatchewan, if 
they came back and said, you know, the way that you were 
selling it in the campaign is something very different from this 
budget that you’re presenting us, I guess the members opposite 
would come back and say, well, you know, buyer beware, or 
caveat emptor or whatever. 
 
But it wouldn’t be a straightforward proposition on the part of 
members opposite in terms of what they campaigned on and 
what we’ll see tomorrow in terms of the handiwork of treasury 
board on an ongoing basis, in terms of the work of this little star 
chamber committee that’s been set up adjacent to the Premier, 
in terms of the way that financial statements that are rightly the 
property of the Ministry of Finance seem to be having a lot 
more to do with lining up with talking points coming out of the 
Premier’s office than they do with any sort of direct relationship 
to providing proper accounting to the people of Saskatchewan 
as it regards their finances. 
 
And so that is the context in which we see this particular piece 
of legislation coming forward, Mr. Speaker. It’s no coincidence 
that the timing leaves them with three extra months of revenue. 
It’s no coincidence that, you know, having successfully 
promoted the magic act last year, that $700 million of 
borrowing was somehow separate and apart from the deficit 
that’s, you know, north of $1 billion, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 
the deficit that they had in last year’s budget. In terms of the 
way they got born again when it came to the Crowns, Mr. 
Speaker, because . . . and we heard it again here today where 
the Premier was referencing debt that was being paid off and 
debt being paid off has been replaced, you know, two and three 
times on the other hand, Mr. Speaker, in terms of borrowing on 
the Crown side of the equation. 
 
So the Premier can talk about credit cards and various things 
like that, but it’s a bit more like, you know, Three Card Monte 
or shuffling the cards so that you’re able to put your best case 
forward. It’s like problem solving through redefinition. You 
know, you add three more months of revenue into the equation, 
and guess what? Things look better by, you know, more than 
$100 million. 
 
So in terms of, you know, this particular piece of legislation, 
standardizing the year-ends for the Crowns in terms of the fiscal 
year-end for the executive government, fair enough. But why 
now? And what on earth could the motivations possibly be? 
 
And I would submit to you, Mr. Speaker, that this has 
everything to do with managing the look of the books. It has 
everything to do with the way that this is a government that, 
you know, can’t get enough of dipping into the Crowns, can’t 

get enough of taking dividends when they said they would not, 
can’t get enough of racking up the credit card of the people of 
Saskatchewan on the utility rate hike side of the equation, and 
then sit there with a straight face and say, oh no, we’re not 
raising taxes but, you know, go on and pay the shot through 
your utility bills. 
 
We saw that last Friday, Mr. Speaker, and again Bruce 
Johnstone had a fine column in the Leader-Post in terms of the 
kind of spin doctor overtime that was going on presenting 
SaskEnergy and SaskPower, their respective, you know, 
requests of the rate review panel and cabinet, and the fact that 
of course SaskPower is going to have to pay the shot for the 
mismanagement that this government has been up to, when it 
comes to various of the projects of that government, to the tune 
of hundreds and millions of dollars . . . hundreds of millions of 
dollars. 
 
[15:15] 
 
So again, Mr. Speaker, as regards to this particular piece of 
legislation, you know, standardizing year-ends, what . . . Why 
now? Why would they be coming forward with it now? Well 
it’s because the finances of the province under the management 
of these people . . . And we’ll see, you know, I’m sure some of 
that tomorrow, Mr. Speaker. But as ever, a lot of these things 
await the finer scrutiny of the Provincial Auditor when it comes 
to the way that even on a budget day this government will 
present something that has more to do with spin than it does 
with being the most open and accountable government in the 
history of the province, which is something that they talked 
about striving for in 2007, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we’ve seen what a long ways they’ve come from there. So 
they’re going to keep shuffling the cards as fast as they can. 
They’re going to keep, you know, racking up the Crown debt 
and trying with a straight face to say that this isn’t somehow 
what they’re going to be passing on to the next generation and 
the generation after that as again, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen 
governments of that ilk over there do to this province in past. 
We’re seeing this go ahead again, and we’re going to get a 
better picture of that tomorrow. 
 
And in terms of this particular piece of legislation, it makes all 
kinds of sense that it’s Bill No. 2 as regards to the way that this 
government has approached the Crowns. Again, Mr. Speaker, 
there’s apparently, you know, few things they like more than 
racking up Crown debt and then transferring that into the 
revenues, or transferring that to underwrite the different 
debacles that they’ve engaged in such as the smart meters or the 
way that the facts were blatantly misrepresented when it came 
to carbon capture, Mr. Speaker. And you can go on. 
 
Anyway, I know that there’s nothing the members opposite like 
more than the opinion of themselves in terms of just, you know, 
they feel they can do no wrong. And someday, Mr. Speaker, 
that time is going to come where they’re going to . . . where the 
bill is going to come due and they can’t just pass it on to the 
people of Saskatchewan. But they’re going to pay, come the 
opinion of the people of this province. And I think we’re going 
to see a step forward in that regard tomorrow when they finally 
come forward with a budget, they finally bear some kind of 
accountability for what this government’s been up to. 



232 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2016 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d to conclude my remarks on Bill 
No. 2, An Act to amend certain Statutes to Standardize 
Provisions respecting the Fiscal Year End of certain Crown 
Corporations. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Elphinstone-Centre has 
moved adjournment on debate on Bill No. 2, The Miscellaneous 
Statutes (Crown Corporations’ Fiscal Year End 
Standardization) Amendment Act, 2016. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 4 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 4 — The Queen’s 
Bench Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur la 
Cour du Banc de la Reine be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in on Bill 
No. 4, The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2016. To just give it 
a little bit of a . . . I know at the end of the day we’ve got these 
amendments that are coming forward, and the process is here to 
have a discussion about changes or amendments that come into 
legislation, and sometimes we wonder why. There might be 
different reasons why they’re being brought in. 
 
But we’ve always said this, and I’ve always been one to say, 
I’m not sure if the minister has had an opportunity to consult 
with individuals. I know on our side it gives us an opportunity 
to take the legislation and actually have the critics and 
individuals have discussions with those that would be impacted 
by amendments, changes to legislation in the House, whether 
it’s citizens, whether it’s a business, corporations, individuals, 
some of the agencies that represent us, Health. There’s many 
different reasons why we want to have the debate, and it’s good. 
If there’s a good debate, it needs to go on, and the discussion. 
 
And some of these bills, sometimes they’re very simple. 
Sometimes there’s quite a bit to them. I guess it’s the way they 
give certain powers to the minister and some powers, you know 
. . . Rarely have I seen where it takes away powers. It’s more 
where it gives powers to ministers, individual ministers, to 
make decisions from the way the process used to be. 
 
But in this Bill No. 4, The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 
2016, when you look at this, it’s making it easier to enforce. 
And I guess when you have dispute resolution panels, when we 
talk about free trade, there is a process that they go through, and 
I don’t know if it’s individuals, if it’s big corporations, if it’s in 
province, out of province. Those are the things a person needs 
to find out and of course take the time to go through and find 
out who will be impacted by this. Will it be, you know, the 
business people? Will it be those that are going out, and we talk 
about out of Canada? Is it within the provinces, within Canada? 
 
So there’ll be a lot of questions that we’ll have, and we can 
work through that. And I know as a critic, you know, we’ll ask 
that. And the minister may, you know, be able to provide that 

when this goes through the process it goes to. But having said 
that, that process needs to happen here first before it goes to a 
committee. It gives us a chance to just talk about it. And part of 
this change that I said, making it easier for that panel to enforce 
their decision once they’ve made a decision, and it may not be 
something that I guess certain individuals like, dislike. It may 
not work, but it gives them the power to enforce it. 
 
But it goes a little further than that with the minister, and I had 
said the minister giving certain powers. And this, you know, 
second part of this bill does give provisions to the minister to 
have a list of lawyers that the ministry could appoint or the 
courts could appoint, should that be required. 
 
But it also lays out I guess the cost, how much they can bill or 
charge for the service that they would provide should the court 
decide or should someone, you know, want to or the minister 
appoint somebody to say yes, this person needs legal counsel. 
 
So it kind of gives that, but I mean I know at the end of the day 
we’ll work through that. And the critic, my colleagues, we’ll 
talk about that. And we’ll be able to go through in detail in 
committee, but this just gives us an opportunity to start the 
process, to debate it, and give a little bit of I guess our opening 
comments to this process. But I know my colleagues will have 
more. 
 
The other thing it talks about, the updates to the process for 
people applying to get a court-appointed lawyer. There are 
some changes there as well. So this also gives the minister some 
provisions when it goes to court, but also those individuals that 
would be applying for a court-appointed lawyer or legal counsel 
to represent them. 
 
Maybe they’re in a dispute for whatever reason — I don’t know 
if it would be individual; it feels like when they’re coming to 
trade, it impacts them — or if it would be a corporation, might 
be a small corporation. I don’t know from the details in the bill. 
 
And I know my colleagues . . . And we’ll get an opportunity to 
work through that process and get that information, but also to 
ask some of those individuals out there that might be impacted 
by this to find out how they’ll be impacted. 
 
So this gives us some opportunity to ask some questions, to go 
back and do a little bit of research, but also get the clarification 
that’s needed so that that process we talk about in this House 
goes through before it goes to a committee or, you know, it 
actually gets Royal Assent. And before it’s the law of the land, 
you would have that. 
 
So at this point, you know, I just have some opening comments 
about this bill. I have an opportunity. I have no further 
discussions for myself. I know my colleagues will have more 
and we’ll get more of a chance to debate the bill and ask them 
tough questions, and get clarification on some of those that I 
talked about. 
 
So at this point I’m prepared to adjourn on Bill No. 4, The 
Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2016. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has moved 
adjournment of debate on Bill No. 4, The Queen’s Bench 



May 31, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 233 

Amendment Act, 2016. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 5 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 5 — The 
Electronic Information and Documents Amendment Act, 2016 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As ever, 
thanks to the good folks at Hansard and those that make this 
building go around. 
 
Good to join debate on Bill No. 5, The Electronic Information 
and Documents Amendment Act, 2016. This of course moves to 
amend the Act which was first brought forward in the year 2000 
and is of course an effort to modernize and keep in touch with 
the times, Mr. Speaker, and the greater preponderance of 
electronic instruments being used in different transactions 
throughout the public sphere and private spheres, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In referring to the minister’s second reading speech where he 
states: 
 

. . . provides for the legal recognition of documents in 
electronic form where legislation asks for documents to be 
provided in writing. The Act has facilitated the legal 
translation of paper to electronic documents in the private 
and public sectors without requiring each individual Act or 
regulation to be amended to allow for electronic 
documents. Mr. Speaker, this Act does however exempt 
certain documents, such as wills and health care directives, 
so that paper-only requirements are not overridden by the 
Act. 

 
Again, Mr. Speaker, it’s a pretty straightforward proposition 
that this bill comes forward with and that is to allow for the 
usage of electronic format. It’s not much more complicated than 
that, Mr. Speaker. We’ll of course be looking to see how this 
does indeed, whether it does or not follow upon requests from 
the real estate and the credit union communities which the 
minister references in his remarks in terms of them being the 
folks that are requesting this. We’ll be interested to see how this 
interfaces with the work that’s done through, for example, the 
land titles registry. 
 
I guess, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got a number of things we’d like to 
consult on. But as having participated in a number of these 
debates, there are matters that come forward as kind of 
housekeeping legislation, Mr. Speaker, legislation that is about 
keeping up with the times, and this would certainly fall into that 
category, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That is not to say however that there isn’t due diligence that 
need be done that . . . We’ll take the minister’s indication that it 
is supported by different folks out there as again referenced here 
by the credit union sector and folks in the real estate industry. 

But we’ll certainly undertake our own consultation in that 
regard, and I’m sure will be all the better for it when it comes 
back to deal with this piece of legislation at a later date. But 
with that, Mr. Speaker, I am prepared to move adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 5, The Electronic Information and 
Documents Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Regina Elphinstone has 
moved adjournment on debate no. 5, The Electronic 
Information and Documents Amendment Act, 2016. Is that 
agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 6 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 6 — The Statute 
Law Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in on Bill 
No. 5, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2016. A note I guess 
we go back to, and in my opening comments on some of the 
other bills that we talked about, the process about debating this, 
in this bill here, an amendment that’s been requested, they’re 
clearing up some grammar. There’s some spelling they’re 
changing. So what this bill will do is it changes some of the I 
guess those that a provincial judge but also Queen court judge 
as well, some of the wording and stuff so that it I think works 
together. From what I can get when you refer to the grammar 
and everything is to I guess align with the Queen court bench 
court as well some of the rulings and the language. I think this 
just does some clarifying. There are some areas where they’re 
making some changes and amendments to wording and 
grammar, as I said. So there’s not a lot in here that’s 
actually . . . 
 
And I don’t know. Again I go back to there must be a reason 
why, and hopefully it’s been consulted and we’ll have a chance 
to have more of a debate if there is going to be any impact that 
will impact anybody out there, hopefully through that process 
as we debate with the screening and those that, you know, as we 
consult and we talk to individuals. They may be simple changes 
that are just housecleaning and that’s fine if that’s so needed. 
 
So really at this point, I don’t have a lot to talk about it. My 
colleagues may have, but other critics may have, and we may 
get clarification on that. So at this point I’m prepared to move 
adjournment on Bill No. 6. 
 
[15:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has moved 
adjournment on Bill No. 6, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 
2016. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 



234 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2016 

Bill No. 7 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 7 — The Statute 
Law Amendment Act, 2016 (No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2016 modifiant 
le droit législatif be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in on Bill 
No. 7, The Statute Law Amendment Act. And I guess this is, 
again this is a bilingual Act that goes from English and French. 
Again, it’s just the previous bill I talked about. We have 
bilingual Acts, and this one will just be in compliance with 
what we are proposing to amend as the legislation will go 
through that process. 
 
So Bill No. 7 makes those changes to the bilingual Act, Bill No. 
7. So at this point, again I don’t have a lot of discussion about 
that bill, so I’m prepared to adjourn on Bill No. 7, at this point 
to adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has adjourned 
debate on No. 7, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2016 (No. 2). 
Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 8 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 8 — The Summary 
Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker, and of course 
with thanks to the Deputy Premier for the assist in this regard. 
His help’s always, you know, much appreciated, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But to Bill No. 8, The Summary Offences Procedure 
Amendment Act, 2016, again issuing forth from the Ministry of 
Justice. You know, sometimes I look at the legislative agenda, 
Mr. Speaker, and I think to myself it’s almost like they’ve got 
an entire legislative drafting division over there in Justice or 
something, for all the different bills that are issuing forth from 
that entity. And certainly they’ve played a pretty vital role in 
the assembling of this lineup, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the bills 
my colleague was just referring to, the one that I’d had an 
earlier opportunity to reference, and of course this one, The 
Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of, you know, fair enough, 
you want to keep the administrative process, when it comes to 
the function of justice and criminal justice, you want to keep 
that up to the times. But interestingly enough, where we had 
electronic documents being referenced in Bill No. 5, this one 
carves out a special place for issuing certain documents by 
means of telecommunication, i.e. the fax machine, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. So this one may have suffered from too long on the 

vine, and maybe we’ll be seeing something coming forward as 
regards to something that actually updates it to the 21st century 
as opposed to the 20th century. But we’ll be looking with great 
interest, Mr. Speaker, as regards those things that would be 
communicated by fax, as anticipated in this piece of legislation, 
versus those things that could be communicated by electronic 
means, purely and simply, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But again turning to the minister’s second reading speech, and 
certainly it’s available on the May 30th, 2016 edition of 
Hansard, page 198, where the minister states: 
 

This Act deals with the procedures for charging people 
with provincial offences and offences against municipal 
bylaws. The Act also prescribes the court’s power and 
duties respecting provincial offences, which generally 
follow the summary conviction provisions of the Criminal 
Code and the enforcement of fines resulting from those 
convictions. 

 
Again, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be interested to see how the 
legislation works its way through the whole division between 
powers that cabinet takes up for itself by way of regulation, 
what will be left to order-in-council, and how that will all 
proceed. Certainly there are a number of prerogatives that are 
secured for the cabinet as regards in being able to move through 
the means of regulation with this particular piece of legislation. 
 
But you know, we’ll look on with great interest to see whether 
or not this does in fact result in “. . . the amendments that I’m 
proposing are aimed at reducing court volumes and improving 
court efficiency.” We’ll be very interested to see how that plays 
out, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll be interested to see if that is the 
case because certainly there are a number of bottlenecks that 
exist in the justice system as we see it do its work throughout 
the province and making sure that your courts are providing 
justice in a timely manner. There’s an old saying, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that justice delayed is justice denied, and certainly if 
this can do a better job of taking on the bottlenecks that are 
there in the system in terms of providing better administrative 
process, we’ll be interested to see how that goes. 
 
But I guess, Mr. Speaker, we will be looking to consult more 
broadly on this piece of legislation with practitioners. And 
certainly I look forward to some more in-depth thoughts from 
my colleague from Douglas Park, the opposition critic for 
Justice, herself a lawyer and someone very familiar and fluent 
in these issues. And you know, though how she had topped the 
minister’s second reading speech on this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
it’s going to be a challenge because it was certainly a bit of a 
barnburner. 
 
Anyway with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move to adjourn 
debates on Bill No. 8, The Summary Offences Procedure 
Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 8, 
The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2016. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



May 31, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 235 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 9 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 9 — The 
Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 
2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’exécution des jugements 
canadiens be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to join on 
Bill 9, The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Act, 2016. 
 
Just to give some opening comments, I mean, I realize we’ll get 
into some of the discussions, and I think this warrants a further 
discussion because we’re not sure exactly . . . clarification will 
have to go on this. 
 
You have, I guess, federal court. You have provincial courts, 
territorial courts that hear certain cases. And in this case I think 
it’s more referring to the amendment to making this tax 
judgment, that it’s on an individual, and maybe it is and we’ll 
get into it. And it might be a corporation, it might be a business, 
maybe somebody operated a business, small business or 
whatever. What we’ll have to get through and to clarify exactly 
what changes and what will be impacted and who will be 
impacted by this amendment that they’re proposing right now to 
change the legislation. 
 
And when you look at the process, and I guess we can go 
through that, whether it be Saskatchewan, I guess other 
provinces, whether if I said it’s a federal court, whether it’s a 
provincial court, whether it be Revenue Canada. And I assume 
— and that’s why I’m wondering, it’s referring to tax, so 
judgments — so I’m assuming if you’ve been taken to court by 
Revenue Canada or by a provincial body for tax, maybe it’s a 
property tax as well. I mean, you’re living in another province 
and you decide to move to Saskatchewan, that there’s more 
complications when you try to enforce a judgment on an 
individual in another province. 
 
To me it looks like, being of course not a lawyer, but I know 
there’s work that’s going to have to be done in clarification on 
this one. Because I’m not sure again if it’s strictly talking about 
Revenue Canada or if it’s talking about provincial tax, if it’s 
talking about property tax. It just says tax judgment 
enforcement. They’re making the change, and I think what it’s 
saying, it’s the ability to enforce in Saskatchewan, should 
another province come forward, to enforce collection of a tax. 
And like I said, it doesn’t refer to strictly one type of tax. It just 
refers to tax judgment. 
 
So we’ll have to work through that and find out, and I know my 
colleagues will have an opportunity to ask some questions. 
We’ll debate it. We’ll do maybe some talks with the minister, 
their officials, when we have an opportunity in committee to 
even flesh it out more, not that . . . And this may be, you know, 
fine to support in the sense of, you know, you’re enforcing a 
judgment and you’re making sure that once a judgment has 
been . . . Obviously the person has gone through a process, and 

for whatever reason there is a judgment that goes against an 
individual, that they can come to Saskatchewan and say, well 
you can’t collect these dollars once I’m over here. Like, I’m 
here; I’m safe. And I think what it is clearing up is that it makes 
it easier, that process to make sure you enforce here when 
someone resides here or comes over, a business or whatever. 
My understanding I’m getting from that is it clears up that. 
 
It also talks about administrative process, that it’s making it 
easier and doesn’t cause more grief or red tape, maybe it gets 
rid of the red tape that can cause problems to enforce a tax 
judgment. So when I think about that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that’s kind of where I’m thinking it’s coming from. It’s clearing 
up and making it easier to enforce, once a judgment has been 
placed on an individual, it’s going to make it easier for them to 
enforce that judgment to collect, I guess, taxes that is owed to 
them. 
 
And like I said, whether it be property tax . . . And I don’t know 
this, but I have to assume they say tax judgment, an order like 
that. So I’m thinking it could be, like I said, income tax, 
property tax, provincial, federal tax. Is it Revenue Canada? Is it 
. . . So there’s different taxes that we’re talking about whether 
in force . . . I guess it could be GST [goods and services tax], 
PST [provincial sales tax] in a province, where you come to 
Saskatchewan and you think you can . . . 
 
And this is, I think, kind of gets where they’re, I believe, 
making it easier to enforce and to collect the dollars that’s owed 
to another, I guess, province or agency, whether it’s 
government, to collect the dollars whether it’s an order or that’s 
been, you know, designated. You’ve gone through that process 
and you’ve been found guilty. The order is now by the court, 
has been put in place, and you are supposed to comply with 
that. And I think this is what my understanding is, what it’s 
trying to clarify to make that process easier. 
 
So at this point my colleagues again will probably have more 
discussions on this, more clarification probably, you know, to 
consult and we’ll have our critic look at this and then go over it 
and have that opportunity to have the debate in the House but 
also in committee to flush out any issues or concerns that there 
may be for residents of the province. 
 
At this time I don’t have any further discussions on this bill and 
I’m prepared to adjourn on this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 9, The Enforcement of 
Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 10 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cox that Bill No. 10 — The Forest 
Resources Management Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 



236 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2016 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Again, glad to join debate on Bill No. 10, The Forest Resources 
Management Amendment Act, 2016. And certainly, you know, 
as a card-carrying southerner in this province, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
something that is, you know . . . I’m a bit more used to the 
golden side or the yellow side of the flag equation, a little less 
on the green for our beautiful forests in the North. But I do have 
some experience and some exposure to the beautiful forests that 
we have in this province and do have, certainly, some 
knowledge of folks that make their living in this sector. And 
certainly some of those folks are very closely tied to our caucus 
and there’s advice from those individuals that certainly we’ll be 
counting on as we proceed in our reckoning with this particular 
piece of legislation, but it’s always an interesting thing to see 
the government making moves on a given sector. 
 
This is a fairly significant piece of legislation, fairly wide 
ranging in the different measures contained therein and 
certainly lends itself to a wider ranging consultation. And you 
know, there are certain aspects of this that will lend themselves 
well to closer discussion at the committee stage. 
 
[15:45] 
 
But in terms of this particular phase of the consideration of this 
legislation at second reading, it’s with great interest I’ve read 
the minister’s second reading speech and the way that this piece 
of legislation provides the government with more powers to 
make agreements related to the use and reclamation of roads 
that have been constructed in conjunction with forestry, in 
terms of allowing for new regulations that change the value of 
fees for reforestation, the way that this legislation removes the 
requirement for submitting a forest management plan before 
starting forestry operations, and the way that it allows for 
tougher penalties for those who break the laws of forestry. 
Again we’ll be taking a deeper dive into these and be looking to 
see how it plays out. 
 
But certainly the forestry sector in the province has gone 
through some tough times, Mr. Speaker. There’s certainly some 
good news stories to be encountered out there, but there are 
questions that persist. I know that I’ve been around this House 
long enough to have been familiar with those that got elected on 
the pledge for the mill in Prince Albert to be open and families 
working again, and that has yet to materialize, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I followed with interest the discussion we’ve had about 
reforestation in Saskatchewan just this past week. And 
certainly, Mr. Speaker, you’ve got areas with, in some cases, 
more than 70 per cent unemployment and at the same time 
tenders being let out to outside of province. Concerns for 
reforestry efforts, you know, surely to goodness there’s some 
way where we can make this work with the different sort of 
economic development institutions that are out there in the 
North and the great work that they’ve done in other sectors of 
the economy. And certainly there’s got to be a better 
opportunity for those actors to take up the opportunities that are 
there in something as straightforward as reforestation, Mr. 
Speaker, let alone the different sort of value-added components 
to the industry and how that could be realized. 

But again, Mr. Speaker, as often is the case in a caucus, you 
rely on certainly outside expertise and you certainly rely on the 
life experience and the expertise of folks that you have the 
privilege of serving alongside, and you take all that together and 
you try to put your best opinion forward. And I’ll be interested 
to get further feedback on what is a fairly . . . what can be 
complex in places certainly, Mr. Speaker, a complex piece of 
legislation. So with that I would move to adjourn consideration 
of Bill No. 10, The Forest Resources Management Amendment 
Act, 2016. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 10, 
The Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 2016. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 11 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cox that Bill No. 11 — The Forestry 
Professions Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Again, good to join debate on Bill No. 11, The Forestry 
Professions Amendment Act, 2016. In his fairly lengthy second 
reading speech, the minister gave a pretty good overview of the 
professionalization of forestry workers in the province of 
Saskatchewan, how that has come about, and how that’s 
impacted the way that forestry professionals do their business 
here in Saskatchewan. He talked to a fair number of . . . He 
talked about the different subdesignations that have been 
evolved in terms of the folks that have access to the association 
that governs the work of foresters, and certainly the designation 
such as professional forester, professional forest technologist, 
forester-in-training, forest technologist-in-training. 
 
Again referring to the minister’s second reading speech on this 
and as well, Mr. Speaker, the different folks that were consulted 
in the work of the forestry professions. But certainly it’s 
encouraging to see the minister referencing different groups 
such as the Saskatchewan Forestry Association, the 
Saskatchewan Trappers Association the Saskatchewan Wildlife 
Federation, Saskatchewan nature, Tourism Saskatchewan, 
Ducks Unlimited, Saskatchewan Outfitters Association. 
Although you know if I might speak parenthetically there, Mr. 
Speaker, we realize there’s some there’s some turmoil and 
division within the outfitter community and perhaps that awaits 
legislation on a further day. But back to the minister’s listing: 
Fisheries and Oceans Canada, and the Saskatchewan Resource 
Council, and the folks that have played a role in the 
professionalization of the industry and the development of the 
Association of Saskatchewan Forestry Professionals. 
 
Again, you know, we’re always interested to see what the 
balance is between a sector getting organized and being able to 
recognize credentials, and in turn the value that that provides to 



May 31, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 237 

the people of Saskatchewan and to be the . . . on the community 
level or in business. But we’ll be interested to see that the 
different assurances in this piece of legislation that were made 
by the minister around the consultation that had taken place, to 
see if that is in fact as it is promoted. But that will await further 
consultation, and for the meantime, Mr. Speaker, we’ll 
undertake to do that work and do it well, but certainly this 
follows on Bill No. 10. But with that being said, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 11, The Forestry 
Professions Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 11, 
The Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 12 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 12 — The Public 
Health (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to join in 
on Bill No. 12, The Public Health (Miscellaneous) Amendment 
Act, 2016. Going through I guess a little bit about it, they’re 
doing some updates and definitions of clinical nurse to be in 
line with the bylaws of the SRNA, Saskatchewan Registered 
Nurses’ Association. 
 
So they’re making those changes and they’ll be within the 
bylaws of that organization. Now I’m not sure, and again this 
process . . . I talked about this earlier, obviously, and I’m 
hoping that, you know, the ministry, the minister, the officials 
have gone through a process obviously to make these changes 
and to make the amendments that they want. And again I 
always provide that opportunity to make sure that we’ve 
consulted with those that will be impacted and affected by the 
changes and amendments, and I’m hoping that process has 
happened and that the government has gone through that 
process. 
 
Now having said that, we may have to actually, as a critic, as 
opposition, as members opposite, they can inquire to 
individuals and have those conversations with individuals when 
we’re making changes to legislation that is supposed to affect 
our province and certain individuals. That’s where you want, all 
of us, we have a due diligence and, you know, an obligation to 
make sure legislation changes, amendments we’re doing, are 
the right ones as best we can. I mean we can’t . . . At the end of 
the day we’d like to say we get everything perfect. I’ll disagree 
on that one. You know, government has passed legislation that 
has not been perfect and has hurt many people in this province. 
But having said that, you know, they’re making some changes. 
 
The other area that I noticed they were talking about, it’s adding 

different reporting duties of nurse practitioners, how they report 
certain . . . If they’re treating certain individuals for a certain 
disease, I guess, there’s a reporting process that they want them 
to have. So that’s in there as well. There’s some changes. But 
again I don’t know exactly the clarification. It’ll have to be 
worked out, and we need to find out exactly what that is. And 
we have that opportunity to make sure it’s done right, it covers 
off what needs to be done. 
 
And hopefully again the minister and the officials have done the 
work that they needed to do to make sure we get it right so that 
we’re not later on changing something or adding things. So 
hopefully, you know, when we pass it, it’s not saying legislation 
that passed . . . I know this government has not always made it 
perfect. They’ve had to make changes shortly after and have 
done that. And maybe all governments do that, you know, to be 
fair. That’s fine. That may have to do. 
 
At this bill when we talked about miscellaneous changes, 
there’s also something else that’s been referred to, and it allows 
government to create a new public health registry system 
similar to one in place for restaurants. And I mean that’s 
another area where I think needs to have further scrutiny here 
on our side, but also hopefully the work has been done with the 
minister and why they’re proposing these amendments coming 
forward. So I’m hoping that they’ve done the work that needs to 
be done and have asked, and why. So at this point I don’t know 
why it is in there, but there must be a reason why, and maybe 
through committee and explanation of the minister, you know, 
it’ll be figured out and it’s fine. And sometimes these are things 
that are fine, but sometimes we have to go through the process 
to make sure we’ve asked them the questions. And I’ve talked 
about that, making sure those individuals are consulted, talked 
to. And sometimes they’re straightforward and it’s just . . . 
We’ve supported different legislation, and maybe these are just 
fine and it’s just, you know, some changes they’re proposing 
and they want to do. 
 
So at this point, you know, my colleagues may have more 
questions, and we have a chance to debate this more and then 
go into committee and get some clarification, consult with those 
that are out there, our nurse practitioners, our RNs [registered 
nurse], and talk to them, the associations that are represented 
and will be impacted, to make sure, whether it’s families or 
individuals, patients that will be impacted, to make sure we’ve 
done our due diligence. 
 
So at this point I have no further discussions on Bill No. 12, The 
Public Health (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2016, and I 
adjourn on that. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 12, The Public Health 
(Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 13 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 



238 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2016 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 13 — The Cancer 
Agency Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Good 
to join debate on Bill No. 13, The Cancer Agency Amendment 
Act, 2016. Certainly as I had occasion to be painfully reminded 
this weekend in a couple of different circumstances, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, cancer is a plague that affects far too many lives, and 
often as not, tragically and fatally, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So I guess when it comes to efforts aimed at bolstering the 
efforts by which we take on cancer, be it cancer care or cancer 
control efforts, Mr. Speaker, I mean sign me up. This particular 
piece of legislation, as behooves legislation aimed at the 
functioning of a given organization in the main, has to do with 
the way that the work of the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency both 
asserts its proper legislative authority, the way that it interacts 
and reports to different registries, both on a Canadian basis and 
an international basis. It clarifies the situation wherein if the 
legislation is in dispute between regional health authorities and 
the Cancer Agency itself, how that is adjudicated. 
 
[16:00] 
 
But in the main, Mr. Speaker, I think the primary benefit 
coming from this piece of legislation . . . And just one other 
aspect, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of the way that the Office 
of the Information and Privacy Commissioner will be consulted 
about the agency’s ability to collect information and disclose it 
for specific purposes and to specific organizations that will be 
prescribed through the regulations. Again, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
what the independent officers are there for. And certainly we’ve 
seen different passes in the career of this government, and 
certainly in other jurisdictions, where privacy is compromised 
by the way that different agencies care for it. 
 
But the main thing that I see of benefit in terms of the work of 
this legislation, Mr. Speaker, is the way that information is 
collected, the way the agency will be able to maintain “. . . an 
accurate picture of an individual’s care status and a more 
accurate picture of cancer services provided to Saskatchewan 
citizens.” That’s from the minister’s second reading speech. 
 
But again, Mr. Speaker, knowledge is power, and it’s certainly 
the case when we take on illnesses, diseases such as cancer. 
And Saskatchewan has a long and determined history when it 
comes to different measures of cancer treatment and the 
different way government organizes alongside community to 
take on cancer. And that fight is not, that battle is not won yet, 
Mr. Speaker, to say the least. 
 
So in aid of better cancer treatment and in better information 
gathering that will strengthen the hand of those who are out 
there in the front lines taking on cancer and its horrendous 
impact on far too many lives, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I look with 
great interest at this piece of legislation and will look forward to 
a more detailed discussion as regards who was consulted and 
how this piece of legislation will go forward and what the 
expected outcomes will be, Mr. Speaker. But as it stands for the 
moment, I would move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 13, The 

Cancer Agency Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 13, 
The Cancer Agency Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 14 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 14 — The 
Horned Cattle Purchases Repeal Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to join in 
on debate Bill No. 14, The Horned Cattle Purchases Repeal 
Act, 2016. It’s interesting this bill, actually, is being repealed. 
Obviously it’s not needed, and the minister talked about it in his 
notes, 1939. And I don’t know who was all born at that time but 
apparently that’s when this bill came into play. And it was 
interesting, having a little discussion and looking at some of the 
comments, you know, the reasons why we had this bill in the 
first place. And now today it’s about $2 for dehorning. 
 
But actually, you know, talking about that, growing up, you 
know, and spending a lot of time on the farm back home with 
my grandfather and, you know, my grandmother, and at certain 
times of the year you end up . . . You dehorned and you did a 
few other things, you know, to the animals to get them ready. 
But having said that, whether we were branding and stuff, it’s 
interesting at that time, you know, horns. And it does a lot of 
damage so they’re repealing this where they collect the $2. And 
it’s probably spending more money. 
 
And we know that the government’s looking to ways to find 
cost savings and, you know, maybe this is one area they’re 
spending a lot of money so they’re going to save some money. 
 
So at the end of the day what they’re doing, they’re repealing it. 
It’s not going to exist. And maybe the cattle association has 
brought it forward themselves as a discussion as the 
government saying, it just doesn’t make sense any more. It’s 
costing us more money. You know, that might be the fact here 
but I guess at this point I have no further comments about it. 
They’re repealing it. It no longer exists. At this point, I’m 
prepared to adjourn on it. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 14, The Horned Cattle 
Purchases Repeal Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 



May 31, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 239 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I move that this Assembly do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that the Assembly does now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This House stands adjourned until 
tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:05.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Beaudry-Mellor ......................................................................................................................................................................... 215 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 215 
  Buckingham .............................................................................................................................................................................. 215 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 215 
  Weekes ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 215 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................... 216 
  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 216 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 216 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 216 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 216 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 University of Regina Professors Recognized for Excellence 
  Beaudry-Mellor ......................................................................................................................................................................... 217 
 Prince Albert Educator Receives Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 217 
 Rise Up National Walk to End Violence 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................... 217 
 Saskatoon YWCA Women of Distinction Awards 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 217 
 Davidson Residents Travel to Costa Rica with Operation Christmas Child 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 218 
 Breakfast Café in Preeceville Wins Bursary 
  Dennis ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 218 
 Yorkton Film Festival Golden Sheaf Awards 
  Ottenbreit .................................................................................................................................................................................. 218 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Government’s Fiscal Management 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 219 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 219 
 Funding for Education Infrastructure 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 219 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 219 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 220 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 220 
 Support for Education in Northern Communities 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 220 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 221 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 221 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 221 
 Provincial Funding for First Nations and Métis Education 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 221 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 221 
 Federal Funding for First Nations Education 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 221 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 222 
 Reaction to SaskPower Rate Increases 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 222 
  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 222 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 223 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Merriman .................................................................................................................................................................................. 223 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 15 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2016 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 223 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 224 
 Bill No. 16 — The Adoption Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’adoption 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 226 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 227 



 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 3 — The Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2016 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 230 
  Cheveldayoff (referral to Human Services Committee) ........................................................................................................ 230 
 Bill No. 2 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Crown Corporations’ Fiscal Year End Standardization) 
 Amendment Act, 2016 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 230 
 Bill No. 4 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2016/ Loi modificative de 2016 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 232 
 Bill No. 5 — The Electronic Information and Documents Amendment Act, 2016 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 233 
 Bill No. 6 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2016 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 233 
 Bill No. 7 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2016 (No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2016 modifiant le droit législatif 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 234 
 Bill No. 8 — The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2016 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 234 
 Bill No. 9 — The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 2016 
 Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’exécution des jugements canadiens 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 235 
 Bill No. 10 — The Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 2016 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 236 
 Bill No. 11 — The Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2016 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 236 
 Bill No. 12 — The Public Health (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2016 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 237 
 Bill No. 13 — The Cancer Agency Amendment Act, 2016 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 238 
 Bill No. 14 — The Horned Cattle Purchases Repeal Act, 2016 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 238 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


