






















































Hansard: June 09, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 14A  THURSDAY, JUNE 9, 2016, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Hon. Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Hon. Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Merriman, Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 51; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Maurice Riou http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 447 
 June 9, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
ask leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from 
Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure and my honour as my new role as minister responsible 
for Saskatchewan-Ukraine relations, I’m pleased to introduce 
five special guests in the Legislative Assembly today. Please 
welcome these visitors seated in your gallery, and I’ll ask them 
to stand and be recognized as I call their names. 
 
First, His Excellency Andriy Shevchenko is the ambassador of 
Ukraine to Canada. Olya Grod is executive director of 
Ukrainian Canadian Congress. Lesia Spolsky is development 
director, Ukrainian Canadian Congress. And of course from 
Yorkton, Mary Ann Trischuk, president of the Ukrainian 
Canadian Congress, Saskatchewan Provincial Council. They are 
accompanied by Chelsey Vargo-Wilson, protocol officer; and 
Helen Akulova, senior international officer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, His Excellency has a busy schedule during his 
time here in Saskatchewan. He and our guests from the 
Ukrainian Canadian Congress are meeting with representatives 
of our government; with members of the Saskatchewan-Ukraine 
relations advisory committee, or SURAC as it is more 
commonly known; and with leaders of Saskatchewan’s 
Ukrainian community and with representatives of academic and 
research institutions. His Excellency’s visit comes during what 
is a special anniversary year for Canada-Ukraine and 
Saskatchewan-Ukraine relations. 
 
I’ll note first that 2016 marks the 75th anniversary of the 
establishment of the Ukrainian Canadian Congress, or UCC, 
and that Ambassador Shevchenko has already joined the UCC 
president, Paul Grod, at various stops across Canada and to 
celebrate that important anniversary of the organization. 
 
This year also marks the 125th anniversary of the first wave of 
Ukrainian immigration to Canada and Saskatchewan; 125 years, 
Mr. Speaker, of rich Canadian-Ukrainian culture and tradition 
contributing to our national and provincial mosaic. Settlers from 
Ukraine helped build our province, and today more than 13 per 
cent of Saskatchewan residents trace all or part of their ancestry 
to Ukraine, according to the last census. Ukraine is currently the 
fifth top source of immigration to our province. 
 

It is to celebrate that strong historic and current connection of 
Saskatchewan with Ukraine that Premier Brad Wall last January 
declared 2016 as the Year of Saskatchewan Ukrainians. Our 
province’s Ukrainian community will be showcasing that 
designation at existing and special community events 
throughout the year. Both the Year of Saskatchewan Ukrainians 
and the 125th anniversary of Ukrainian settlement were profiled 
at the Vesna Festival in Saskatoon in May and at Regina’s 
Mosaic festival this past weekend. I understand that special 
Year of Saskatchewan Ukrainian festival celebrations will be 
taking place on August 13th at Victoria Park in Regina and on 
August 27th at the annual Ukrainian Day in the Park at Kiwanis 
Park in Saskatoon. 
 
Of course the big event this year for our province’s and our 
nation’s Ukrainian community will be the XXV Triennial 
Congress of Ukrainian Canadians. It takes place on 29th of 
September to October 2nd right here in Regina. The theme is 
Engage, Inspire, Empower, and I’m sure the congress will be all 
of that and more for the hundreds of delegates who visit the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan and its government are committed 
to building the long-standing relationship we have with the 
country of Ukraine. Our province has a number of city-twinning 
arrangements and academic exchange agreements with Ukraine, 
and in 2009 we revitalized SURAC to provide 
recommendations on such arrangements and on various 
program initiatives such as the Saskatchewan immigrant 
nominee program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m delighted that these special guests will join 
with us today, and I would ask that all members of this 
Assembly join with me in welcoming His Excellency Andriy 
Shevchenko and the representatives of the UCC to 
Saskatchewan’s Legislative Assembly. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I’d like to introduce to 
the Assembly a great group of grade 4 students from Yorkdale 
Central School, 43 in fact. They’re in the west gallery. With 
them is teachers Ms. Wilson, Mrs. Hicks, and Mrs. Newsham. 
Outside in the bus is Pat Rawlick. He never seems to come in. 
Chaperones are Mrs. Burkall, Mr. Andrew, Mr. Ross, Mrs. 
Presty, and Mrs. Hrushka, along with a good friend of mine, 
deputy fire chief and their good friend, Greg Litvanyi and his 
daughter, Maddie. So I’d ask all members to welcome them to 
their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my distinct 
honour to join with the member opposite, the minister opposite 
to welcome the delegation that’s here today from Ukraine, but 
also Ukrainian Canadians here in Canada that are enriching our 
province day in and day out. To His Excellency Andriy 
Shevchenko, welcome to the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan. Thank you for your presence. It matters. To Paul 
Grod, Olya Grod, Lesia Spolsky, Mary Ann Trischuk, and 
Gerald Luciuk, welcome as well to the Assembly. Thank you 
for all of your contributions to our province. Thank you as well 
for continuing to build this very strong and important 
relationship between Saskatchewan, Canada, and Ukraine. 



448 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2016 

We have a strong and long history, 125 years of Ukrainian 
Canadians building our fine province and our country, and 
we’ve built a very strong and important relationship with 
Ukraine itself. In our province, Ukrainian Canadians have left 
their mark on our province and continue to shape and define our 
future. For example, the Ukrainian Canadian Congress, which is 
now celebrating its 75th anniversary, is relevant and purposeful 
and engaged in very important aspects of our province in that 
relationship with Ukraine. 
 
And you know, and names like Romanow and Tchorzewski and 
Hnatyshyn and Krawetz loom large in our political landscape 
and in our province’s history. And those contributions, although 
they’re very important, are only a fraction of the contributions 
of Ukrainian Canadians to our province as a whole. 
 
It’s a rich history and a bright future between Ukraine and 
Saskatchewan and Canada. The relationship is important, and I 
think it’s important to note that this isn’t just a one-way 
relationship, Mr. Speaker. People from across Saskatchewan 
stand side by side the people of Ukraine in their struggle to 
assert their sovereignty in the face of Russian aggression. 
 
Saskatchewan people will never accept the illegal occupation of 
Ukrainian territory, and I’m proud of the 200 brave men and 
women of the Canadian Forces who are serving alongside our 
NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization] allies and 
providing training to support Ukraine in its efforts to maintain 
sovereignty, security, and stability. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in welcoming 
this delegation to the Assembly here today to thank them for 
their enriching contributions, and in showing solidarity with 
Ukrainian people. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Culture and Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you it’s my pleasure to introduce a special guest to the 
Legislative Assembly today. Seated in your gallery is Tim 
Tokaryk, and Tim is the curator of vertebrate paleontology at 
the Royal Saskatchewan Museum. I think he’s up there in the 
corner. 
 
He’s been working with the Royal Saskatchewan Museum for 
32 years and he has made many important contributions to the 
fossil record of Saskatchewan and the field of paleontology. 
Tim came up with the idea of establishing a provincial fossil. 
He then developed a list of the seven fossil candidates for the 
public to choose from — there’s maybe a couple in this room 
— and you may not know this, but Tim actually excavated 
many of the fossils himself, including Scotty, the ultimate 
winner of the provincial fossil campaign. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in welcoming Tim 
to his Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you I’d like to join the minister in welcoming Tim to his 
Legislative Assembly. He does some great work at the Royal 

Saskatchewan Museum and we really appreciate it. So on 
behalf of the opposition as well, thank you so much for your 
work and welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, I’d also like to introduce another 
individual who is seated at your gallery. Nigel 
Detbrenner-Rempel is here. He is a member of the NDP [New 
Democratic Party] campus club at the U of S [University of 
Saskatchewan] and I understand he’s working for the summer 
for St. Thomas More, going across the province doing some 
outreach work for them. So he’s a great leader in his 
community and I’m looking forward to seeing what he does in 
his career as his career progresses. So I’d ask that the members 
opposite, all the members join me in welcoming him to his 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, seated in 
the west gallery are 14 grade 8 students from the Ituna School. 
They are accompanied by their teacher, Ms. Cindy Yanko; 
chaperones Alison Boczulak and Shawna Zrymiak; along with 
their bus driver, Wesley Kanciruk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re here to observe the proceedings this 
morning. And later on this morning I will be meeting with 
them, and I’m sure that they will have quite a number of 
questions. I would ask all members to welcome them to their 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize Regina Pasqua MLA [Member of 
the Legislative Assembly]. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I would like to . . . To you, through you, and to all the members 
of the Assembly, I’d like to introduce my constituent, Mr. Zia 
Khan. Mr. Zia Khan, can you please raise your hand? Mr. Zia 
Khan started his import and export business in Regina in 2013. 
He’s currently having his office from Regina, Dubai, and from 
Karachi. Zia Khan is having four daughters and one son, two 
daughters going to McMaster University. And right beside him, 
Zia Khan’s partner, Afzul Siddiqui. Afzul Siddiqui is president 
of PCCA, Pakistan Canadian Cultural Association of Regina. I 
would like to say all the members of the Assembly to join me in 
welcoming them in their Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet I would like to introduce 
Kimberly Petrychyn, my constituency assistant from Regina 
Pasqua. Kimberly has recently completed her Business 
Administration degree with a major in human resources at the 
University of Regina. She is currently training for the marathon 
in November this year in Las Vegas. Mr. Speaker, I would like 
to ask all the members of the Assembly to join with me in 
welcoming her to her Legislative Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition to improve PTSD 



June 9, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 449 

[post-traumatic stress disorder] coverage for Saskatchewan 
workers. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that PTSD can 
severely impact the lives of Saskatchewan workers. And the 
gist of the petition is calling on the government to ensure that 
all workers have access to prompt treatment if they experience a 
traumatic event and then get a diagnosis of PTSD on the job. 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Saskatchewan government to 
make the necessary changes to ensure that if Saskatchewan 
workers are exposed to traumatic events on the job and are 
then diagnosed with PTSD, it is presumed to be caused by 
the worker’s employment and the worker will subsequently 
be covered under workers’ compensation and receive the 
same benefits as others with work-related injuries. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens from 
Moose Jaw and Maidstone. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present a 
petition to the Assembly from individuals from Saskatoon. It’s 
regarding the surface rights legislation that is an old and 
outdated piece of legislation. It remains largely unchanged 
despite amendments over the years. It is in desperate need of 
modernization to reflect the current challenges that farmers and 
ranchers are facing today. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the government of Saskatchewan to introduce legislation 
that would modernize The Surface Rights Acquisition and 
Compensation Act, classify land valued as industrial rather 
than agricultural when oil and gas development takes 
place, removing pipelines and flow lines from the surface 
rights Act, and establish a new maximum in compensation 
to be paid for damages. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition in support of funding heritage languages here 
in Saskatchewan. And we know that after 25 years the 
Government of Saskatchewan is discontinuing all support for 
heritage language learning in Saskatchewan. Since 1991, 
heritage language schools have depended on this modest 
funding from the Ministry of Education to help sustain their 
programs. As a result of the announcement by the Ministry of 
Education, many of these non-profit heritage language schools 
will be faced with the difficult decision of whether they can 
continue to operate. 
 
[10:15] 
 
In addition to providing language and cultural classes, these 

schools offer a welcoming environment and crucial support for 
newcomers who are searching for a way to feel at home in their 
new surroundings here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to reconsider this decision and restore funding for heritage 
language education in Saskatchewan heritage language 
schools. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition today are 
from the city of Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Stonebridge-Dakota. 
 

Tax Freedom Day 
 
Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. June 1 was a significant 
day for the people of Saskatchewan. We introduced the 2016-17 
provincial budget that did not raise or introduce any new taxes. 
We know that Saskatchewan people work hard and that the 
taxpayer dollars of this province belong to the people, not the 
government, which is why for the past 10 years Saskatchewan 
has been a national leader for growth, investment, and job 
creation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, June 1 was also significant for another reason. It 
was tax freedom day for our province. Tax freedom day is an 
economic measure put forward by the Fraser Institute that 
tracks and ranks how much provincial residents pay in taxes. 
It’s simple: the earlier tax freedom day arrives, the lower your 
cumulative tax bill becomes. Mr. Speaker, this compares to the 
national average tax freedom day, which is June 7. But more 
importantly, in 2005 when the NDP was in power, tax freedom 
day in Saskatchewan was June 29, a full four weeks longer. 
 
In dollars saved, Mr. Speaker, our government has provided $6 
billion in tax relief since we formed government. Unlike the 
NDP, Mr. Speaker, we will continue to advocate to put more 
money back where it belongs, into the pockets of the 
hard-working people of Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

Saskatoon Community Youth Arts Program 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
wish to rise and recognize the accomplishments of the 
Saskatoon Community Youth Arts Program, or SCYAP as they 
celebrated the end of their urban canvas project and saw another 
talented group of artists graduate. I, along with my colleagues 



450 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2016 

from Saskatoon Sutherland, Fairview, and Northwest, helped 
mark this important occasion at the Snelgrove Gallery at the 
University of Saskatchewan this past May 20th. 
 
SCYAP was founded in June 2001 by Darrell Lechman to 
create an art- and culture-based environment where youth could 
gain employment while working on personal development and 
build skill sets, artistic as well as life skills, that would allow 
them to strive in our community and help them to live happy, 
healthy, and productive lives. Through initiatives such as the 
recently completed eight-month-long urban canvas project, 
SCYAP allows its participants to explore their own personal 
experiences and life struggles through the means of artistic 
expression. The student art show was recently on display at the 
Gordon Snelgrove Art Gallery. 
 
SCYAP is proud that over 70 per cent of the program 
participants are of Aboriginal ancestry, and many grow to 
become strong contributors in the indigenous art community. 
Mr. Speaker, I call on all members to join me in recognizing the 
talented participants from the Saskatoon Community Youth 
Arts Program as well as Darrell Lechman, the staff and 
volunteers at SCYAP. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

First Steps Wellness Centre Opens 
Cerebral Palsy Program 

 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was honoured to 
attend, along with the Minister of Rural and Remote Health and 
the members from Cannington and Regina Pasqua, the First 
Steps Wellness Centre’s cerebral palsy children’s program 
grand opening. 
 
The First Steps Spinal Cord Injury Wellness Centre is a 
non-profit organization that first opened in 2010 to improve 
function, independence, and quality of life for those who 
suffered a spinal cord injury. They provide activity and 
exercise-based rehabilitation, and since opening they have 
expanded their services to those with neuromuscular conditions 
such as MS [multiple sclerosis] and cerebral palsy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new CP [cerebral palsy] children’s program is 
based on the TheraSuit method, which uses a system of elastic 
rubber bands to help align the patient’s body as close to normal 
as possible. This is just a great example of how First Steps is 
using innovative tools and techniques to help people of all ages 
and abilities improve their quality of life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government, through Casino Regina, is proud 
to be a platinum sponsor of this new and exciting program. We 
are proud to contribute to creating a strong, vibrant community, 
and First Steps is helping us do exactly that. 
 
I ask all members to join me in thanking Owen Carlson, the 
man who had a vision for First Steps, and his whole team for all 
that they do for their clients, and congratulating them on this 
new and exciting program they’re about to start on. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Douglas Park. 
 

Mosaic Festival Demonstrates Diversity 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over the weekend I 
had the pleasure to attend the Mosaic festival here in Regina. 
As always, it was a great festival that demonstrated the depth 
and breadth of our Queen City’s diversity. Along with a few of 
my colleagues in the official opposition, I had the chance to 
tend the bar at the India pavilion, serving up beers and mango 
lassis to the huge crowd that turned out to enjoy the festival. 
 
Since 1978, this fantastic festival has been a highlight on the 
calendar of all Reginans, and this year’s offering didn’t 
disappoint. Thousands of people tour the pavilions each and 
every year to check out the dinner, dance, and dress of the 
cultural groups that call Regina home. This year 17 different 
pavilions celebrated the mosaic of cultures that helps our 
province realize the true potential of its motto “from many 
peoples, strength.” 
 
This year’s festival featured pavilions representing Austrians, 
Hungarians, Brazilians, Caribbeans, Chinese, francophones, 
Germans, Greeks, Indians, Irish, Romanians, Italians, two 
different Ukrainian pavilions, Filipinos, Punjabis, and Scots. I 
ask all members to join me in thanking the army of volunteers 
who give so much of their time to make Mosaic a success, the 
sponsors who helped cover off the costs associated with an 
event that takes place across so many venues, along with the 
dancers, musicians, cooks, and costume makers who shared 
their heritage and culture with so many during the festival. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar-Sask 
Valley. 
 

Great Plains College Warman Region Graduation 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
congratulate the Great Plains College Warman region graduates. 
On May 26th, I had the opportunity to attend the graduation 
ceremony in Warman. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Great Plains College is a multi-location 
regional college with campuses in Swift Current, Kindersley, 
and Warman, and additional program offerings in Biggar, 
Maple Creek, Rosetown, and on the Whitecap Dakota First 
Nation. This year more than 100 Warman region students 
graduated from seven programs, including administrative 
assistant, adult basic education, boom truck crane and hoist 
business, early childhood education, heavy equipment operator, 
and youth care worker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, most of the graduates attended classes at the 
Warman campus, but four students graduated from the ABE 
[adult basic education] program offered at Dakota Whitecap 
First Nation, and four students graduated from the adult basic 
education program offered in the town of Biggar in my 
constituency. 
 
I would like to extend special congratulations to my friend and 
constituent Reno Poitras, who is also Zane’s father, on his 
graduation from the ABE program offered in Biggar. 
Graduation marks a new stage in the lives of students and the 



June 9, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 451 

beginning of the careers they have worked so hard for. I ask all 
members to join me in congratulating the new graduates from 
the Great Plains College Warman region. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
University. 
 

Newcomer Entrepreneur of the Year Awards 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Monday I had 
the pleasure of attending the first ever Newcomer Entrepreneur 
of the Year Awards hosted by the Saskatoon Regional 
Economic Development Authority and Square One, 
Saskatchewan’s business resource centre. 
 
This event was a great opportunity to celebrate those who have 
come to Saskatchewan and embraced our strong entrepreneurial 
spirit. In 2015 Stats Canada reported that over 21 per cent of 
small- and medium-sized businesses were owned by 
entrepreneurs born outside of Canada, with Saskatchewan 
having the largest amount of newcomer entrepreneurs in the 
country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the Start-up category, the winner was Colors of 
India. In the Growth category, the winner was Baydo 
Development Corp. Odd Couple took home the award in the 
Under 39 category, and Manila Cleaning Services won in the 
Connect category. 
 
I felt very honoured, Mr. Speaker, to present the NEYA 
[Newcomer Entrepreneur of the Year Award] Spirit award to 
Wajid and Maysoon Toma with First Impressions Hair Design. 
 
Mr. Speaker, immigrants to the province can face significant 
financial and language barriers when starting a new business, so 
it is important that we recognize the hard work and dedication 
of each and every newcomer entrepreneur. I ask all members to 
join me in congratulating the winners for the Newcomer 
Entrepreneur of the Year Awards as well as Square One for 
putting on such a wonderful event. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Fraser Institute Mining Survey 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 
Fraser Institute’s annual survey of mining companies was 
released, and once again Saskatchewan was ranked as the most 
attractive jurisdiction for mining investment in Canada and the 
second most attractive destination worldwide. 
 
This ranking looked at many factors from 109 jurisdictions 
across the world, including geological attractiveness and the 
extent to which government policies affected investment. Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatchewan has witnessed almost 30 billion in total 
potash and uranium capital investment since 2007, and in 2015 
Saskatchewan had the second highest mineral value production 
in Canada at $8.5 billion. As a result, the mining industry has 
generated over 30,000 direct and indirect jobs in our province. 
Mr. Speaker, this government has worked hard to offer 
competitive resource royalty structures, reliable and transparent 

policies, as well as an overall wealth of resources for the 
companies that do choose to work here. 
 
This report is one more example of how Saskatchewan is 
continuing to be the best place to live as well as invest in, with 
strong, diversified economy that is able to compete worldwide. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would invite all members to join me in 
congratulating the hard-working men and women in our mining 
sector. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Government’s Fiscal Management 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, 9,000 fewer jobs than a 
year ago. People of Saskatchewan are facing lower and lower 
wages. More and more families are falling into bankruptcy. And 
the Sask Party is actually making things worse on many fronts. 
They don’t seem to understand that their cuts, their scandals, 
and their mismanagement all have consequences for real people 
across Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s the people of Saskatchewan who are left to pay the price for 
this government’s mismanagement. Instead of concern and 
compassion and meaningful action, in this House all we get 
from that side of the House is arrogant dismissals, error-plagued 
lines from the ministers, and petty attacks against our critics — 
wrong answer after wrong answer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can count to 51 and to 10 as well as the next guy, 
but the Sask Party’s majority does not remove their duty to 
govern responsibly. Will the Premier commit to working with 
his cabinet and caucus to fix this troubling culture and 
unacceptable approach of his government? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t quite understand the 
Leader of the Opposition’s question. I disagree with much of 
the premise of the question; I would say that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before, during, and since the election, we’ve 
worked very hard to present to Saskatchewan people our plan 
for growth, for continued economic strength in the province of 
Saskatchewan. We campaigned on improving it with things like 
the patent box and, in this particular year, the largest 
infrastructure investment in the history of the province, which is 
also part of the short- and the long-term economic plan we have 
for the province. 
 
We’ve also worked hard and diligently already, even though the 
election was just the 4th of April. Mr. Speaker, it’s very 
important, notwithstanding how many members are in the 
government, that the government works to do the things that it 
said it would do in the campaign, that it would keep its 
promises, that it would work hard to serve the people of this 
province, and we’ve done that over the last number of years, 
over eight years. I think that was in part, perhaps, recognized on 
the 4th of April. I think that’s fair to say. And it’s also the 
expectation of Saskatchewan people going forward, and we’re 
going to work hard to meet that expectation and to earn the 



452 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2016 

mandate we received in that election campaign. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I’m genuinely reaching out 
to that Premier to take some responsibly for the troubling 
culture of that government in his cabinet, not only for their 
scandals and their mismanagement, but also for his ministers. 
The reality being faced by the people of Saskatchewan is not 
the rosy picture the Premier regales us with most days. There’s 
cuts in health care. There’s challenges in education. There’s 
impacts for the poor all across this province, and no plan to 
diversify and to strengthen our economy. 
 
Yet day after day as serious questions are being posed by 
critics, whether they’re about children in care, whether they’re 
about corrections, whether they’re about cuts to the most 
vulnerable or in education, instead of stepping up and 
answering, minister after minister stands in this legislature, gets 
their facts wrong. In fact, if you think of the Education minister, 
instead of answering questions, he launches petty political 
attacks on this very strong Education critic on this side of the 
House who’s painting the reality and addressing the concerns of 
education across this province. Meanwhile, students, as it 
relates to education, are facing the cuts. When will this Premier 
stop failing students, denying reality, and starting making our 
kids’ classrooms a priority? 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the opposition will ask 
questions in this House in question period and the government 
will answer those questions. And sometimes the answer will be 
about the record of the government, and often the answer will 
also talk a little bit about what our plans are for the future. 
Those are the exchanges that I’ve witnessed in this early session 
of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
I’ve witnessed some other things though, Mr. Speaker. I’ve 
witnessed a number of critics on that side of the House 
fundamentally get their facts wrong and have to be corrected the 
next day when the minister rises into place. I think the new 
member for Lakeview has had an experience with this, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I think the Leader of the Opposition himself has had some 
challenges with this, Mr. Speaker, up to and including here I 
think just in the last number of days when he would 
mischaracterize the bypass for, I don’t know, the umpteenth 
time, mischaracterize the fact that it’s Saskatchewan companies 
that are involved in that bypass, basically dismiss Broda Group 
which is a lead contractor. And in the end . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — You know that’s not true. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well he says it’s not true. In the election 
campaign they actually put out a press release singling out 
Broda as not really a Saskatchewan company because maybe 
they have Alberta investment, although they’ve been 
headquartered in this province for 50-plus years and are 
currently located in Prince Albert. 

So I would invite my hon. member to be a bit more circumspect 
in terms of his criticisms in the House. I’m sure members on 
both sides of the House make mistakes from time to time. But, 
Mr. Speaker, what we have seen from members opposite since 
this session began is a string of mischaracterizations in terms of 
government policy and attacks not just on the government, but 
on businesses in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I asked the 
Education minister to clarify something he said to the media. I 
asked him to explain if the 33 per cent increase in education he 
takes credit for is in any part actually a shuffling of existing 
dollars, rather than new money. Instead of answering the 
question, all the minister offered was rhetoric that ignored, 
diminished, and defied the reality that schools across this 
province are facing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, parents deserve answers. They deserve to know 
how their tax dollars are being spent. They deserve clarity about 
how the government calculates their numbers, and they deserve 
adequate funding for schools instead of spin lines for the 
government. So I’ll ask the minister again: does his 33 per cent 
actually represent an overall increase to schools or is he just 
shuffling budget lines? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I would say this to the 
member opposite and I would say this to the Leader of the 
Opposition. If they start out asking a question that has a wrong 
or an erroneous preamble that leads to misconception on the 
part of the public, I will stand in this House and I will correct it 
each and every time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition accuses us of having 
a culture of not wanting to be co-operative or helpful. Mr. 
Speaker, we have two things in this House right now. I have 
reached out to the members opposite and I have said, do you 
wish to have a private or a separate briefing regarding the bill 
going forward on teachers’ superannuation? They’ve accepted 
that offer. That was an offer that was made without them 
asking. 
 
That member opposite has also asked for a briefing and 
information regarding the task force and the work that Dan 
Perrins is doing. I contacted Dan Perrins directly and said, you 
can meet with that member and say whatever you want, 
whatever information’s there, and you don’t need to wait for 
estimates. You’re welcome to the information. We have nothing 
to hide, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the minister and his staff for 
those briefings. But once again we have no direct answers and a 
denial of the reality of the effects that this government’s budget 
is having on schools across the province. 



June 9, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 453 

Mr. Speaker, since last week’s budget, school boards have been 
struggling with bad news. The Saskatoon Public School 
Division is short $160 per student. Teachers will be cut and 
class sizes will grow. Mr. Speaker, the Prairie South School 
Division is making cuts too, eliminating educational positions. 
Several trustees in the division spoke out about these cuts. And 
it’s not fearmongering. These are the facts. One trustee said, “I 
think in this day and age of students coming to school with a lot 
of different challenges the last thing we need is eliminating 
positions in our schools.” Mr. Speaker, we couldn’t agree more. 
When will this minister finally admit that his government’s 
budget is failing our kids? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite asks 
questions about what the effect was with education property tax 
included or not included. Mr. Speaker, during the election, the 
members opposite ran on a platform of an increase to education 
of 1.1 per cent, right out of their costing platform, a paltry $27 
million increase, Mr. Speaker, something totally unacceptable 
and not workable. 
 
Since that time, the members opposite have said we need a 6 
per cent increase. Mr. Speaker, they come out with numbers 
each and every day, something totally different. But let’s be 
accurate. Let’s talk about what the numbers actually are. In 
2000 and 2008, provincial funding to school divisions, 
exclusive of property tax, exclusive of capital, was $694 
million. 2016-17, that number, exclusive once again of property 
tax, exclusive of capital, had increased to $1.2 billion. So if you 
want to talk about what the percentages are, 73 per cent. At the 
same time, Mr. Speaker, education property tax had been 
reduced by 8.3 per cent, Mr. Speaker. That’s the commitment 
from this side of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Expansion of Private Medical Diagnostic Services 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Yesterday the Health minister brought 
forward his private CT [computerized tomography] scan bill. 
The Sask Party ran on private CT scans, so this was not 
unexpected. But what they did not run on was opening up a 
back door to more for-profit, user-pay procedures in health care. 
 
The bill goes far beyond CT scans and allows cabinet to write 
whatever definition for medical imaging it likes. So if the Sask 
Party decides they want people to pay personally for necessary 
X-rays or ultrasounds, nuclear medicine, or scope procedures, 
they don’t have to come to the House and debate it in public. 
All they need is an order in council and a stroke of a pen, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
To the minister: why is this government opening up a back door 
to more private-pay health care? And if this was their intention 
all along, why weren’t they honest with Saskatchewan people 
about it during the election? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we’ve gone through a process as a government of 
talking with the public about allowing for additional options for 
people to have access to MRI [magnetic resonance imaging]. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we introduced the bill. We put a bill before this 
House and the bill has passed, Mr. Speaker, and that bill has 
now been in place and in effect for a couple of months now. We 
did openly campaign to say that we would extend this to CT, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is in stark contrast to the members opposite 
who actually allowed for the same arrangements for workers’ 
compensation and other organizations like the Saskatchewan 
Roughriders, Mr. Speaker. And was there a debate in this House 
on that? Absolutely not. Was there a debate in the public on 
that? Absolutely not. In fact, Mr. Speaker, they had allowed 
organizations like workers’ comp and the Saskatchewan 
Roughriders to do this for years before anybody even knew that 
it was happening under the social democrat NDP, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve been very open and transparent in terms of 
looking at different options to allow for additional capacity, 
unlike the members opposite who didn’t even pass a law, didn’t 
pass a regulation. Mr. Speaker, they wrote a letter, sent it to 
those organizations, and nobody knew the wiser. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, Canadians across the country 
are proud of their health care system. It ensures that everyone, 
rich or poor, has equal access to health care based on their 
health card, not their credit card. It is a public system that 
started right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they received a mandate for private CT scans — 
nothing more, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan people did not give 
the Premier and cabinet power to privatize all aspects of health 
care in closed-door cabinet meetings with zero debate, zero 
oversight, zero accountability. 
 
Here in Saskatchewan, people expect changes to medicare to be 
debated in their Legislative Assembly, and very big changes 
here that are happening, Mr. Speaker. How can the minister 
justify this massive overreach of his mandate? Will he amend 
the bill to limit its scope to MRI and CT scans only? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, once again, we have not only had a conversation with 
the public going back a couple of years ago about looking at 
different options for allowing what people had the ability to do 
each and every day. They just didn’t have the ability to do it 
inside the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite are so opposed to that, I 
would encourage the member to write a private bill that would 
bar health care providers from looking at a scan that was paid 
for out of province, Mr. Speaker. They looked at that as a party, 
but they decided not to do it. So we thought, Mr. Speaker, as a 
way that we can find a benefit for the public system for what 
people are already doing each and every day in this province, 



454 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2016 

whether it’s in Calgary or Minot or the Mayo Clinic or in other 
places, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we decided that we’re going to expand on 
that. We’re going to look at other innovations to ensure that we 
do have a sustainable health care system for many generations 
to come, Mr. Speaker. But we’re having that open debate, that 
public debate — unlike the members opposite who thought, you 
know what, this is actually a good idea for some people though, 
but only for some people, Mr. Speaker. And I can tell the 
members opposite, I know that I campaigned very hard for 27 
days in the last campaign, and I never met a constituent of mine 
that is any less worthy than a Saskatchewan Roughrider or a 
member of workers’ compensation, Mr. Speaker, and that 
shouldn’t be afforded the same opportunities. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, that is one of the more 
ridiculous answers we’ve heard in this House. Will he admit . . . 
The question was about making sure that CT only, in his bill, is 
what he campaigned on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are more concerns with the expansion of private 
diagnostic clinics. The government has a clear responsibility to 
make sure that these clinics follow the rules, and they are 
providing safe and high-quality care for patients. Based on this 
government’s track record and learning from the lessons of 
other provinces, this is certainly a concerning element. Auditors 
have highlighted issues with inspections in facilities that 
weren’t up to par. And this is our health care system that really 
sick people rely on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are also concerns about inappropriate use of diagnostics. 
We have opened up the door for more physicians to own 
clinics. Physicians, the ones who can prescribe these tests. How 
does the government plan on managing this conflict of interest? 
How will they ensure that these clinics are safe for patients? 
Will they keep track of the data or will they just expect CIHI 
[Canadian Institute of Health Information] to get this 
information for us? Will they add funding for inspections or is it 
just yet another thing they will pawn off on underfunded health 
regions? To the minister: what’s the plan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I guess I don’t understand 
the premise of the question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have had for some time now publicly funded 
scans being delivered in community, Mr. Speaker, by 
organizations. And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe that there has 
been a problem in terms of ensuring that they were done in a 
safe manner, in an effective manner, Mr. Speaker. In fact what 
we’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, is a lot of the load being taken off of 
the hospitals, Mr. Speaker, and people having a more 
appropriate scan done in a more appropriate place. 
 
Yes, we have to ensure that appropriate scans are being 
requisitioned by physicians, Mr. Speaker. We have to work 
with our physician community. And we are working with the 
SMA [Saskatchewan Medical Association] on a program called 

Choosing Wisely to ensure that only scans that are actually 
necessary, Mr. Speaker . . . And in the case of these bills, a 
physician will still have to requisition that the scan be procured, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I don’t understand the position of the member 
opposite when . . . If it was good enough for a football player, if 
it was good enough for workers’ compensation, but it’s not 
good enough for my constituents and it’s not good enough for 
hers, I don’t understand that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Children in Provincial Care 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Minister of 
Social Services thanked me for reading out her whole quote, the 
full quote that showed she had her facts wrong until a reporter 
corrected her. In that spirit, I hope she will help me to clarify a 
few more facts. 
 
First, the minister said she was not aware of any rural parenting 
programs that were cut. Mr. Speaker, these important programs 
were cut by the Sask Party last year in Archerwill and Lestock. 
 
Next, Mr. Speaker, the minister is in the record saying that no 
kids have been placed in hotels in 2016. Well in fact, during 
just the first four months of this year, hotels were used to hold 
children at least five times. Mr. Speaker, does the minister not 
care enough to know the facts when speaking about her 
important file, or does she just not care enough to use them? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — So again the member opposite is going 
back to an interview that was done prior to the election, so a 
few months ago now. And the question was whether or not I 
was aware of children being . . . or hotel usage since the 
beginning of this year. And I said, to my knowledge, I was not. 
 
The ministry does not alert me if they take children into care 
very temporarily. If they take them in late at night or if it’s a 
large sibling group, they don’t leave them in the corner of the 
office, Mr. Speaker. They’ll use a hotel for those few hours till 
the morning where they can find an appropriate placement. 
There was indeed, and the officials clarified that there was four 
incidents. 
 
[10:45] 
 
They don’t alert my office when that happens. It’s when they 
have accelerated number of times that they’re using a hotel, and 
the hotel usage is for a number of days. That is concerning, Mr. 
Speaker, and that did happen in the fall of 2015. The public 
knew about that, Mr. Speaker, and it was happening in Regina 
and then in P.A. [Prince Albert] because we had a shortage of 
placements. We have since expanded the number of spaces for 
children here in Regina, and it is a file that we will continue to 
work on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 



June 9, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 455 

Employment Numbers in Correctional Facilities 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to move on to clarify 
some facts from another minister who had her numbers wrong 
about P.A. jobs. Mr. Speaker, just the other day, on June 7th in 
this House, the Minister of Corrections and Policing bragged 
about the jobs that would be created by the Prince Albert 
Correctional Centre expansion. She said, “We’ve added 200 
new jobs in Prince Albert for the newly opened, I guess it’s 
Prince Albert Correctional Centre.” 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this doesn’t match the minister’s press 
release and announcements in October. Then the number is 
closer to 100, Mr. Speaker. Which job numbers can the people 
of Prince Albert trust — the minister’s announcement in 
October or the answer she gave in the House just two days ago? 
Mr. Speaker, if the minister is unsure of the answer, rather than 
guess, can she please tell us that and come back with the true 
figure once she gets the facts straight? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when 
I used the number of 200 new jobs in the Prince Albert area, 
that of course included Pinegrove Correctional Centre, and this 
is from 2013, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud of our record. I’m proud 
of the amount of money — $60 million spent on opening 380 
bed spaces in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ll stand by our record rather the members opposite. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Economics and Environmental Assessment 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I prefaced my question 
to the Environment minister saying we don’t hear much from 
him except when it comes to zebra and quagga mussels. I then 
proceeded to ask him about other things like the tech fund, 
conservation, watershed planning, and climate change. Even 
with all those options and the preface, Mr. Speaker, how did the 
minister reply? By once again talking even more about zebra 
and quagga mussels. It would actually be funny if he weren’t 
the one responsible for protecting the air we breathe, the water 
we drink, and the earth our farmers rely on to grow our food. 
So, Mr. Speaker, let me try again. 
 
People are worried about the impacts and the economics of the 
proposed Yancoal potash mine. The minister soon will need to 
make a decision about this project that will impact thousands of 
jobs, as well as the water sources of a lot of people’s drinking 
water. Environment and Economy should work together on 
something to ensure sustainable prosperity, and that isn’t 
something we’ve seen from this government. 
 
So, to the minister, can the people of Saskatchewan even trust 
this government to make this important choice? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thanks for the 
question opposite. And Yancoal, yes they are proposing a new 

solution potash mine that’s going to be located near Southey 
here in the province. And they’re currently going through, Mr. 
Speaker, a very rigorous provincial environmental assessment 
process which is ongoing at this time. 
 
And in answer to the question, we did hear from the local 
committee in that area that wanted more time to have a look at 
the assessment, and we granted that time. We increased it by 50 
per cent, from 30 days to 45 days, to allow them more time to 
assess what was going on. And that’s not something that is done 
on a regular basis, but we did it in this case. Yes, and June 6 
was the last day for that assessment for the consultation process, 
and that’s closed by now. But the environmental assessment 
process is science-based and it includes a lot of factors 
including technical information, public input, and the decision 
will be made in the future after we do do our diligent and 
rigorous assessment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Funding for Urban Parks 
 
Ms. Sproule: — We got some terrible news yesterday, Mr. 
Speaker. The Meewasin Valley Authority announced that the 
interpretive centre will shut down on July 1st and three 
full-time jobs will be lost. The lack of funding by this 
government has forced the Meewasin Valley Authority into the 
precarious situation they are in now. And it’s not just Meewasin 
that’s facing cuts and clawbacks, Mr. Speaker. Five other urban 
parks will have their funding cut because of this government’s 
mismanagement of nearly a decade of record revenues. 
 
And even Wascana Park, the park that this Legislative Building 
that we sit in today is a part of, is at risk of funding cuts as well. 
Bernadette McIntyre, the CEO [chief executive officer] of 
Wascana Centre Authority, said Wascana would be affected if 
provincial funding was cut. 
 
So to the minister: what does he have to say to the Wascana 
Centre Authority and the thousands of people, including myself, 
who enjoy this park? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank 
the member opposite for the question. Mr. Speaker, we take the 
Meewasin situation seriously. This is a budget that we put 
together that controls spending. Mr. Speaker, we had difficult 
choices that we had to make this budget time, and Meewasin 
and Wascana are currently, they’re currently under review, Mr. 
Speaker. The Meewasin Valley Authority Act requires statutory 
funding and it needs to be reviewed every five years, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue to complete the reviews 
in terms of financial assessments. We’re going to continue to 
engage and dialogue with our partners, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I think it’s important to read into the record that since 
2011-12, Meewasin’s statutory and supplementary funding has 
remained stable at $909,000, Mr. Speaker. So that’s been every 
single year including this budget, Mr. Speaker. 



456 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2016 

Mr. Speaker, Wascana Centre Authority, their budget has been 
stable this whole time, Mr. Speaker, 2011 as well up to 2012. 
Mr. Speaker, I challenge the members opposite to actually look 
at their platform document, Mr. Speaker. I think all of us would 
be interested where the increases to Meewasin, Wascana Centre 
Authority, and all the urban parks are in their document, Mr. 
Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Consultation on Provincial Lands Act 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, back in 2013, the Agriculture 
minister set out to change The Provincial Lands Act. He held 
consultation meetings and got an earful from folks who weren’t 
keen on how vague and how far-reaching his plan would be. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, fast forward to May of this year and the 
government is again plowing ahead with these changes, except 
this time they are only allowing three weeks of consultations 
and the final deadline was last Friday. This just doesn’t make 
sense because we won’t be seeing this legislation until the fall. 
So to the Agriculture minister: what is your rush? Why are you 
plowing ahead without meaningful consultation? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
member for her question. The time has come for modernization 
of this Act. This Act is a 1930 Act and has not been updated 
since 1978. Language in the Act is not representative of the 
language used today and is inappropriate, frankly, Mr. Speaker. 
We conducted fulsome consultations in 2013 and ended up not 
proceeding at that time. We refreshed . . . The consultations that 
were held this time were a refresh of those consultations held in 
2013. All of the parties were re-engaged and we’re very pleased 
with the responses from them. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 28 — The Extension of Compassionate 
Care Act, 2016 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 28, The Extension of Compassionate Care Act, 2016 be 
now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It’s been moved by the Minister of Education 
that Bill No. 28, The Extension of Compassionate Care Act, 
2016 be introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second time? I 

recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 29 — The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 
2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur les juges de paix 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move that Bill No. 28, The Justices of the Peace Amendment 
Act, 2016 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 29, The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 
2016 be now introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that the Assembly approves in 
general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Ms. 
Sproule.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure and 
an opportunity to stand in the Assembly and to respond once 
again to a budget, a budget that certainly has a lot of concern, a 
lot of risk for Saskatchewan people. You know, over the past 
few days I’ve listened to speeches on both sides of the 
Assembly, value some of the points made on both sides. But I 
really do appreciate the, I guess, the smarts and the strength and 
the compassion and the reality that I heard from members of the 
official opposition in sharing their perspective and their 
connection to their respective riding and to our province as a 
whole with the budget that’s been brought forward. 
 



June 9, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 457 

As I’ve said before, as the official opposition, we accept the 
reality, the electoral reality. We accept what voters have said, 
and we accept the, in this case, a relatively small opposition that 
we are. That being said, that doesn’t diminish our commitment 
to serve all of the people of this province whether they voted for 
us or not, and the entire province of Saskatchewan. And as an 
official opposition, we’re out there listening. We’ll be building 
those relationships and be ready to stand up and to serve the 
best interests of Saskatchewan people any day of the week 
whether it relates to a matter in downtown Saskatoon or 
whether it’s in Preeceville or the Far North or the southwest or 
anywhere in between, Mr. Speaker. That’s our task. That’s our 
commitment, and that’s our pledge to Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as was noted by the Finance critic last week, there 
was no reason for this budget to be hidden from Saskatchewan 
people, to be withheld before the election, you know. And it’s 
become pretty clear, Mr. Speaker, that that Sask Party has a lot 
to hide, a lot to hide, Mr. Speaker. It’s clear in this budget that 
. . . It makes clear a record, a record of mounting 
mismanagement, Mr. Speaker, and mismanagement that the 
Sask Party government is passing on to Saskatchewan people 
by way of cost. It’s their mismanagement. It’s their waste. It’s 
their debacles, but they’re asking Saskatchewan people to pay 
the price, Mr. Speaker, and that’s not right. 
 
And it demonstrates concerning values of this large, 
heavy-handed government majority, values that are increasingly 
and actually surprisingly at times out of line with Saskatchewan 
people. You know, the fact is that clearly this government 
didn’t have the courage to come clean with Saskatchewan 
people before the election, denying Saskatchewan people the 
very basic information, hiding their plan, hiding the budget, 
hiding the true state of the finances, hiding the cuts and the 
impacts for Saskatchewan people. 
 
And it’s also clear that this government is making 
Saskatchewan people pay for their mismanagement, their waste, 
their debacles, Mr. Speaker. In so many cases in this budget, 
despite having a great big deficit, Mr. Speaker — and we see 
ballooning costs on projects that are being mismanaged — we 
see a government that’s exacting callous and regressive, 
short-sighted cuts for Saskatchewan people. On so many fronts, 
cuts that actually defy common sense in any of the evidence 
around those cuts, Mr. Speaker, actions that are damaging to 
our future and limiting and hurting the futures of so many 
people across the province that we love. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was all hidden from Saskatchewan people 
before the election, a government that didn’t have the courage 
or the decency to come clean or be straight with Saskatchewan 
people. And that’s beyond unfair to the people of this province. 
 
You know it is clear that they didn’t want Saskatchewan people 
to realize that they had drained every last dime from that rainy 
day fund, the fact that they had spent billions of dollars and 
more, the surpluses that were left to them, the rainy day fund 
that was in place. And not only had they exhausted and drained 
all those dollars, they spent those dollars and more, piling on 
debt, billions of dollars, taking us to in fact record levels and 
not saving a dime for the future. 
 
You know this is evidenced in things like the idea of a heritage 

fund or a futures fund or some of the work that was done a few 
years ago by Mr. MacKinnon, work that has never come to 
fruition from this government because they couldn’t get their 
priorities right. They couldn’t get their mismanagement in line. 
The dollars continued to flow to the detriment of Saskatchewan 
people who deserve a lasting legacy from windfall in good 
years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[11:00] 
 
It’s clear they didn’t want people to know about their plans in 
health care or in education, the underfunding and the 
consequences. And it’s abundantly clear that they didn’t want 
Saskatchewan people to know, who are sadly dealing with job 
loss, pressure of realities on that front, precarious employment, 
that they had no plan to create jobs, no plan to diversify the 
economy. And it’s certainly clear that this government hid their 
mismanagement, their waste, their damaging plan; in the case of 
jobs, the lack thereof. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I have said in this Assembly and brought to the 
attention of government, who’s often caught up in back-patting 
itself and denying the reality, Mr. Speaker, we have 9,000 fewer 
jobs in this province from last year. And we can talk about that 
as if it’s a statistic, but those are real lives. Those are real 
people and real lives in my riding and across Saskatchewan, 
families under strain and under pressure. And in this budget we 
see no action, no meaningful action to resolve and to remedy 
that circumstance. Bankruptcies are on the rise. And instead of 
a government searching for solutions, we see a government 
making cuts — cuts to apprenticeship programs, cuts to 
post-secondary education, cuts to programs that help people get 
back to work and help support new businesses. 
 
They used to talk about diversification, but they’ve even 
abandoned that in this budget. Instead now they’re even making 
cuts to economic development trade programs that help our 
economy and help support us with commodity cycles and the 
challenging commodity cycle we’re facing right now. Mr. 
Speaker, how is that going to help our economy grow and 
prosper? 
 
Why isn’t this government rolling up their sleeves to support 
the development of new industries — technology, green jobs, 
renewable energy, film and cultural industries? And why can’t 
this government actually get the job done when it comes to 
market access? Actually getting our product to market by 
addressing our failed transportation system, rail that doesn’t 
perform, the need for safe, responsible pipelines, and a road and 
highways network that’s safe and efficient. 
 
You know, when it comes to transportation and how important 
it is to an exporting province like ours, this government has 
been all words and no action. All words on rail transportation 
with no meaningful action to fix and build a system for the 
future. All words and no delivery on pipelines. In fact, a costly, 
failed approach by this Premier who’s always ready, it seems, 
to sort of inflame divisions or grandstand, but not able to get the 
job done, which will require strongly making the case and 
building understanding across our country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while health care and education . . . When we look 
at health care and education, we know that the funding that’s in 



458 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2016 

this budget just simply isn’t enough to even maintain the 
current levels of service. We know that this government’s 
pushing that important responsibility onto health regions, 
punting, off-loading that responsibility, sticking them with 
those tough choices, providing them insufficient dollars and 
leaving it up to them where they’re going to cut. And that 
leaves concern for Saskatchewan people and communities all 
across this province, wondering what’s next when it comes to 
their health services. 
 
We see a government that’s certainly not serious about 
addressing the pressures in emergency rooms across our 
province, making sure that hospitals are open and have the 
services that they need. And then we see a government that’s 
hiking the cost in a significant way for families and seniors 
when it comes to prescription drug costs. 
 
You know, this is something that was hid from Saskatchewan 
people in the election. It’s a direct cost for families and people 
that are working hard. And all too often, I’m already told, long 
before this surprise hike by this government, that we have too 
many seniors all across this province that are in a very 
vulnerable circumstance, that are left with that very difficult 
choice between food or prescriptions. That’s wrong, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Just in the past week alone, we continued to hear from 
educational leaders, school boards, teachers, parents, students 
about the inadequacy of this budget relating to education. We 
have classrooms that are under strain and kids that have had 
support peeled away from them, class sizes that have grown, 
classes that have become more complex, insufficient supports 
for English as an additional language, insufficient action for 
First Nations and Métis students across our province. But we 
have a budget that’s not making any of these things better, but 
it’s actually making things worse. We have a budget that’s not 
addressing the unsafe conditions in some of our schools, the 
current state of many facilities that need funding and need a 
clear, transparent plan from this government. 
 
You know, we also see measures that the government I think 
just dismisses as a small budget item because it doesn’t cost a 
whole bunch. Of course we have a government that’s willing to 
spend, you know, 43 million bucks on an overpass just two 
years ago but now they’re tearing it down and rebuilding it. But 
yet they’re going to cut just over $200,000 from heritage 
language schools across the province — almost 80 heritage 
language programs that serve thousands of students for $50 a 
year per student. That’s incredible value. These schools build to 
our multicultural province. Language is the foundation of 
culture. These cuts are regressive and they hurt us socially, 
culturally, and economically. They just don’t make sense, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
When we look at education, education has to be the foundation 
of our future. That’s what it is. Our future society, our future 
economy. It’s the great equalizer, or at least it should be. It 
should be our tool to extend opportunity to all in this province. 
Instead of supporting education and making dreams realities 
and creating opportunity, we see another budget from this 
government that harms classrooms all across our province, thus 
harming our province and our future, Mr. Speaker. 
 

We warned of these things in advance of an election, and I think 
the government opposite called it fearmongering at the time. All 
while they hid their budget and hid their plan, Mr. Speaker. 
Families are dealing with job loss, as I’ve stated. We need a 
plan, a meaningful plan to create jobs, protect jobs, and 
diversify our economy. 
 
We have families that are struggling with costs, costs of raising 
families, and instead we have a government that has a surprise 
hike in power bills to the people of this province. And actually 
not one but just two surprise hikes, Mr. Speaker, to an alarming 
10 per cent, Mr. Speaker, hidden from the people of 
Saskatchewan before the election from a government that 
wouldn’t come clean before an election, Mr. Speaker, and a 
government that’s clearly forcing Saskatchewan people to pay 
for their mismanagement. 
 
You know, I watched the member from Athabasca and also our 
Justice and Corrections critic take to the floor to address the 
callous and nonsensical cut of the Buffalo Narrows corrections 
centre. This not only creates hardship for families in a 
community for which the centre is important, peels away 
meaningful employment, but it defies common sense. It rejects 
the evidence about what makes sense to build effective 
programs and to reduce recidivism. 
 
We have a plea from this opposition to reconsider this very 
short-sighted cut, this cold-hearted cut, and to reinstate the 
support for that very meaningful program. You know, and I 
guess we look to that region itself as well. These are individuals 
who are being served that are from within the region. We know 
it’s in our best interests to make sure that that process is as 
effective as possible. This hurts that process and it certainly 
hurts jobs also within a region that suffers a very difficult 
unemployment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I don’t think anyone expected in this budget that there was 
going to be cuts to parks all across the province, and there’s 
consequences for that. Of course we have communities across 
the province that have been impacted: Weyburn, Moose Jaw, 
Swift Current, Prince Albert, The Battlefords. But also now we 
have Regina and Saskatoon left in the lurch not knowing what 
commitments are there. This is a government that never ran on 
cutting parks within the election, and now we’re left all across 
the province either with the choice for municipalities again 
being off-loaded onto, to either force cuts up once again on 
Saskatchewan people or to cut some of those things that are 
important to communities. And parks are important. They’re 
important. They provide economic opportunities. They’re 
important from a cultural perspective. They’re important to 
quality of life. 
 
All while this government has no trouble signing us on to 
wasteful project after wasteful project, whether it’s 23 million 
bucks for the GTH [Global Transportation Hub] scandal, 
whether it’s $43 million for an overpass that was built two years 
ago that’s now being torn down and being rebuilt, or whether 
it’s the fact that we have a bypass that’s been mismanaged so 
bad with the big cheques going to France, Mr. Speaker, of 
going from $400 million to over $2 billion. That’s bizarre, Mr. 
Speaker. And then we see these callous and misplaced cuts for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 



June 9, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 459 

And who would have imagined, Mr. Speaker, that this 
government would make cuts to the programs that help the most 
vulnerable in our province? Families who are struggling with 
low-paying jobs are no longer getting the employment 
supplement for children over 13, despite the promise to parents 
already in the program from this government just a year ago 
that that money would be there. Families count on those 
commitments and they deserve to be able to trust their 
government at their word, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We see cutbacks to things like the Aboriginal court worker 
program and police consulting groups. These are supports that 
we should be extending. These are programs that we should be 
championing to address some of the very troubling and 
challenging circumstances we have across the province and to 
ensure hope and opportunity for many in the province, Mr. 
Speaker. Making cuts in these areas is frankly shameful and 
unacceptable. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, during the election the government 
told the people of Saskatchewan that they were going to sort of 
stay the course. That was sort of their pitch. They said, don’t 
worry that we’re hiding our finances. Don’t worry that we’re 
not sharing our plan. Don’t worry that we’re running on six 
items on a napkin, it would seem, Mr. Speaker. But the reality 
is this government didn’t come clean with Saskatchewan 
people, and it’s Saskatchewan people who are left to pay the 
price for this Sask Party government’s mismanagement. 
 
We hear a government now talking about transformational 
change. I don’t know if they yet know what they’re talking 
about on this front, Mr. Speaker, but of course it causes concern 
for people all across the province. The Minister of Finance says 
everything’s on the table, Mr. Speaker. And he’s asking 
questions that frankly should be asked by a government that’s 
being responsible and prudent every single day of governing, 
Mr. Speaker, not 10 years in after blowing an historic 
opportunity. Health regions and school boards are already 
dealing with cuts and are now left wondering what this means. 
Saskatchewan people are wondering what’s next by way of cuts 
and impacts. And all of that of course was hidden from 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
You know, at the end of the day this government needs to stop 
blaming low commodity prices on everything, and they need to 
take some responsibility for the position we’re currently in — 
no savings. And let’s just remember: over eight years, almost a 
decade of record revenues in this period of government, but no 
savings, $1.4 billion once in the rainy day fund completely 
drained and exhausted. Surpluses blown; strong economic times 
and windfall blown. Debt, Mr. Speaker, going to historic levels 
under this government. 
 
In fact if you look at this government’s own budget documents 
just back to 2009, debt was at $7.9 billion. Now, Mr. Speaker, 
$15 billion. And where is it going, Mr. Speaker, under this 
government in their own budget documents? Going higher, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s not responsible. That’s not prudent. 
 
You know, we see the debt to GDP [gross domestic product] — 
your measure of whether or not you can afford the debt that 
you’re taking on, whether it’s sustainable — it’s nearly 
doubled, Mr. Speaker, in just the past number of years from 11 

per cent to almost 20 per cent, Mr. Speaker. Clearly this is a 
government going in the wrong direction, spending in fact, I 
believe, almost $3 million more per day than they’re taking in. 
You know, this isn’t debt and deficit because of tighter times. 
It’s because of costly mismanagement and waste, Mr. Speaker. 
You know, and sadly, it’s Saskatchewan people who are left to 
inherit the consequences. 
 
This government inherited an incredible situation — billions in 
the bank, surplus, a strong economy. Sadly it’s evident to many, 
Mr. Speaker, that this is a government that while they did lots 
of boasting, that it was lots of boasting and coasting. But they 
really did squander a historic opportunity for Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
You know, they blew it on smart meters. Despite having full 
briefings and information of the risk and the cost, they ran 
forward and blew the dollars and put people are risk. 
 
They blew it on the carbon capture project without providing 
the facts to Saskatchewan people and not having a sound 
financial plan, signing Saskatchewan people on to some of the 
most costly power possible, Mr. Speaker. And of course we see 
it; it’s just a start with the hikes that we see in our power bills. 
 
Of course they’ve blown it with their external consultants and 
the whopping increases that they’ve subjected Saskatchewan 
people to. They’ve blown it on the GTH land scandal, the 
Pinkie Road bypass costing $43 million, now being torn down 
and rebuilt. And they blew it on P3 projects that have been 
proven time and time again to cost more, cost more for 
Saskatchewan people over the long run. 
 
They blew it on the lack of ability to plan an important project, 
the bypass. They dismissed and delayed action to address the 
traffic concerns on Highway No. 1 East. And then when they 
did, Mr. Speaker, they mismanaged the project every step of the 
way, from $400 million now to over $2 billion, Mr. Speaker, 
with the big money and big jobs going to France, Mr. Speaker. 
Saskatchewan people deserve so much better than that 
approach, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[11:15] 
 
You know, at the end of the day this government has put us in 
this financial reality because of the mismanagement, because of 
the waste, not because they’re adequately supporting education 
or health care as they should be across the province. 
 
You know, we’ve called for and proposed actions to address the 
inequity in Aboriginal education — nothing in this budget, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ve called for and proposed actions to address the 
TRC [Truth and Reconciliation Commission] recommendations 
— not a mention in the budget. We called for and proposed 
actions to address and reduce poverty, Mr. Speaker. Instead, 
shamefully, we see a government exacting short-sighted cuts 
that are walking people in our province backwards.  
 
We called for and proposed actions to address mental health 
and ensure community supports across Saskatchewan and, 
importantly, in the North. Instead we continue to see dismissal 
of this urgent need. We’ve proposed in advance of budget and 
have called for important practical environmental action like 



460 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2016 

bolstering renewable energy, green jobs, conservation, and the 
protection of water. Instead we see cuts and inaction. 
 
We proposed in advance of budget and called for solutions to 
water management, solutions that work for agricultural 
producers and communities that have been subjected to damage 
and that respect the value of wetlands. Instead we see cuts to 
watershed authorities across Saskatchewan and dismissal of this 
issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all that mismanagement has real consequences for 
the people of this province. We’re seeing it in this budget. The 
budget goes against the best interests of Saskatchewan people. 
It fails to provide the means necessary for strong public health 
care and the best education possible. It shows no plan to create 
jobs, no plan to get this province’s economy back on track. 
 
You know, this government should take a hard look at the 
budget that’s proposed and they should start to understand the 
impacts on families. And I urge members on that side, that big 
government majority to exercise some critical and independent 
thought here today before they vote for this budget from this 
government that never ran on a budget, a budget that clearly has 
costs for Saskatchewan people. 
 
It’s beyond unacceptable that this government didn’t have the 
courage to come clean with Saskatchewan people before an 
election, denying the basic facts. You know, it’s pretty clear this 
government’s forcing Saskatchewan people to pick up the tab 
and pay the price for their mismanagement. That’s wrong, Mr. 
Speaker. We see a budget that, instead of dealing and tackling 
their waste and their mismanagement, Mr. Speaker, we see 
them exacting short-sighted and regressive cuts that will hurt 
the future of children and students, the vulnerable in this 
province, and won’t build the futures that everybody in this 
province deserves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact is we have a beautiful province full of 
innovators, creative thinkers, full of hard-working and common 
sense people, a province that we all love. But that requires a 
government that’s ready to work with Saskatchewan people. It 
requires a vision and a plan. It requires meaningful actions, Mr. 
Speaker. It requires a government that’s willing to recognize 
their mismanagement and take action to address it to make sure 
that the priorities, the real priorities of Saskatchewan people are 
addressed. 
 
In the coming days and weeks and months ahead as the official 
opposition, we’ll continue to work with all Saskatchewan 
people, to work in their best interests, and to build that future 
everyone deserves. Clearly this budget takes our province in the 
wrong direction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I mean, it’s pretty clear. We have a government that’s breaking 
promises, that hid plans, a budget that’s causing damage. 
Certainly Saskatchewan people can count on us to stand up, to 
stand strong, and to fight for their best interests. I won’t be 
supporting this budget, a budget and a plan to make people pay 
for Sask Party mismanagement, a budget and a plan that causes 
damage and hurt for the most vulnerable in this province. As 
such, I’ll be supporting the amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker it’s an honour to be able to participate in another 
budget debate here in the Legislative Assembly. And I 
appreciate the opportunity to follow the Leader of the 
Opposition, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s fair to say he’s a good 
speaker. From his very earliest days in this place he was 
effective in the House, I would say. I think that that would not 
be exaggerating the case at all. I think the Hon. Leader of the 
Opposition is effective in his communications, Mr. Speaker — 
not always consistent and accurate perhaps, but effective 
nonetheless. 
 
And I just want to — because this is a debate — I want to 
highlight a few of the things that I think I heard him say in his 
speech and maybe offer another perspective to what he had to 
say. For example, when he was referencing, Mr. Speaker, his 
concern about the economy, I can assure the hon. member that 
we’re all very concerned about the economy, that these job 
losses have hit home for our province in the energy sector, 
mostly in the energy sector, but not exclusively. 
 
I’m from Swift Current, which has long been a community 
dependent on the oil industry, so I have friends and neighbours 
who have gone through something that nobody would ever want 
them to have to go through, Mr. Speaker. And so what they 
would need from a government, I think, is a government that 
would do no harm, a government that would perhaps offer a 
few ideas to the federal government. And we did that, if you 
will remember, with the well completion proposal that we made 
to the federal government. 
 
It wasn’t supported by the NDP, by the way. I recollect that 
prior to the election. You’ll remember that suggestion to the 
federal government that perhaps we could get some support 
from Ottawa for the industry here to deal with some abandoned 
wells, to complete the wells. We knew that that would put 
people back to work. And yes, it would happen that some oil 
companies then, who couldn’t afford to do it at the time, would 
have that perhaps provided to them — much like, by the way, 
the country has helped car manufacturers when they needed it; 
much like the country has helped aeronautical manufacturing 
companies when they’ve needed it; much like the federal 
government has helped agriculture when they’ve needed it. We 
thought that, well now more than ever, the energy sector could 
use a little bit of help. 
 
So we listened to the oil field service workers, and a particular 
entrepreneur from Weyburn constituency, from the city of 
Weyburn. And we proposed it to the federal government 
whereby some support from them would put people back to 
work completing wells — an environmental benefit, to be sure, 
and an employment economic development benefit, to be sure. 
 
So here was an opportunity for the NDP to support a plan like 
that. Not just to talk about their concern for job losses or their 
concern for the economy, but actually to support a common 
sense proposal from the government, and they refuse to. Now, 
Mr. Speaker, to be fair, their counterparts in Alberta initially 
weren’t supportive. They never outright rejected the idea but 
later on, to their credit, the Alberta government also came on 
board and still the provincial NDP opposed that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would say to the member opposite and to the 



June 9, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 461 

NDP in general, there is a need for consistency. If you’re going 
to say that you’re advocating for jobs for the oil sector, for the 
energy sector, then you have to act like it. And you have to I 
think at least find a way to work with the government in 
proposing a new idea to the federal government. I’ve heard my 
hon. member, my hon. friend say they want to work with us on 
common sense, good ideas for Saskatchewan. Maybe the well 
completion idea we proposed wasn’t quite right. Maybe we 
could’ve worked together to figure out how to improve it. But 
they weren’t interested; they just rejected it out of hand. 
 
I would also point this out to my hon. friend, if he’s worried 
about Saskatchewan’s economy, then I think he and all of us 
need to send out clarion messages of consistency and support 
for those essential sectors of our economy. And those essential 
sectors, even though we are more diversified than ever before, 
are still agriculture and it’s energy and it’s the mining sector. 
It’s the resource sector in Saskatchewan. 
 
And in terms of consistency of message, I think it matters what 
appointments we make as leaders in this place. And I know the 
hon. member chose for his Finance critic, the one who provided 
the main critique to the budget of the province, someone who 
did support the further discussion of, at least the entertaining of 
the Leap Manifesto, and they deny this. And remember the 
Leap Manifesto, it goes against everything we do in the 
province. If ever implemented, it would destroy the economy. It 
doesn’t like modern agriculture. It wants to end all pipelines. It 
doesn’t like mining. 
 
Imagine that, Mr. Speaker, that that item would come to the 
floor of a convention that any of us might be attending, what 
our response would be as representatives of the people of this 
province. I think a reasonable response for any of us in this 
place, regardless of where we sit, would be to get to the 
microphone in that hall, in that convention deliberation, and to 
say, this has no business being considered, especially in 
Western Canada. But here’s what the member voted for. The 
Finance critic, hand-picked by the Leader of the Opposition, 
voted for this: 
 

Therefore be it resolved that the NDP recognizes and 
supports the Leap Manifesto as a high-level statement of 
principles [as a high-level statement of principles] that 
speaks to the aspirations, histories, and the values of the 
party. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that should be opposed by any member in this 
House. I don’t care what membership card’s in their wallet or 
what they, what party they support. If something like that is 
proposed . . . They’re worried about the economy, they say, Mr. 
Speaker. He’s saying he didn’t see enough concern for the 
economy in the budget, and I’ll get into that in a moment 
because I don’t agree. But what we say outside of this province 
is important, and our actions are important in terms of those 
across the country who simply don’t like what we do. And 
they’d like to stop what it is that Saskatchewan does, and does 
very well in terms of feeding the world and providing the 
answers around energy security that the fastest growing 
economies of the world have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other decisions the NDP have made is to 
assemble a renewal committee, and the chairperson of this 

renewal committee — this would be a very important apparatus 
within the party — the chairperson of this renewal committee I 
believe is the former candidate for the NDP. And I believe she 
didn’t just vote in principle to have a discussion about Leap, I 
think she signed it. She signed the Leap Manifesto. And I would 
say, if I was the Leader of the Opposition or a leader of the 
party, I would say, sorry. I mean we want you involved in the 
party, but in terms of leading our renewal process, that’s a deal 
breaker. Because in this place and in our party, we stand with 
the interests of the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
And no, frankly, we’re not interested in countenancing a debate, 
a debate that actually goes contrary to those interests that would 
devastate the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
Moreover, Mr. Speaker, we see the Leader of the Opposition 
and the NDP appointed a chief of staff who was a former staff 
person with Mr. Mulcair, who would have and did oppose the 
Keystone pipeline. Now there wouldn’t have been 
Saskatchewan oil in that pipeline had it ever been approved by 
the Obama administration, but it would have done this. It would 
have narrowed the gap, it would have narrowed the gap 
between Brent price and West Texas, which has in certain years 
of our budgeting meant hundreds of millions of dollars, and for 
the industry it meant billions of dollars. Mr. Speaker, I think it’s 
very important that . . . Who we appoint and how we act is as 
important as how effectively we may communicate in this 
particular Legislative Assembly. 
 
If I can, Mr. Speaker, very quickly I’ll point out that the Leader 
of the Opposition talked a lot in his speech about cuts. And you 
know, I think some of the characterization, some of the 
characterization perhaps wasn’t quite right, wasn’t quite right. 
But let’s just assume that the Leader of the Opposition was 
breaking with tradition and dealing exclusively in fact when he 
was talking about those cuts. Let’s consider what was in their 
campaign document. He just finished running a very successful 
campaign in Regina Rosemont. We know it was a successful 
campaign because the Sask Party had an excellent campaign, an 
excellent candidate in that constituency, and the member was 
successful, that notwithstanding. He worked on that campaign 
and I know he would . . . He’s diligent, so I know he would 
have read the platform, especially the costing document of the 
platform. And I assume that prior to him taking his place and 
participating in the debate, prior to any member opposite 
participating in the budget debate, that they might have reread 
their own costing document to compare it to what the 
government’s actually proposed in this budget. And we might 
find, actually, which party has an agenda for cuts, significant 
cuts in Saskatchewan. 
 
Here are the facts from the NDP costing document, Mr. 
Speaker, from the NDP costing document. The NDP platform 
promise in the last election: percentage increase from budget, 
from the budget that was in place, in health care, point eight per 
cent. That member and members opposite have taken to their 
feet in this place and decried a budget that increases health in 
our case by 1.5 per cent, and the Finance critic has said an 
increase that small is a cut. She has said since that an increase 
of less than 6 per cent is not acceptable. She campaigned, and 
the Leader of the Opposition campaigned, costed in their 
document on a health care budget that would have only 
increased, if they would have ever been elected, by point eight 
per cent. That’s inconsistency, Mr. Speaker. It’s in the 



462 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2016 

documents. It’s in the documents. The Leader of the Opposition 
is doubting this? It’s in his costing document. 
 
What about K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12]? Here’s a quote 
from the member that just spoke. The Leader of the Opposition 
just spoke and he was advancing the interests of education. He 
said it was our future and he said, “It is the great equalizer.” 
That’s what he said, eloquent words, words with which we all 
agree. But, Mr. Speaker, he campaigned as the deputy leader of 
his party and now the Leader of the Opposition. He’ll have to 
answer questions. But he campaigned on a costed platform that 
would have seen an increase to K to 12 — again the NDP 
platform — of 1.1 per cent. 
 
[11:30] 
 
This budget has an increase, a total increase for K to 12 of 7.9 
per cent, total increase. These are apples to apples: operating K 
to 12, capital K to 12, Mr. Speaker. 1.1 per cent increase is what 
they campaigned on. And every day since we’ve met in this 
place since the session began, the Leader of the Opposition — 
and he continues to talk about cuts — the Leader of the 
Opposition and his Education critic, the member for Regina 
Lakeview, has stood up and decried the education funding 
represented in this budget. If they would have won, there would 
have been less money for education, a lot less money for 
education. And I think inconsistencies like this in a debate, I 
think they matter. I think Saskatchewan people would like to 
see the comparison. Then yes, you can be critical of things in 
the budget. But what did you campaign on just a few months 
ago? 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, how about social services? We’ve heard 
the members opposite decry this budget in terms of what it 
offers in social services. Had they been re-elected, according to 
their fully costed . . . well their mostly costed document, they 
would have increased social services spending by point seven 
per cent. That’s in the document that they campaigned on. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party budget that they’re voting against 
would have proposed an increase of 2.8 per cent. And the 
deputy leader makes a good point. I think I know now why the 
NDP are voting against the budget. The increases in social 
services, health care, and education are too high under this 
budget based on what they ran on in the last election campaign. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, consistency matters. Consistency does matter 
in this debate and, you know, the government has to be held 
accountable. That’s the way the process works and when that 
happens, government is going to be better for it, Mr. Speaker. 
And so we accept the fact that the NDP will work hard to hold 
the government accountable, and we accept the fact that they’re 
earnest in this work. But I encourage them, Mr. Speaker, to be 
consistent. 
 
The election campaign wasn’t that long ago. Remember what 
they said. Did the Leader of the Opposition just say that it’s 
over? Well the Leader of the Opposition I guess in response to 
this said, well don’t worry about the election and what we said 
in the campaign because it’s over. Well, Mr. Speaker, promises 
that are made in an election campaign, in our view, should last 
for a very, very long time if not forever. That’s kind of the 
nature of a promise. It’s not just in the 27 days of a campaign 

and we’ll say what we need to say to get elected and maybe we 
won’t fully disclose all the little details which we now have in 
the costing document. That also is not good enough, and again I 
think it explains why the people of this province may have 
made the choices that they made in the last number of elections. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget deals with a number of challenges that 
we face in Saskatchewan. Chief among them I think is the 
economic challenge. And unlike how . . . I just fundamentally 
disagree with what the Leader of the Opposition has said with 
respect to this budget and its recognition of the importance of 
diversification. That’s why the patent box initiative is in this 
budget, a campaign promise we made and part of our plan to 
further diversify our economy from an innovation perspective. 
And it’s why, Mr. Speaker, we’ve not increased any taxes. I 
think that’s pretty important. I think businesses out there, job 
creators out there want us to do no harm when times are 
challenging. 
 
And so this budget, unlike other budgets where similar revenue 
challenges have been faced in other provinces, we have chosen, 
the Minister of Finance has chose not to increase taxes. What 
does that mean, Mr. Speaker? It means that the tax cuts, the tax 
reductions implemented by our government over the last eight 
years are protected, are maintained. What’s the number? What 
is the quantum of those tax reductions over all of these years? 
It’s $6 billion. That is the amount of money that government 
has given back to businesses. That is the amount of money that 
government . . . It’s their money in the first place. That’s the 
amount that government, this government has given back to 
small businesses, to farmers, to property owners, and to 
families, very significantly to families, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the Leader of the Opposition says that was a waste. He said 
it again in his budget debate. And member after member over 
there has said, well you know the government has blown . . . 
whatever number it comes up with in terms of billions with a 
“b” or whatever number they’re using. The bottom line is this, 
Mr. Speaker. I don’t think Saskatchewan families think it’s a 
waste to reduce their taxes. 
 
Here is what our party has done with some of the proceeds of 
growth in this province. In 2007 a single person making 
$25,000 in income paid $1,979 in taxes. In 2016 they paid 
1,018 in taxes. That’s a savings of 49 per cent. A family of four 
with $50,000 income used to pay 3,382 in provincial taxes 
under the NDP when we first took office. Now they pay 721, 
and that is a decrease of 79 per cent. A family of four with 
75,000 in income used to pay, under the NDP, $6,396. Now 
they pay $4,068, a savings of 2,328 a year, 200 a month, a 
savings of 36 per cent. 
 
And you know, the Leader of the Opposition — and I think this 
is why they’re at danger, at risk potentially of not changing 
places in this Assembly any time soon — he thinks that’s a 
waste of money. That’s how he describes this, that when you 
reduce taxes for families to the tune of 36 per cent, 79 per cent, 
49 per cent, when you drop 114,000 low-income Saskatchewan 
people off the tax rolls completely, that that’s a waste. Well we 
on this side of the House, we don’t consider it a waste. We 
consider it as a part of our growth plan, Mr. Speaker, and we 
consider the dollars that we appropriate in this Assembly to 
belong to the people of Saskatchewan and not any party on 



June 9, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 463 

either side of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget also makes a number of investments in 
people, as we have pointed out, as the Minister of Finance has 
pointed out. And members on this side have done a very good 
job of canvassing all of those important investments. 
 
But one I’d like to focus on, if I can, in my closing minutes here 
is the additional investment that we’ve made to the surgical 
wait times initiative. Mr. Speaker, when we were able to be 
fortunate enough to take over government in 2007, here was the 
sad fact in Saskatchewan. People waited here longer for surgery 
than anywhere else in Canada. And it seemed incongruous, you 
know, here in the birthplace of medicare, the home of Tommy 
Douglas, we had gotten to a point with health care in 
Saskatchewan that people waited longer for their surgeries here 
than anywhere else in Canada. 
 
And so the minister of Health, now the Deputy Premier, and 
carried through with by the current Minister of Health, have 
developed and implemented a plan whereby we use private 
clinics — setting aside ideology about private and public — 
private clinics in a public system and increased investment, 
significantly increased investment for surgeries. We’ve been 
able to reduce the wait times to the point where we’re no longer 
the longest in the country, but now we’re the shortest in all of 
Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this budget, which is a difficult one, there are 
challenges. We’ve decided, we’ve chosen . . . The Minister of 
Finance is recommending to the House and recommending to 
your vote and mine that we would increase, that we would 
provide an additional allotment, more money for the surgical 
wait times initiative in the province of Saskatchewan. And I 
hope members on both sides of the House would want to vote in 
favour of that kind of an initiative. There’s a number of other 
increases in supports: more child care spaces, more support for 
people with disabilities, 15 drugs added to the formula for 
cancer treatment. But, Mr. Speaker, I do think the work that 
we’re going to do on the surgical wait times initiative arguably 
is as important as any of those other key investments for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
And it’s an interesting bridge, I think, to another discussion and 
debate that we actually had in this Assembly in question period. 
Because the other thing I think people want in Saskatchewan is 
they’d like a little bit less ideology and a little bit more common 
sense. They’d like results from their government, and that’s 
why they didn’t much care that it was private clinics that were 
shortening the wait times. They didn’t much care where the 
clinic was even. They wanted surgery in a timely way. 
 
It’s the same approach that Saskatchewan people would take to 
diagnostics, Mr. Speaker. And in this session and facilitated in 
part by the health budget certainly and so very much material to 
the budget debate, we are going to take the step to provide that 
private option in CT scans as we’ve already done in MRIs. And 
here again it’s an interesting juxtaposition. It’s an interesting 
contrast because all these years later where people of 
Saskatchewan have moved on, moved way beyond the 
ideologies of the ’50s and the ’60s on health care and now are 
focused on the need for innovation and results, we have one 
party that is clinging to that tired ideology. 

We saw it in question period today. Unbelievably the Health 
critic, I’m sure approved by the Leader of the Opposition, took 
to her feet in the Assembly today and said, you know when we 
were in government, sure, we allowed the Saskatchewan 
Roughriders and workers’ compensation patients to get their 
diagnostics, to pay to jump the queue. Because that’s what they 
were doing. They were jumping the queue. As long as they paid 
for a scan on the public system, that was okay according to the 
ideology of members opposite, but expanding that opportunity 
to everyone else is somehow wrong, and expanding it beyond 
MRIs to CTs is somehow wrong. And in that little debate, I 
think there’s a bit of a microcosm of the dynamic of politics in 
Saskatchewan today just these few short weeks after the last 
election campaign. 
 
I think it’s incumbent upon all of us to remember that this is a 
province whose people are kind of . . . They’ve always been 
focused on results. They’ve been focused on common sense, 
and they’ve used different vehicles to achieve those results over 
the years. But, Mr. Speaker, they’d like results from their 
government and a little less ideology. For our part, Mr. Speaker, 
we’re going to work hard to provide that common sense, to 
provide those solutions to meet the challenges that exist today. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think the budget is a good example of that 
kind of government. We can always do better. We can always 
work harder. But I’m proud to support the budget because, Mr. 
Speaker, it speaks to those basic principles. It lays out a 
long-term vision for a strong Saskatchewan, one that is leading 
the country. And I’m proud, Mr. Speaker, to indicate to you 
today for the first time formally, that I’m going to be opposing 
the NDP amendment and supporting the budget of the Minister 
of Finance. 
 
The Speaker: — Before I recognize the next speaker, it is my 
duty to inform the House that pursuant to rule no. 31(8), to 
warn the Assembly that the member is about to exercise his 
right to close the debate and afterwards all members will be 
precluded from speaking to the question. Therefore if any 
member wishes to speak, let him or her do so now. I recognize 
the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker, and I thank my colleagues. It was just over a week 
ago, last Wednesday, Mr. Speaker, a week ago Wednesday that 
I stood in my place here and presented our financial plan on 
behalf of all of my colleagues here in the Government of 
Saskatchewan for the people of Saskatchewan in presenting the 
budget of 2016-17. 
 
If I could today, Mr. Speaker, just before I get into the essence 
of my comments, if I could just make a few thank yous. This is 
the first opportunity I’ve had to formally rise in this House and 
thank the people of Regina Northeast for re-electing me in the 
election on April 4th, and I really appreciate that support. 
 
I want to thank the Premier for the opportunity to serve in 
cabinet, Mr. Speaker, to serve in cabinet as the Minister of 
Finance. I’ve often said to folks when they ask me questions 
about working in government, I’ve said I serve in this Assembly 
at the pleasure of the people of Regina Northeast, and I serve in 
cabinet at the pleasure of the Premier, and I appreciate both of 
those. 
 



464 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2016 

I want to thank all of my cabinet and caucus colleagues, Mr. 
Speaker. Many of them are new on this side of the House, and 
there’s some new ones on the other side of the House, and I 
congratulate all of them on their election, their re-election, on 
both sides of the House here, Mr. Speaker. But I want to thank 
my cabinet and caucus colleagues who have worked diligently. 
And we are a team. This is a collaborative effort, Mr. Speaker. 
We are a team who have worked diligently to put this budget 
together and to present to the people of Saskatchewan on June 
1st. 
 
I want to thank the treasury board members in particular, Mr. 
Speaker, those that I was working with prior to the election that 
we started this budget process last year as we usually do on 
every single fiscal year, Mr. Speaker. And we had the election 
this year; it interrupted that process obviously. And we gathered 
back again. Contrary to some people’s views that we were 
taking some time off after the election, I can assure members of 
this House, Mr. Speaker, and you, that we were back to work 
immediately after the election and trying to put this budget 
together. I want to thank my treasury board colleagues for the 
hours and hours and hours they spent in putting this document 
together. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the staff in my office, my 
ministerial office and my constituency office, but I want to 
thank Dawn, Paul, Danielle, and Jane who was in my office and 
served previous Finance ministers now moved over to the 
Minister of Advanced Education’s office and doing a terrific 
job over there, and Eric, and Ron who is my constituency 
assistant, has been since 2011, Mr. Speaker, doing a terrific job. 
 
I want to thank . . . You know, Mr. Speaker, our government, 
well all elected officials, are well served by the public service in 
this province, both on the executive side of government and in 
the Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. I am particularly well 
served and treasury board members are well served by our 
deputy minister of Finance, Clare Isman, who is a stellar public 
servant, Mr. Speaker, and all of the officials in the Ministry of 
Finance who work for and with Clare on the preparation of a 
budget. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, she was telling me that, just before we 
put the budget to bed with respect to it going off to the printers 
to actually be printed, that there were dozens of officials over at 
the Finance ministry going through every line both forwards 
and backwards to ensure that the numbers aligned in the charts 
and added up and that there were no mistakes. 
 
[11:45] 
 
I also want to thank all the different officials across the various 
ministries and the Crowns, Mr. Speaker, for their work in 
supporting their ministers with respect to their budgets and 
bringing forth their ideas, their hard work, their advice as we 
completed the budget. So I want to thank all those involved in 
the public service, both on the executive side and the Crown 
side, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned in my opening comments, the 
treasury board process is a difficult process, and there are some 
members over there who, on the opposition side, who had the 
opportunity to partake in that when they were in government. 

There’s some members that have never partaken in the treasury 
board process and have no idea how it works, Mr. Speaker. But 
it is a collaborative process. The Minister of Finance has the 
opportunity to present the budget, but it is a collaborative 
process amongst many of the elected members on the 
government side to put together the budget. 
 
And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, it is a difficult process, 
particularly when you’re sitting at the treasury board table, and 
on a daily basis you’re trying to make public policy decisions, 
spending decisions with respect to where you’re going to spend 
taxpayers’ dollars as you’re watching your resource revenue 
base and the value of the Canadian dollar fluctuate on a daily 
basis, Mr. Speaker, not knowing full well on any given day 
when you have to put the budget to bed and make those 
spending decisions, where you’re going to end up with respect 
to the dollars that are available to you on the revenue side. 
 
But I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, as difficult as meeting the needs 
and the demands of all ministries is, this government and this 
budget found dollars for our priority areas, Mr. Speaker. We 
found dollars for the priority areas of health care and education 
and social services. All of these major areas, Mr. Speaker, 
received funding increases in this budget. Now there may be 
some debate on the levels of those funding increases whether 
they were appropriate or not. But you could say, Mr. Speaker, 
legitimately say, that all of these major priority areas received 
funding increases. Despite difficult economic and fiscal 
circumstances, these areas received funding increases. Again 
perhaps not as much as the opposition members would like to 
see. I’m going to talk a little bit more about that in a minute, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
There is no question that resource revenues in this province 
have dropped by close to $1 billion over the course of the last 
year, Mr. Speaker. That’s not in dispute, and anyone over on 
that side, over on this side as well, Mr. Speaker, who says that 
they saw this coming — anybody over there or on this side — 
who said that they knew that this was coming with respect to 
where the value of the Canadian dollar would be . . . You know, 
Mr. Speaker, the value of the Canadian dollar on December 
31st was at 72 cents. Just three months later at the end of 
March, the end of our fiscal year, it was at 77 cents. That’s a 
five cent increase, Mr. Speaker, over the course of three 
months. On an annualized basis, that’s over $200 million to the 
treasury, good or bad. That’s the kind of volatility we’re dealing 
with, Mr. Speaker, in trying to put a budget to bed. But anybody 
over on that side, or even this side, who claims that they knew 
that this was going to happen is either disingenuous or 
delusional. 
 
We believe that, given the circumstances we were faced with, 
Mr. Speaker, that we took a balanced approach. We invested in 
the priority areas of the people of this province: health care, 
education, and social services. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker 
. . . And I think the members of the opposition should listen to 
this. It provides some context. Seventy four cents of every 
dollar the government collects from the taxpayers of this 
province, 74 cents of every dollar the government collects, goes 
to those three areas of health care, education, and social 
services. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as the Premier pointed out, we did not raise 



June 9, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 465 

taxes in this budget. We campaigned on not raising taxes. We 
fulfilled that campaign promise. We were not going to shock 
the economy further by raising taxes, unlike what some other 
provinces did with respect to their budgets, Mr. Speaker. And 
we believe that we are running an appropriate sized deficit of 
$434 million. 
 
Now let me put that in perspective, Mr. Speaker. That size of 
deficit represents point six per cent of our provincial GDP here 
in Saskatchewan. Manitoba’s deficit is $911 million. That 
represents 1.3 per cent of their provincial GDP, and they get 
$1.7 billion in equalization payments on an annual basis. And 
they are not subject to the volatility in the oil and gas sector like 
we are here in Saskatchewan. And they have no plan to balance 
their budget for another eight years according to their Finance 
minister, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Alberta’s deficit is $10.4 billion and represents 3 per cent of 
their GDP. Remember I said our deficit is point six per cent of 
GDP. And they have no plan to balance their budget until at 
least 2024 at the earliest, Mr. Speaker, according to their 
Finance minister. 
 
And Newfoundland and Labrador has a deficit of $1.8 billion 
on a revenue base of only $6.8 billion. Their deficit is 26 per 
cent of their revenue base, and they have to contribute to 
equalization this year, Mr. Speaker, as does Saskatchewan, as 
does Alberta, and as does British Columbia. As a matter of fact, 
Mr. Speaker, three of the four provinces in this country that 
contribute to equalization are in deficit. Two of the six 
provinces that receive equalization payments are in surplus, Mr. 
Speaker. There’s something wrong with that. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, since I’ve been in this legislature since 
being re-elected again on April 4th and we reconvened here, 
I’ve met some of the new . . . I’ve met all of the new members 
on the opposition side. And they’ve all been assigned their critic 
duties and they’ve come into this House in every single 
question period, Mr. Speaker, particularly the Education critic 
and the Health critic, and have stood in their place day after — 
we heard it again today, Mr. Speaker — day after day after day 
and have criticized the government for not providing enough 
money in education or in health care. They said that there are 
cuts across the education sector and across the health care 
sector. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, according to their own Finance critic, who 
stood in her place on budget day . . . I remember it well. The 
place was full of people, full of guests here on the floor. The 
Finance critic in response to the budget speech, Mr. Speaker, 
stood in her place on budget day and said this, and I quote: 
 

Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t end there. We heard the minister 
today [me] talk about investments in health care and 
education, but perhaps the minister needs a lesson in 
inflation and population growth, Mr. Speaker. A minimum 
of 6 per cent annual increase is needed just to maintain the 
status quo programs like health care and education. 
Anything below that is effectively a cut. 

 
That’s what the Finance critic said. Now the Health minister 
tells me that a 6 per cent annual growth rate in the Health 
ministry alone would consume the entire provincial budget in 

18 years. It would be in excess of $15 billion on a 6 per cent 
annual growth rate. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s just take a look. Let’s just take a look 
at what the NDP campaigned on just two and a half months ago. 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if members over there 
actually read their costing document, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know 
if the Health critic, the member from Saskatoon Riversdale, 
actually read the costing document or the Education critic from 
Regina Lakeview actually read your own costing document. 
This was a document written by the current Leader of the 
Opposition who was the Finance critic. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in their own campaign document . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, this is rubbing them the wrong 
way, Mr. Speaker. They don’t like this. They don’t like this at 
all. 
 
They forecast a deficit in their first year in government, had 
they been elected on April 4th, Mr. Speaker. They’re criticizing 
me for running a deficit. They forecasted their deficit in their 
first year in office, based on what, Mr. Speaker? In health care 
alone they campaigned on a point eight per cent increase in the 
first year in office — point eight per cent. Mr. Speaker, there’s 
a 1.5 per cent increase in this budget right now and the Health 
critic calls it a cut. There is a 7.9 per cent increase in the 
Education budget, Mr. Speaker, including operating and capital, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — K to 12. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — K to 12. Their own costing document 
that that member went around Regina Lakeview saying, oh if 
you elect us, look at what we’re going to do — 1.1 per cent 
increase in their own costing document. Somewhat a little less, 
somewhat a little less of what we’ve actually proposed in this 
budget, Mr. Speaker, and far less than the 6 per cent that the 
Finance critic said had to be done as a minimum or it would 
effectively be a cut. I don’t think they’ve read their own 
documents, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me go on and further talk about what . . . The Leader of the 
Opposition, the Leader of the Opposition gets up — he got up 
again today, Mr. Speaker — the Leader of the Opposition got 
up again today and said, there’s 9,000 jobs lost in the province. 
What is the government doing with respect to creating new jobs 
in this province? This is the document that they put out for the 
people of Saskatchewan. It was attested to by an adjunct 
professor at Carleton University, a senior policy adviser at the 
Broadbent Institute. 
 
Well we can debate that, whether that’s a non-partisan 
organization or not. Had we put out a costing platform, Mr. 
Speaker, that said, oh by the way, it’s been attested to by the 
Fraser Institute, I could just imagine what members opposite 
would have said. 
 
Here’s what they said, Mr. Speaker. This is the professor: 
 

You are also taking advantage of historically low 
borrowing costs and a federal commitment to support 
growth oriented public infrastructure investment by the 
provinces. A recent study for the Broadbent Institute by the 



466 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2016 

Centre for Spatial Economics showed that such 
investments [this is capital investments — such 
investments] boost employment, growth and provincial 
government revenues in the short term, and expand the 
long-term revenue base by increasing business sector 
productivity. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that is exactly what we’re doing on this side of the 
House. That’s why we’ve got a $3.5 billion capital program this 
year. That’s why our Crown corporations after years, after years 
of being neglected by the NDP, has a $1.8 billion capital 
program this year, Mr. Speaker. That’s why we’re investing 
$1.7 billion on the capital side from executive government, 
including the Regina bypass that is employing thousands of 
people here in the province of Saskatchewan. Your own 
Broadbent Institute agreed with that. I don’t think you’ve read 
your own documents. It’s unbelievable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition brought up our 
debt-to-GDP levels. And I’m glad he did because the fact of the 
matter is our debt-to-GDP here in the province of Saskatchewan 
as of March 2016 was just over 17 per cent; it was 17.6 per 
cent. It is forecast to be just over 19 per cent at the end of this 
fiscal year. Now this Leader of the Opposition criticized our 
government for the first half of his speech for not spending 
enough on all these different areas, Mr. Speaker — health care, 
education, social services — even though spending more than 
what they campaigned on in their costing document. 
 
Then in the second half of his speech, he criticized me for 
running a deficit and spending $3 million a day more than what 
we’re taking in. I don’t know if he understands the 
contradiction in his own speeches, Mr. Speaker. He certainly 
hasn’t read his own costing document, and he wrote it. 
 
Our debt-to-GDP, Mr. Speaker, is the second lowest amongst 
provinces in Canada right now. Again let me provide some 
context and perspective. I said our forecast debt-to-GDP is 
going to be just over 19 per cent at the end of this fiscal year. 
The province of British Columbia is at 28.5 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker. Ontario is at 47.6 per cent, Mr. Speaker. Manitoba, 
Manitoba under the good old NDP for a number of years, is at 
57.5 per cent. And Newfoundland and Labrador, Mr. Speaker 
— and I don’t wish this upon anybody — is at 63 per cent 
debt-to-GDP. 
 
We’re just over 19 per cent at the end of this fiscal year, 
including the fact we’re borrowing over $1 billion, which we’re 
being criticized by the members opposite, even though the 
Broadbent Institute suggested with historically low interest rates 
and a AAA credit rating, you ought to be doing that. They 
won’t even follow their own advice from the Broadbent 
Institute, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me just finish off here today and talk a little bit 
about transformational change. You know, Mr. Speaker, 
transformational change is not easy. I understand that. Members 
on the government side here understand that. It’s going to 
require some heavy lifting. Change is never easy. Change 
brings about fear. Sometimes that fear can be . . . Oh, the flames 
of fear can be fanned by people with some ulterior motives, 
shall we say, Mr. Speaker. 
 

But can you just imagine, can you just imagine this province of 
Saskatchewan, even under Tommy Douglas, if Tommy Douglas 
had been surrounded by a bunch of MLAs in his caucus, Mr. 
Speaker, that were afraid of change, that were afraid of change? 
How little Premier Douglas would have accomplished during 
his time in office if he had been surrounded by people who 
instilled fear in people outside of this building because of 
change. I would suggest Premier Douglas would not have 
achieved very much, Mr. Speaker. They like to hold him up as 
the beacon of their party, and I understand that. I understand 
that, Mr. Speaker. But he would not have accomplished 
anything had he been surrounded by those 10 MLAs over there 
today, Mr. Speaker, because they’re afraid of change. 
 
What I would say to members opposite, I’ve been in this 
legislature now since 2011. I’ve heard the same speech from the 
member from Athabasca probably 50 times. It doesn’t matter 
what the issue is. I’ve heard the same speech over and over and 
over again. I’ve heard every single one of them. And I’m 
speaking more to the new members now, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
speaking more to the new members now. Don’t buy into it 
every single day to come into the legislature and do nothing but 
criticize the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would respectfully suggest that this Premier and 
this government have got some things right. He’s won three 
successive majorities in this province, Mr. Speaker. I would 
respectfully submit, Mr. Speaker, that we put some ideas out 
there. And yes, they’re not perfect, but every single day this 
government proposes ideas, those members walk into this 
Chamber and do nothing but denounce them and disagree with 
them and just criticize whatever our ideas are. Well that’s fine, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s part and parcel of our parliamentary 
system. 
 
But here’s what I would say to the new members. You now 
have an opportunity to engage in your own transformational 
change with respect to how you bring ideas to the floor of this 
legislature. I listened to a number of their speeches, Mr. 
Speaker. The member for Regina Douglas Park, I listened to her 
yesterday. I thought she brought up some good ideas. She 
mentioned how we should have a look at creating green jobs in 
this province. I’m interested in those ideas, Mr. Speaker. I wish 
that member would put together a position paper and send it 
over to us, or come and discuss it with one of the ministers on 
this side, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I listened to the member for Cumberland. I think he’s a genuine 
individual, Mr. Speaker. I heard him talk yesterday about the 
fact that he could be a bridge to the Métis and First Nations 
communities in his constituency for this government. I welcome 
that kind of opportunity, Mr. Speaker. I would like to see more 
of those ideas come forward on this floor of the legislature. This 
ought to be a place of ideas. It ought to be a place of aspiration. 
It ought to be a place of innovation. It not necessarily has to be 
every single day where members come in and just criticize the 
government because we put ideas up, Mr. Speaker. We will 
continue to put ideas up. We will continue to put ideas up. 
 
What I am asking the members of the opposition to start doing 
now is embrace change. Because if this is the new normal, Mr. 
Speaker, if this is the new normal with respect to what we have 
available to us as far as resource revenues, where our entire 



June 9, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 467 

revenue base is concerned, something has to change to ensure 
that our programs and services for the people of this province 
are sustainable . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well, the 
member from Athabasca continues to chirp over there. He’s not 
interested in any of this kind of stuff. He’s not interested in any 
of this kind of stuff. His own Leader of the Opposition just 
stood here today and asked the government to work 
co-operatively with them, and he won’t even silence the guy 
beside him who has no interest in doing any of this kind of stuff 
whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[12:00] 
 
So I’m appealing particularly to the new members, Mr. 
Speaker. I think now is the opportunity for you to come forward 
with some ideas. We’re interested in your ideas. You represent 
constituents in your constituencies. We’re interested in your 
ideas. 
 
But if you’re simply going to come in here day after day after 
day and criticize the government for putting up ideas, and 
criticize our budget because . . . And every single day it’s just 
not enough, it’s just not enough. We’ve got to spend more here, 
doesn’t matter if it’s education or health care or social services 
or highways. We’ve demonstrated in your own document, 
we’ve demonstrated in your own document, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
spending more than you even campaigned on, that you even 
promised to the people of this province on April 4th, Mr. 
Speaker. In that case they ought to vote in favour of his budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that again, as I want to close off by saying 
that change brings some fear. It ought not to bring fear, Mr. 
Speaker. People of this province over many, many decades have 
always embraced change. They’ve always embraced innovation. 
They’ve always embraced new ideas. It’s how we came to be 
the great province that we are today, Mr. Speaker, and how 
we’ll continue to be a great province in the Dominion of 
Canada. 
 
So I say to members opposite, our government’s prepared to 
work with you. If you come forward with new ideas and 
innovative ideas, we want to hear about that with respect to 
transformational change. Mr. Speaker, I am proud to represent 
the Premier in this government in presenting the budget to the 
people of Saskatchewan. I will not be supporting the 
amendment. I will be supporting the government in this motion 
with respect to the budget. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion from Saskatoon Nutana, seconded by the member from 
Athabasca: 
 

That all words after “That the Assembly” be deleted and 
the following be added: 

 
disagrees with the government for tabling a budget months 
late, failing to be transparent to the Saskatchewan people, 
and for failing to deliver opportunities to create jobs, 
diversify the economy, and support kids in the classroom. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — All those in favour say yea. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Yea. 
 
The Speaker: — All those opposed say nay. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 
 
The Speaker: — Call in the members. 
 
[The division bells rang from 12:03 until 12:05.] 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly . . . 
[inaudible] . . . the text of the motion as read. All those in 
favour of the motion please stand. 
 

[Yeas — 9] 
 

Wotherspoon Chartier Belanger 
Sproule Forbes Rancourt 
Beck Sarauer Vermette 
 
The Speaker: — All those opposed to the motion please stand. 
 

[Nays — 48] 
 
Wall Stewart Morgan 
Wyant Duncan McMorris 
Boyd Harpauer Doherty 
Reiter Moe D’Autremont 
Weekes Beaudry-Mellor Cox 
Docherty Campeau Heppner 
Cheveldayoff Harrison Ottenbreit 
Tell Bonk Brkich 
Hart Steele Hargrave 
Makowsky Marit Merriman 
Wilson Eyre Ross 
Olauson Young Kaeding 
Parent Fiaz Nerlien 
Bradshaw Dennis Phillips 
Steinley Lambert Carr 
Michelson Buckingham Kirsch 
 
Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the amendment, 9; 
those opposed, 48. 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the motion lost. 
 
The question before the Assembly is the motion by the Finance 
Minister, seconded by the member from Regina University: 
 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 
policy of the government. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Yea. 
 
The Speaker: — All those in favour say yea. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Yea. 



468 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2016 

The Speaker: — All those opposed say nay. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 
 
The Speaker: — I declare . . . Call in the members. 
 
[The division bells rang from 12:08 until 12:09.] 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is: 
 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 
policy of the government. 

 
All those in favour of the motion please stand. 
 

[Yeas — 48] 
 
Wall Stewart Morgan 
Wyant Duncan McMorris 
Boyd Harpauer Doherty 
Reiter Moe D’Autremont 
Weekes Beaudry-Mellor Cox 
Docherty Campeau Heppner 
Cheveldayoff Harrison Ottenbreit 
Tell Bonk Brkich 
Hart Steele Hargrave 
Makowsky Marit Merriman 
Wilson Eyre Ross 
Olauson Young Kaeding 
Parent Fiaz Nerlien 
Bradshaw Dennis Phillips 
Steinley Lambert Carr 
Michelson Buckingham Kirsch 
 
The Speaker: — All those opposed to the motion please stand. 
 

[Nays — 9] 
 
Wotherspoon Chartier Belanger 
Sproule Forbes Rancourt 
Beck Sarauer Vermette 
 
Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 48; those 
opposed, 9. 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the motion carried. I recognize the 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that this Assembly do now 
adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly now stands adjourned 
until Monday at 1:30. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:13.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Ottenbreit .................................................................................................................................................................................. 447 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 447 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 448 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 448 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 448 
  Fiaz ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 448 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 448 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 449 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 449 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Tax Freedom Day 
  Eyre ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 449 
 Saskatoon Community Youth Arts Program 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 449 
 First Steps Wellness Centre Opens Cerebral Palsy Program 
  Steinley ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 450 
 Mosaic Festival Demonstrates Diversity 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 450 
 Great Plains College Warman Region Graduation 
  Weekes ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 450 
 Newcomer Entrepreneur of the Year Awards 
  Olauson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 451 
 Fraser Institute Mining Survey 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................... 451 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Government’s Fiscal Management 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 451 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 451 
 Funding for Education 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 452 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 452 
 Expansion of Private Medical Diagnostic Services 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 453 
  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 453 
 Children in Provincial Care 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 454 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 454 
 Employment Numbers in Correctional Facilities 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 455 
  Tell ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 455 
 Economics and Environmental Assessment 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 455 
  Cox ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 455 
 Funding for Urban Parks 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 455 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 455 
 Consultation on Provincial Lands Act 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 456 
  Stewart ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 456 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 28 — The Extension of Compassionate Care Act, 2016 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 456 
 Bill No. 29 — The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur les juges de paix 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 456 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 456 



 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 460 
  Doherty ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 463 
 Recorded Division (Amendment) ................................................................................................................................................ 467 
 Recorded Division (Main Motion) ............................................................................................................................................... 468 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 




