






















































Hansard: May 30, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 7A  MONDAY, MAY 30, 2016, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Hon. Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Hon. Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Merriman, Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 51; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Maurice Riou http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 181 
 May 30, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to request leave 
for an extended introduction, if that’s all right. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to take a moment to introduce a few guests seated in 
your gallery this afternoon. They are victim services volunteers 
and they are among, I think we would all agree, some of the 
most dedicated, compassionate, and all-around inspiring people 
that we have in this province. They are people that we turn to in 
times of crisis, Mr. Speaker. Recent events in this province 
certainly underscore the very important work that they do to 
support victims and communities, so their work, Mr. Speaker, is 
invaluable. 
 
And today our honoured guests are celebrating some 
milestones, 10 and 15 years in what they do. Celebrating 10 
years, Mr. Speaker: Deb Macdonald from Southey — you can 
give a wave; there she is — Lynn Pelzer, and Ashley Young 
from Regina. And we also have three people celebrating 15 
years of service with us today, Mr. Speaker. They are Dianne 
Smutt from Kamsack, Tina Bird from Estevan, and Sharon 
Dunham from Swift Current. 
 
As I do every year, Mr. Speaker, I had the pleasure of meeting 
with them for lunch earlier as part of victims week, known 
nationally this year as Victims and Survivors of Crime Week. 
So, Mr. Speaker, I had the great honour of expressing to them 
our great respect from a grateful government on behalf of all 
members of this legislature and our heartfelt thanks for what 
they do. So, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members in joining me 
today in welcoming this truly exceptional group of people to 
their provincial legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you and to all members of this Legislative Assembly, I would 
like to join the minister in welcoming these volunteers from 
victim services. Congratulations on your years of dedication 
and amazing volunteer work. Thank you for all the work that 
you’ve done in helping victims in what, as you know, is likely 
one of the most traumatizing experiences of their lives. Your 
work in this province is truly invaluable. I ask that all members 
join me as well in welcoming these individuals to their 
Assembly. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, while I was on my feet I 
neglected to introduce someone else that was in the legislature 
today. In your gallery, and to you and through you we have 
Geri Williams-Borne from Amherst, Nova Scotia. So welcome 
to the legislature. She is here visiting her daughter, Ellen 
Williams, who is currently employed in the caucus office, the 
government caucus office. But as of tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, 
we’re very pleased to have her join the Ministry of Justice up in 
room 355. I’d ask all members of the legislature to welcome 
Geri to the legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Certainly I’d 
like to welcome all the guests that are here today and 
specifically victims services volunteers that are here today. 
 
But I’d like to welcome some very special guests that have 
joined us here today that are with our cultural associations and 
with our heritage language organizations that contribute in so 
many ways — from a cultural perspective, from a social 
perspective, from an economic perspective, Mr. Speaker. And 
they’re primarily seated in the east gallery here today. There’s a 
very large gathering here today. 
 
I’d like to welcome Ms. Tamara Ruzic, the executive director of 
the Saskatchewan Organization for Heritage Languages, SOHL. 
I’d like to also welcome Ms. Rhonda Rosenberg, executive 
director of the Multicultural Council of Saskatchewan, MCOS. 
I’d like to welcome Dr. Jim Leskun, president of the 
Multilingual Association of Saskatchewan. And I’d like to 
welcome Ms. Eleanor Shia, chairperson of the Saskatoon 
Multilingual Schools, Saskatchewan Intercultural Association. 
I’d be remiss if I didn’t also welcome one of our former 
colleagues, MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] and 
minister Sandra Morin who’s also very highly involved in the 
heritage language schools and the German school specifically. 
 
These individuals have given so much to our province and our 
community from a cultural perspective but also from an 
economic perspective. They assist in settlement. They provide 
strength within our province and operate on very limited 
resources — almost 80 heritage language schools across our 
province. They do so through the goodwill of volunteers. They 
do so with borrowed space, and they do so with very limited 
resources from government that go a very long way in helping 
build the bright future that everyone deserves in Saskatchewan. 
So it’s my pleasure to welcome these very impressive leaders to 
their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the member opposite in welcoming these individuals to the 
legislature. The rich mosaic that we enjoy of citizens from all 
around the world are something that we celebrate, value, and 
appreciate the work that they do. Our provincial motto is “from 
many peoples, strength,” and I think the people that you see 
here today are representative of that. We thank them for being 



182 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2016 

in the province, and we thank them for the efforts that they 
make in preserving and sharing their culture with all of us. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I would like to introduce to you, through you and to all the 
members, Madeeh Ur Rehman. He is a fourth-year student of 
University of Regina. 
 
On May 20th in Regina, first-time, he arranged a Best Buddies 
gala and raised a lot of money for that. I was there with my 
colleague from Regina Rochdale, and Her Honour was there as 
well, the Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan. 
 
I would like to introduce Safeer Ahmed as well. Safeer Ahmed 
is president of the Muslim Youth Association for Saskatchewan 
and for Manitoba as well. And I was talking to him, to help us 
for organ donors in Saskatchewan and in Manitoba and other 
communities. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you to this Assembly, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker, a group of grade 7 to 
9 students from Swanson Christian School near Delisle. They’re 
accompanied by their teacher, Myra Hiebert, and chaperones: 
Merle Hiebert, Melanie Hiebert, Darcy Loewen, Rosalie 
Loewen, Warren Isaac, Valerie Isaac, Renaldo Wiebe, Brenda 
Wiebe, and Carrie Anslow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m looking forward to meeting with them after 
question period. I hope they enjoy today in the Assembly, and 
I’d ask all members to please give them a warm welcome to 
their Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure for me to rise in the House and join with our leader and 
the minister in welcoming the guests in the east gallery. It’s 
very impressive to see so many folks out in support of heritage 
languages. 
 
I want to say a special welcome to Tamara; Eleanor Shia from 
Saskatoon, as she’s come all the way down for this very 
important day; and Rhonda and all the rest. 
 
I do also want to make mention of three important people from 
the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour. They’re here in the 
back bench up there: Kent Peterson, Paige Kezima, and Matt 
Lensen. They are working so hard to make sure that workers’ 
rights are respected and we have a fair and safe workplace. So, 
folks, let’s give them all a warm welcome to their legislature. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce a really fine group of grade 7 students — 51 in fact — 
in the west gallery from Yorkdale Central School. With them 
are teachers Mr. Noel Budz, Mr. Evan Neibrandt, and Mr. Grant 
Edgar.  
 
Also with them is one very special guest, a good friend of mine, 
Klay Sawatsky. I know him very well; he keeps me in line 
when I’m back home quite often. So, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all 
members to recognize these guests, welcome to their Assembly, 
and ask Klay to give us a wave. I’ll be seeing them a little bit 
later as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
want to rise today and recognize a young lady from my home 
community of Ile-a-la-Crosse, and it’s Marva McCallum. 
Marva is here today with two of her children. Heidi right now is 
involved with the Bold Eagle program but is not here, Mr. 
Speaker. But she brought her son, Neil McCallum. And Neil 
was telling me now that he wants to be Neil Graham fairly 
soon.  
 
But I want the record to show today that I’m really glad that 
they’re both here today and to tell Neil that I did beat his dad, 
Bill Graham, in an arm wrestling competition for $15 one night. 
So maybe he should keep the name McCallum and not take the 
name Graham. But I’d ask all members to recognize this very 
special young lady, a great mom, and a great granddaughter, 
and her children that are here visiting today. Thank you very 
much. 
 
The Speaker: — I’m going to take this opportunity to welcome 
some guests that are sitting in the Speaker’s gallery today. 
They’re from visitor services, information officers. They 
welcome visitors from around the world to the Legislative 
Building. The extended summer hours are now in effect. Tours 
of the building are to be offered now every half hour starting at 
8 a.m. till 9 p.m. every day. Tours are available in both French 
and English. 
 
I’d like to introduce the visitor services team consisting of the 
summer staff: Jean-René Robillard, Zane Davey, Katelyn 
Major, Tatiana Orlowski, Kingsley Erlo, Devon Peters. Joining 
also with them today are the permanent staff that I’d like to 
introduce: Arnold McKenzie, Kelly Liberet, Marianne Morgan, 
Lorraine deMontigny. Please join with me in welcoming them 
to their Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition to improve PTSD 
[post-traumatic stress disorder] coverage for Saskatchewan 
workers. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that 
post-traumatic stress disorder can severely impact the lives of 
Saskatchewan workers. They point out that PTSD is not on the 
list of workers’ compensation illnesses presumed to be 
work-related in Saskatchewan, and that many workers suffering 



May 30, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 183 

from work-related PTSD are burdened by lengthy investigations 
and approval processes, and that presuming PTSD is 
work-related will reduce the stigma and allow workers easier 
access to services and supports. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Saskatchewan government to 
make the necessary changes to ensure that if Saskatchewan 
workers are exposed to traumatic events on the job and are 
then diagnosed with PTSD, it is presumed to be caused by 
the worker’s employment and the worker will subsequently 
be covered under workers’ compensation and receive the 
same benefits as others with work-related injuries. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Regina and 
Swift Current. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to stand today and 
present a petition in support of funding heritage language 
schools here in Saskatchewan. And we know that after 25 years, 
the Government of Saskatchewan is discontinuing all support 
for heritage language learning here in Saskatchewan. Since 
1991, heritage language schools have depended on this modest 
funding from the Ministry of Education to help sustain their 
programs. And as a result of the announcement made by the 
Ministry of Education, many of these non-profit heritage 
language schools will be faced with the difficult decision of 
whether they can continue to operate. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Now we know in addition to providing language and cultural 
classes, these schools offer a welcoming environment and 
crucial support for newcomers who are searching for a way to 
feel at home in their new surroundings. It’s also increasingly 
important to work towards improving access to indigenous 
languages, many of which are endangered. 
 
Heritage language programs provide support not only for 
immigrants, refugees, and their descendants, but also for the 
Aboriginal peoples and all Canadians who recognize the benefit 
of learning additional language. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read 
the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to reconsider this decision and restore funding for heritage 
language education in Saskatchewan heritage language 
schools. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Reginans Support Fort McMurray in Time of Need 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan people are very generous and that kindness was 
on display during the wildfire crisis in Fort McMurray. There 
were numerous acts of generosity across the province, and 
many Regina residents stepped up to help as well. On May 7th, 
Hasan Hai and Niall O’Hanlon took cash and new item 
donations at the Regina Farmers’ Market for the evacuees of 
Fort McMurray. 
 
This isn’t their first foray into public kindness. Last winter 
when there was concern over whether the government was 
going to accept Syrian refugees, they made it clear that the 
people of Saskatchewan were more than ready to accept 
newcomers, through sale of a T-shirt bearing the slogan We’re 
All Welcome, and taking item donations. 
 
Hasan and Niall raised $1,727 in direct cash donations for the 
Red Cross, and the value of physical donations received was 
$12,000, including a donation of over $2,000 in pet food from 
PetSmart. The Regina Farmers’ Market donated the space for 
the drive, and a number of vendors donated portions of their 
sales to the Red Cross that day as well. The Fat Badger, 
O’Hanlon’s Irish Pub, and Regina Douglas Park’s own Malty 
National Brewing all helped to gather donations before and 
after the Farmers’ Market event. Cameron Beaton of Bennett 
Dunlop Ford helped with the transport of all donations to 
Alberta. I would also be remiss if I did not give a special thanks 
to the other people I was able to volunteer with that day, Lisa 
Luzney and David Burke. 
 
I have the privilege of calling all these people my friends, and I 
ask all members to join me in thanking these Regina residents 
for their generosity in Fort McMurray’s time of need. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 

Watson Student Recognized at National Science Fair 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
stand in the Assembly today to acknowledge an innovative 
young woman from the community of Watson in my 
constituency. Grade 11 student Teresa Deng won the bronze 
medal in her category at the prestigious national science fair 
held in Montreal earlier this month. 
 
Mr. Speaker, her project was called Algae Bio-Fuel, where 
Teresa was able to grow algae and then process it into an oil 
that can be used as a fuel replacement in everything from 
automobiles to airplanes. Teresa Deng’s project turned heads at 
the national science fair because it showed promise as a realistic 
and economical fuel substitute. Kal Lefebvre, Teresa’s teacher, 
said this about the fair: “The calibre of Teresa’s project and 
other winning projects were so advanced that they were actually 
creating or developing new products on their own.” As a result 
of her forward thinking, she has already been approached from 
universities from across the nation, offering her scholarships. 



184 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2016 

Mr. Speaker, young people from all over this province are able 
to dream big, be creative, and innovate. It’s innovations like this 
that shows Saskatchewan’s future is very, very bright. Mr. 
Speaker, I would ask all members of the Assembly join in with 
me in congratulating Teresa on her accomplishment and wish 
her the best as she moves forward. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Lakeview Educator Receives Saskatchewan  
Order of Merit 

 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to rise in the 
Assembly today in recognition of a role model and constituent 
of mine, Ms. Anne Luke. Last week Anne was invested into the 
Saskatchewan Order of Merit for her outstanding contributions 
to early childhood education in our province.  
 
Anne came to Saskatchewan from England in 1969 and was a 
leader in developing rural kindergarten programs. In 1977 she 
founded the Early Learning Centre here in Regina, which still 
provides today some of our city’s most vulnerable families and 
youngsters with healthy development and a great start in life. 
  
At the awards ceremony, Anne was joined with family and 
friends from across the world to help celebrate with her. One 
thing that stood out for me was that she had a huge table of 
enthusiastic supporters. It was a real testament to the 
tremendous impact that she has had on so many lives here in 
Regina. She always puts kids first. 
 
And this was far from her first award, having received an 
honorary doctorate of laws from the University of Regina, a 
fellowship from the Muttart Foundation, and countless other 
accolades. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
Anne Luke on her well-deserved award, and also thanking her 
for her many years of service and contributions in early 
education. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 

Weyburn Officer Completes Marathon  
for Mental Health 

 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I rise in the House to talk about a remarkable man in my 
constituency, Constable Jeffery Bartsch, a member of the 
Weyburn Police Service. Constable Bartsch ran the entire 
42.2-kilometre-long Saskatchewan Marathon in Saskatoon in 
his full police uniform. He is one of just four officers who have 
attempted and successfully ran a marathon in full uniform in 
North America. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this was part of Constable Bartsch’s fundraiser to 
raise funds for mental health programming in Weyburn. As 
quoted by the constable, and I quote: “Running has really 
helped me with my own mental health.” He also said, and I 
quote: 
 

Around the world with mental health there is a huge 

initiative right now and it helps me to learn to deal with 
those people on a professional level and have the empathy 
to try and understand what they may be going through. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to announce that Constable Bartsch’s 
fundraiser raised nearly $2,000 for mental health programs in 
Weyburn. As for this, his third marathon, he successfully 
completed, in full uniform, in five hours and 45 minutes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in 
congratulating Constable Bartsch on completing his marathon 
in full uniform and for bringing awareness to mental health. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 

2016 Moose Jaw Transplant Trot 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On May 22nd I 
attended Moose Jaw’s second annual Transplant Trot, held in 
the beautiful Moose Jaw Wakamow Valley. Transplant trots are 
3-, 5-, or 10-kilometre walking and running events which are 
organized by local volunteers to increase awareness about organ 
and tissue donation, and to raise funds for the Canadian 
Transplant Association. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Roxanna Gadd-Frey brought the transplant to 
Moose Jaw in 2015 after she learned about the events when she 
was in Edmonton with her son Kevyn Gadd who received a 
double lung transplant in 2014. About 195 people registered 
this year for Moose Jaw’s run, which raised $15,000 for the 
Canadian Transplant Association. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Canada’s rates of organ donation are quite low 
when compared to the United States and many other European 
countries. Our government is committed to helping to increase 
the number of organ donors in our province. I’m looking 
forward to working with members of the Standing Committee 
on Human Services to study how we can work to help increase 
organ donation rates in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, potential 
organ and tissue donors are encouraged to sign their donor card 
and to talk to family members about their wishes.  
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating Roxanna 
Gadd-Frey and everyone who helped organize the 2016 Moose 
Jaw Transplant Trot on another successful event. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
North. 
 

Moose Jaw Rotary Club Celebrates 100th Anniversary 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, this past Friday I, 
along with the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow, had the 
pleasure of attending the 100th anniversary banquet of the 
Moose Jaw Rotary Club. 
 
The Rotary theme of Service Above Self reflects the 100-year 
history of Rotary, both in Moose Jaw and around the world. 
Ken Krebs, the governor of district 5550, paid tribute in his 
address, stating, “One hundred years is a long time for any 
organization to be around. Rotary has thrived since its inception 



May 30, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 185 

here in Moose Jaw.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the event, members, families, and guests 
celebrated the accomplishments of the last century and 
honoured some Moose Javians who exemplify the value of 
Rotary. Special recognition was given to Eric and Erna Pullman 
for their 35 years of service. Other recipients of the Paul Harris 
Fellowship Award included Lyann and Lloyd Pethick, Clayton 
Finnell, Scott Elger, the late Al Buchanan, Joe Dueck, Dale 
Clarke, David Chow, Brenda Walper Bossence, and the Moose 
Jaw Health Foundation board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 
congratulating the award recipients and the Moose Jaw Rotary 
Club on 100 years of service to our community. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 
 

New Group Home Opens in Regina Rochdale 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
last week I attended a grand opening ceremony for a new group 
home here in Regina that supports four individuals living with 
disabilities. This home, located in my constituency of Regina 
Rochdale, provides these individuals with the chance to live 
independently in a safe and supportive environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to making our 
province the best place in Canada to live for individuals with 
disabilities. To reach this goal, we have partnered with Cheshire 
Homes Society of Regina to support the home’s four new 
residents to help them lead independent lives. Mr. Speaker, 
Cheshire Homes Society of Regina plays an incredible, valuable 
role in ensuring inclusivity for these individuals. I applaud all of 
the important accomplishments of this group that it has made in 
providing quality, sustainable services for Saskatchewan 
residents living with disabilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to this ongoing 
partnership. That is why we are providing Cheshire Homes 
Society of Regina with over 380,000 in annual funding for this 
project. Together we will improve the services and support for 
these four individuals and all Saskatchewan residents living 
with disabilities through our ongoing work with our province’s 
disability strategy. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

SaskPower Rate Increases 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party’s failures 
are costing Saskatchewan people their jobs. Their mismanaged 
$1.5 billion carbon capture scheme and their smart meter 
debacle have left SaskPower cash strapped and deep in debt. As 
a result, the Sask Party says they need to jack up rates by 5 per 
cent — not once, but twice in just six months. Now job creators, 
from producers to manufacturing and resource companies, are 

saying they may not be able to afford to operate. They say 
they’ll have to cut jobs, shut down, or scale back. One business 
leader said these rate increases were “outrageous” and would 
result in “significant amount of layoffs.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, how can the Premier justify making Saskatchewan 
workers pay for his mismanagement with his job-killing carbon 
capture tax? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I thank 
the Leader of the Opposition for his question, and I would point 
out that, should these increases be approved by the rate review 
panel and subsequently by the cabinet, Saskatchewan would 
still have the third-lowest-cost utility bundle in all of Canada. 
 
I would also point out that, should the rate review panel 
approve of these rate increase requests by SaskPower, 
Saskatchewan — when you combine both the taxes that 
families pay and businesses pay, and the utilities — we’re 
second best in all of Canada, Mr. Speaker. And we want to 
maintain that competitive advantage both for families and for 
our businesses. 
 
I believe the member was referring to a quote from an official 
from Meadow Lake Mechanical Pulp, Mr. Speaker. Since then, 
they have issued a retraction of that statement in terms of jobs 
at that particular facility. And we could table that or share this 
note with the Leader of the Opposition so his information is 
accurate and updated. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 
Premier, certainly I would appreciate him tabling that 
document. But to dismiss the $1.5 billion carbon capture tax 
that he’s passing along to Saskatchewan businesses and to 
families all across Saskatchewan is wrong and disrespectful, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have workers who now may be facing layoff because of this 
very hike and this mismanagement of this government. And 
when those workers and if those workers face layoff when they 
go home, they’ll be facing larger power bills there directly as a 
result of that Premier’s mismanagement. 
 
[14:00] 
 
How is that fair, Mr. Speaker? Why is it that Saskatchewan 
people are left to pay, along with businesses, for that 
government’s mismanagement of our Crown corporations? 
Why can’t this Premier stand up and take responsibility for his 
job-killing carbon capture tax and finally work with us to 
develop a plan to strengthen and diversify our economy creating 
good, mortgage-paying jobs for Saskatchewan people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the 
member for his question, notwithstanding some of the 
hyperbole and inaccuracy in the preamble. 
 



186 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2016 

I would just say this to all members of the House: that the 
president of SaskPower, Mike Marsh, has been commenting 
publicly on the rate, the reasons for the rate increase. And he 
was asked specifically about the relationship to the very 
successful Boundary dam 3 project. And he’s indicated . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Well I guess they’re discounting the 
fact that Mr. Marsh has served this corporation ably for a 
number of decades spanning different administrations in office. 
 
And he would point out to members of the House and members 
of the public that we have a growing economy, Mr. Speaker, 
and it’s been growing rapidly over the last number of years, and 
so SaskPower has had to build out its infrastructure, not just in 
terms of generation but in terms of transmission. Mr. Speaker, 
part of that has been to find a solution for coal so we can 
continue to use it in the mix while cleaning it up. Members 
opposite want to shut that coal industry down and shut those 
plants down. We don’t want to see that happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also point out that since we took office, we’ve 
only taken a dividend from SaskPower in two years. Previous to 
that, when they were in office from 2000-2007, they stripped 
money from SaskPower every single year. They also were not 
reinvesting in the infrastructure required to keep the electrical 
utility healthy. We inherited billions of dollars worth of an 
infrastructure gap at SaskPower. We’re going to fill that gap. 
We’re going to provide power for a growing economy, and 
we’re going to have the third-lowest-cost bundle of utility rates 
in terms of the entire country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Employment and Services in First Nations, Métis, 
and Northern Communities 

 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the fact is this government has 
been in power for a decade, and under the Sask Party 
unemployment rates are on the rise. And they won’t even 
acknowledge nor talk about the unemployment rates for First 
Nations and Métis people. This government is failing our 
communities. The Truth and Reconciliation Commission made 
some clear calls for action to the provincial government 
including for employment, mental health, and education. But 
this government doesn’t even acknowledge the issues that our 
people are facing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The most recent unemployment rates for off-reserve First 
Nations is at 25 per cent and it’s much, much higher on-reserve. 
Mr. Speaker, certainly this government does not think that these 
are numbers that they should be bragging about. To the 
minister: when will this government acknowledge these 
unemployment rates and get serious about jobs for First Nations 
and Métis people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
certainly the unemployment rate in the First Nations community 
is much higher than we’d like to see. But our government has 
taken a great deal of action in that regard. Mr. Speaker, we 
definitely see the correlation between education opportunities 
and the unemployment rate, Mr. Speaker. That’s why the 

unemployment rate is much lower than it was, for First Nations, 
is much lower than it was just a few years ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve spent record amounts of money on adult 
basic education. We’ve spent record amounts of money funding 
the Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re going to continue on the education front. We’re 
going to continue with programs that work for First Nations 
and, Mr. Speaker, that work for all citizens of the province. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, everyone knows that these 
small programs are not going to solve the problem, and it won’t 
make a difference because this government has undercut the 
essentials like education. Time and time again this government 
is failing to provide what is so desperately needed for First 
Nations, Métis, and northern communities. The TRC [Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission] called on the provincial 
government to take action on the health inequities of indigenous 
people. 
 
Today a psychiatrist spoke out about the lack of services in 
northern Saskatchewan. After paying for her own flights — and 
I’ll repeat, after paying for her own flights — she only has a 
few hours to see all of her clients from across the North. No 
other psychiatrist is doing the work that she does. One 
psychiatrist for northern Saskatchewan who flies in for a few 
hours every couple of months — how is this acceptable, Mr. 
Speaker? This government continually hears desperate calls for 
better mental health services in the North and nothing changes. 
They see tragedies occur on a regular basis and yet nothing 
changes. Mr. Speaker, why do lives in the North matter less? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, this government 
recognizes issues in the North, and we pay a lot of attention to 
northern issues including northern health. There has been 
challenges in the past when it comes to psychiatric and mental 
health access to services, Mr. Speaker, but there is psychiatric 
services. We do have a psychiatrist that does travel to the North. 
There’s always the option . . . We are continually searching for 
more psychiatric services, Mr. Speaker, but we’re also 
researching other options where we see Telehealth and remote 
presence technology as very accessible and makes these 
services very accessible to people in northern Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. So we’re exploring every opportunity we can to 
make sure these services are accessible to people all over the 
province, especially in the northern regions. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Aboriginal Population in Correctional Facilities 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, another one of the calls to action 
from the Truth and Reconciliation Commission is the need for 
provincial governments to commit to eliminating the 
overrepresentation of Aboriginal people in custody, and 
transparently report on their efforts and progress. The 



May 30, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 187 

overrepresentation of First Nations and Métis people 
imprisoned in Saskatchewan remains rampant. But instead of 
addressing this issue and recognizing the historical injustices 
that have led to these inequities, the Sask Party is flippant about 
these circumstances, paints entire communities with one brush, 
and offers no understanding to communities who are struggling. 
 
So in line with the commission’s call, what efforts is the 
minister taking to reduce this overrepresentation? Will the 
minister commit to genuine compassion to communities who 
are struggling and take meaningful action to address the 
overrepresentation of First Nations and Métis people in 
custody? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, we do realize that there is a 
high representation of First Nations people within our facilities. 
As a result, we are focusing on reducing the demand of 
individuals coming into our provincial correctional facilities. 
We look at the Hub program, Mr. Speaker — and I don’t know 
if I need to explain that to anybody — where the professionals, 
they talk about an individual, an individual case to help get 
people to the point where they get the services they require 
before they come into our correctional facilities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The other program that we offer within our facilities of course 
is training programs because what we want to do, we want to 
turn our inmates, the people in our facilities into taxpayers, 
providing them employment opportunities, employment 
training. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are fully cognizant of the fact that our First 
Nations population is higher in our facilities and we’re working 
to address as best we can. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Multi-Ministry Team on Aboriginal Issues 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, we see such disparity amongst 
our First Nations and Métis population because of historical 
injustices. Indigenous cultures were undermined and 
under-valued. Indigenous languages, the lifeblood of our 
culture, were suppressed. The TRC recognized the importance 
of indigenous languages — what our elders have been telling us 
all along. We must take action to reclaim our languages and 
ensure their survival. 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 
 
Which is, in Cree, we have to keep fighting. 
 
In response to the TRC the Premier stated: 
 

The Government of Saskatchewan is committed to meeting 
this task through the adoption of practical solutions. We 
will create a multi-ministry team to carefully examine this 
report and the full report once released. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m curious: what has this multi-ministry 
team done so far, and what practical solutions can we expect to 

see from this Premier, and that government? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the member 
knows, the Truth and Reconciliation Commission released a 
very lengthy report that the multi-ministry team he’s referring 
to continues to deal with. A great deal of work has been done. 
Mr. Speaker, as sort of the summary to that report, there was 94 
different recommendations in that report, 34 of which pertained 
directly or indirectly to the provinces. Of those . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Well if the member would quit heckling he 
might be interested to learn that of those 34, 22 of those are 
already been addressed either in whole or in part by the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue to work with First 
Nations communities, with the FSIN [Federation of Sovereign 
Indigenous Nations] in regard to the balance of those Mr. 
Speaker. The multi-ministry committee’s going to continue to 
do their good work. And, Mr. Speaker, I look forward to the 
next question from the member. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

Funding for Heritage Language Education 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As my friend from 
Athabasca said, building and growing indigenous languages is 
so important for our province’s future, and unfortunately this 
government is going in the wrong direction, Mr. Speaker. 
Earlier this March, the Saskatchewan Organization for Heritage 
Languages learned that the government is pulling its $225,000 
grant. We are joined today by many people who help organize 
the heritage language schools all across the province. This grant 
has provided for the past 25 years, Mr. Speaker, and the 
heritage language schools depend on their grant. Students 
throughout this province depend on this program not only to 
learn their heritage language but also to learn the cultural 
histories behind the languages. Will the minister fix this 
mistake and restore funding to this heritage language program 
today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to start 
off by thanking the heritage language teachers and schools for 
the work that they do in making education in Saskatchewan a 
more culturally diverse and rich place to live. 
 
This was a decision that was not taken lightly, Mr. Speaker. But 
I can tell you this: we have changes in our current economic 
climate. Right now we have seen resource revenue fall by 
approximately $1 billion. We are focused on and committed to 
ensuring that our core services are provided in our classrooms. 
This was an after-school program and, as much as we value and 
respect the program, it does not fall within our core mandate, 
and accordingly we made a very difficult decision. I can advise, 
Mr. Speaker, I can advise the members opposite this was a 
program that had a total expenditure of $225,000. It affected 
4,000 students, a difference of $55 per student per year. 



188 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2016 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, this minister seems to have 
forgotten Saskatchewan’s motto, “from many peoples, 
strength.” The heritage language schools are an important part 
of that strength. We need to give our students every opportunity 
to explore their culture and learn their language, our province’s 
rich multicultural history. And again it’s what gives us our 
strength and makes Saskatchewan strong. So why is this 
government moving ahead with a cut that undermines 
Saskatchewan’s strength? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we respect and appreciate 
the value that that program provides. The people that participate 
in that program are preserving their own culture. In our 
province, we are promoting English language. We are 
promoting the things that are core to our province. We do that 
in our classrooms each and every day. This is an after-school 
program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the grant was providing $55 per student per year, 
or $4 and 58 . . . dollars per month per student. Province wide, 
it’s almost a quarter of a million dollars, but we feel it’s 
something the parents can raise on their own and encourage 
them to do so. The school divisions, Mr. Speaker, are providing 
space and other resources for this program. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we recognize and want to emphasize the fact that we have a $1 
billion shortfall in revenue resources in our province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, these answers are just not good 
enough for the people who have come to the legislature today 
and filled the galleries to fight for the heritage language 
schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, governing is about choices. This government is 
happy to hand out big contracts to out-of-province companies to 
build and operate P3 [public-private partnership] schools, happy 
to pay millions of dollars to American health care consultants, 
but they can’t come up with the money to support our heritage 
language schools. Talk about misplaced priorities. Why is this 
government cutting valuable programs for heritage languages 
instead of cutting their own mismanagement? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I 
mentioned, this is a program that is not core to the educational 
services that are provided by our province. I can advise the 
members opposite that it was their . . . When they were in 
government, they closed 176 schools. They neglected the 
schools that they didn’t close. 
 
But in our province, Mr. Speaker, now under this government, 
we’ve increased operating funding by 31 per cent. We’ve 
increased capital spending by 400 per cent. We’ve increased 
child care spaces for the benefit of families by 53 per cent. 
We’ve increased pre-K [pre-kindergarten] spaces by 104 per 

cent. Mr. Speaker, we have a good record and we’re looking 
forward. 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, those answers from the 
minister defy common sense, are absolutely nonsense, Mr. 
Speaker. This is a regressive, short-sighted cut and it 
undermines our multicultural well-being. It undermines us. It 
undermines us from an economic perspective, a social 
perspective, and a cultural perspective. This is $50 per month 
per student that supports thousands of students across 
Saskatchewan and helps us build a stronger future. My question 
isn’t to the minister for more nonsense here. My question is to 
the Premier: will you stand today, will you scrap this regressive, 
short-sighted cut? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the 
member for the question. He is wrong. It’s actually $55 per 
student per year and $4.58 a month. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
decision was not taken lightly, Mr. Speaker, but the minister is 
right. We are looking to support and improve core services in 
education. We’re going to have a budget tabled in just a couple 
of days where we challenge many areas of government and our 
partners to focus again on core services so we can deliver the 
best quality of those core services to Saskatchewan people at 
the lowest possible cost. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when that budget’s tabled in two days, members 
will note in the House that the province is short $1 billion in 
resource revenue alone from last year. That number will be 
released on Wednesday. We’re $1 billion short in terms of 
resource revenue, and so that calls for a complete and focused 
review on all the services that government provides and all of 
the funding. 
 
We want to be able to focus on the cores. We’ve been 
increasing operating funds for school divisions. We’ve been 
building new schools. We’ve been ensuring there are more 
teachers, not less as there were under the NDP [New 
Democratic Party]. Those are core functions in education that 
need to continue and along the way there’ll be difficult 
decisions made including this one, Mr. Speaker, that the 
government will stand by, and there’ll be more information in 
two days in the budget. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Education Infrastructure 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party cuts are forcing 
extreme measures on our schools. Our schools are in such a 
state of disrepair, Mr. Speaker, that the Saskatoon Public 
School Division is preparing for the worst. Last week they held 
a two-hour drill at one of their elementary schools to prepare for 
a “facility failure.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know it’s common for schools to have fire 



May 30, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 189 

drills, even duck and cover drills in case of wartime bombing, 
but a drill to train students and staff what to do in case their 
schools falls apart, Mr. Speaker, gives duck and cover a whole 
new meaning. 
 
In 2013 the Provincial Auditor found that this government did 
not have a proper plan in place to fix our schools. In the follow 
up last year, the auditor found that this government had 
implemented just three of the eight recommendations. Why 
does this government keep ignoring the serious infrastructure 
needs our schools are facing? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, when I went to school, we 
had fire drills. We now have drills in the event of a terrorist or 
other type of attack. We have methods in place for lockdowns. I 
presume the school division in Saskatoon has chosen to take 
other steps to make sure that they’re being proactive. Mr. 
Speaker, if they have a danger of a structural collapse, I hope 
they contact the ministry right away. I hope they use their PMR. 
[preventative maintenance and renewal] money to try and 
address whatever the problem is, and I hope they come to us if 
there is an emergency that arises that they need to use some 
emergency capital, and we’ll help them. 
 
I can say this, Mr. Speaker, that since we formed government 
we have invested $966 million in capital. We’ve built 40 new 
schools including the nine joint-use schools. We’ve had 25 
major renovations and additions. We were left with a horrible 
shortfall from the members opposite. And for them to stand up 
and turn to us and say we’re not investing enough in education 
capital, they need only look backwards and see where they 
were. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, nearly a decade in power and a 
decade with the best of economic times, and they chose not to 
invest in our kids. No more excuses, Mr. Speaker. And this isn’t 
on the school boards. We know that our schools are in desperate 
need of repairs. While Saskatoon schools are having facility 
failure drills, there are other schools across the province where 
facilities are already failing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Rosthern, the high school’s roof is at risk of 
collapse — collapse. Parents worry about sending their children 
to school. But it’s not just Rosthern High School, Mr. Speaker. 
In fact, the government’s own documents show that at least 
$1.5 billion in repairs are needed in schools across this 
province. That’s a familiar number, Mr. Speaker. But this 
government has set aside just a small portion of what is needed. 
When will this government start ignoring our schools, stop 
blaming school boards, and come up with a plan to invest in and 
fix our schools before the situation gets worse? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the ultimate facility failure 
is when it closes completely. Mr. Speaker, under that 
government when they were in government, it happened not 
once, not twice, not three times —176 times. And where did 

those students go when that facility failure happened? They 
went to Alberta; they went to BC [British Columbia], and they 
left our province. That’s the facility failure that came from that 
failed group of people over there when they were in 
government, and they ought never be allowed to be in 
government again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has a track record on education 
funding that we will put up against theirs any day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, right here in Regina, we’ve got construction under 
way on Connaught and Sacred Heart. We have renovation and 
additions taking place in St. Brieux, Hague, Langenburg, 
Gravelbourg, Hudson Bay, Martensville High, Weyburn, 
Georges Vanier, St. Matthew, and Holy Cross. Mr. Speaker, 
this year we have provided over $27 million to preventative 
maintenance and it keeps going on. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Prince Albert Bridge 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, once again along with my NDP 
team, I am the only one speaking up for Prince Albert. The Sask 
Party government, they have sat on their hands and failed to 
invest in a badly needed new bridge. Resource companies rely 
on the bridge to move people, products, and equipment. 
 
Tourists use the bridge to get to cabins and camps in the North. 
Over the May long weekend, drivers were stuck in traffic for 
hours because of construction on Prince Albert’s only bridge. 
And what’s the government’s solution? A zipper merge sign. 
 
The federal government has removed the P3 requirement for 
infrastructure projects. When will this government open its 
eyes, do the same, and finally commit to building a new bridge 
in Prince Albert? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate 
the opportunity to respond to this question. We are pleased as a 
provincial government to be partnering with the city on repairs 
to the bridge. As we all know, the NDP refused to do that. They 
were going to make the city pay for those repairs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That being said, we’re paying for it, but the contract 
management and traffic management is up to the city of Prince 
Albert. The members opposite know that, Mr. Speaker. If they 
have issues about the traffic management when it comes to that 
bridge, they can redirect that to the city officials. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this bridge was such a priority for the NDP, we 
just came off our provincial election and how many dollars did 
they set aside in their cost, in their platform for the P.A. bridge, 
Mr. Speaker? Absolutely zero. Wasn’t a priority when they 
were in government, Mr. Speaker. Wasn’t a priority this last 
election when they were trying to get back into government, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And let me read the headlines. And this is the difference 
between our two parties. In 2003 when the bridge needed 



190 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2016 

repairs, and I quote, “. . . Highways Minister Mark Wartman, 
who’s . . . determined his . . . government won’t part with a thin 
dime because . . . the bridge isn’t an integral part of 
Highway 2.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, here’s the difference between our parties. This is a 
quote from the newspaper from 2015, and I quote, “The 
province will foot the bill for the full cost . . . [to repair] the 
bridge.” 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy House Leader. 
 

Medical Isotopes 
 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, last week the Saskatchewan Centre for Cyclotron 
Sciences at the University of Saskatchewan received clearance 
from Health Canada to supply radioisotopes to the Royal 
University Hospital on a clinical trial basis. This is good news 
for Saskatchewan patients. 
 
Locally produced radioisotopes can now be supplied for use in 
PET [positron emission tomography] and CT [computed 
tomography] scans as part of the clinical trial. Starting next 
month, the Royal University Hospital will no longer have to 
rely on isotopes produced outside of the province. The 
cyclotron and the Sylvia Fedoruk centre are working with the 
Saskatoon Health Region to officially start supplying the 
hospital in June. 
 
Radioisotopes are now also produced by the cyclotron for 
research purposes. A University of Saskatchewan team is 
studying the development of prostate enlargement and prostate 
cancer using radioisotopes produced by the cyclotron, opening 
up new methods of research. 
 
In 2011 our Premier called on Saskatchewan to become a leader 
in research in the areas of nuclear science, power generation 
from small modular reactors, and nuclear medicine. This is in 
stark contrast to the NDP Environment critic in 2009, who I 
might add is actually sitting in the Chamber today, Sandra 
Morin. This is what Sandra Morin had to say in 2009: “By all 
accounts, an isotope reactor simply doesn’t make sense from an 
economic standpoint so I would question the rush for the 
province to get involved with one.” 
 
Innovation Saskatchewan’s $30 million investment announced 
in 2011 into the Sylvia Fedoruk Canadian Centre for Nuclear 
Innovation is creating a world-class centre of excellence in 
nuclear science and medicine, located right here at home in our 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Since 2012 the Fedoruk centre has granted over $3.7 million to 
25 nuclear research projects with a total value of close to $7.7 
million, when combined with matching funds and in-kind 
contributions. I was pleased to be at the conclusion of 
construction of the $25 million cyclotron back in 2014 in which 
Innovation Saskatchewan, the Fedoruk Centre, University of 
Saskatchewan, and the government of Canada all contributed 
towards. 
 

Saskatoon is getting a reputation worldwide as the place to be 
for innovative research. I wish to thank the Saskatchewan 
Centre for Cyclotron Sciences and the Sylvia Fedoruk Centre 
for Nuclear Innovation for the work they’ve done to date and 
wish them well in their current clinical trials and research 
projects. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
thank the minister for providing an advance copy of his remarks 
so that I as the critic for Innovation might be able to respond in 
a more fulsome manner. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to say right off the top that this is, 
having listened to the announcement by way of media on 
Friday, this is a good piece of news for the province of 
Saskatchewan. I don’t know if the Deputy Premier is getting . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . I don’t know if it’s his seatmates 
that are busy yelling and he can’t hear over that or what’s the 
case there, Mr. Speaker, but I’ll say it again for him. This is a 
good bit of news for the province of Saskatchewan. We’re glad 
to see the developments moving forward in the whole field of 
nuclear medicine. 
 
And certainly, Mr. Speaker, the field of nuclear medicine goes 
back decades in this province, and certainly the Sylvia Fedoruk 
Centre is rightly named for that pioneer in the field of nuclear 
medicine as it stands, Mr. Speaker. And we’re glad to see that 
this critical aspect in terms of nuclear medicine, the 
radioisotope, is now being locally produced, and there’s some 
work that can now progress in terms of seeing what the most 
complete application of that capacity is for the system in 
Saskatchewan but also going beyond our borders, Mr. Speaker, 
in terms of spreading the benefit of this critical development as 
far as is humanly possible.  
 
So certainly in terms of this being an advance in the field of 
nuclear medicine — building on literally decades of advances 
that have been made in the province of Saskatchewan and 
certainly the good work, the partnership between the Sylvia 
Fedoruk Centre, the University of Saskatchewan, the federal 
government, and the Saskatoon Health Region — we are very 
interested to see what other good possibilities may come from 
this. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, in case the Deputy Premier or others 
over there weren’t able to hear me the first time, this is certainly 
a good bit of news for the province of Saskatchewan. And we 
await further developments in the field of nuclear medicine and 
the advances that that means for health for Saskatchewan 
people and people around the world. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 15 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2016 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 15, The 
Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2016 be now introduced and 



May 30, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 191 

read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minster of Justice 
and Attorney General that Bill No. 15, The Provincial Court 
Amendment Act, 2016 be now introduced and read a first time.  
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read the second time? I 
recognize the Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 16 — The Adoption Amendment Act, 2016 
Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’adoption 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 16, 
The Adoption Amendment Act, 2016 be now introduced and 
read for the first time. 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Social 
Services that Bill No. 16, The Adoption Amendment Act, 2016 
be now introduced and read the first time.  
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting of the Assembly. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 1 through 8. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions number 1 through 8 are tabled. 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 2 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Crown 
Corporations’ Fiscal Year End Standardization) 

Amendment Act, 2016 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of the 
miscellaneous statute amendments Act, 2016. 
 
As each Crown corporation is formed by separate legislation, 
some fiscal year-ends are not on a specific date, while others are 
subject to change by order in council. This amendment will 
standardize all CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan] Crowns by having a fiscal year ending 
determined by order in council as opposed to a legislative date. 
 
By changing the Crowns’ year-ends, we will be better able to 
align the budget planning process between CIC and executive 
government. This will provide government with greater 
efficiency in the planning process. The alignment of budget 
years will also provide Finance with more current information 
on Crown earning expectations and their impact to the 
provincial budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of the 
miscellaneous statutes amendment Act, 2016. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the Minister of Crown Investments that Bill No. 2, 
The Miscellaneous Statutes (Crown Corporations’ Fiscal Year 
End Standardization) Amendment Act, 2016 be read a second 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
once again pleased to stand in my place today to offer our initial 
comments as it relates to Bill No. 2. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what’s really important on the 
miscellaneous statutes amendment Act is the fact that when it 
comes to the Crown corporations, we in the opposition are 
going to be paying very close attention to what the Sask Party 
government does around our Crowns on any front. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while this particular bill talks about 
harmonizing year-end with that of the executive government, 
which is the Government of Saskatchewan, we wanted to make 
sure that any concerns as it relates to the accounting procedure 
or the accounting process is something that we clearly 
understand and that we have to make the effort to try to speak to 
as many organizations and groups that are out there. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what this bill does, according to the notes 
here, this allows the government to harmonize the Crown 
corporations’ fiscal year with the fiscal year of the Government 
of Saskatchewan, as is described in the bill. Now, Mr. Speaker, 



192 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2016 

what this does, as according to the bill notes as well, is it allows 
cabinet to set the fiscal year for all the Crown corporations out 
there so they coincide with their fiscal year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now one of the things that’s really important for the people of 
Saskatchewan to know . . . and most of the people of 
Saskatchewan see the Crown corporations as something that 
they highly value. They also see their Crown corporations 
providing them with a sense of security, Mr. Speaker. So when 
the Crown corporations get involved with, for example, if 
there’s dividends taken out of the Crown corporation, if there’s 
more debt placed on the Crown corporations, which we’ve seen 
from the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker, they obviously pay very 
close attention to that. 
 
Now as innocuous as this change might be in its simplest form, 
Mr. Speaker, we cannot be certain that there isn’t any other 
rules or regulations that they’ll be changing now or in the future 
that impact the effectiveness and the bottom line of many of our 
Crown corporations. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it is often our job in the opposition is to briefly 
explain what the bill is about, what the proposed changes are. 
And we’re going to ask the people of Saskatchewan to look at 
the bill and really try and offer some opinion and some advice 
as to what we need to watch out for. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as I said at the outset, it’s very, very 
important that we pay very close attention to what the Sask 
Party is doing with our Crown corporations. And as I travelled 
throughout Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, a lot of people — 
again, as I mentioned several times — they really want to 
protect the Crowns. The Crowns are vitally important to our 
province. And it doesn’t matter where you come from, Mr. 
Speaker, whether it’s Strasbourg or whether it’s Swift Current 
or whether it’s Buffalo Narrows, people in the province really 
do care about the Crowns and they want to see the Crown 
corporations stay as profitable and functional as possible. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what’s happening now, we’re seeing a lot of 
evidence that the Sask Party now is musing about selling off the 
Crowns. We’ve seen some of the examples, as I mentioned in 
the past, whether it’s the Information Services Corporation 
which generated $14 million in profit for the people of 
Saskatchewan; well they sold that, Mr. Speaker. Whether it’s 
the liquor stores that they’re now privatizing and selling off, 
Mr. Speaker; once again they said they wouldn’t do that. Now 
they’re doing this. 
 
Now they’re looking at coinciding their year-end, Mr. Speaker. 
And it always pains me whenever I hear the word Crown 
corporation coming out of the Saskatchewan Party’s corner, Mr. 
Speaker, because it always gets my defences up. And I think 
overall a lot of people of Saskatchewan will also pay very close 
attention to what they’re saying. 
 
So once again, as innocuous as this bill may seem in terms of 
harmonizing their year-end with their year-end, as well as the 
Crown corporations’ year-end, I think it’s important that we pay 
very, very close attention to this one. And I would encourage all 
my caucus colleagues to make the connect and talk to a lot of 
organizations, and especially those that are involved with the 
accounting industry to see what this really means. 

And one of the things I hope it doesn’t mean, Mr. Speaker, is 
that if they coincide with their budget, that we’re not seeing the 
Saskatchewan Party either, at the very worst, trying to sell these 
Crowns or, Mr. Speaker, at the very least, trying to raid these 
Crowns to cover up their mismanagement at the executive 
government or the provincial government level. That’s 
something that we really, really have to pay close attention to. 
 
And that’s one of the reasons why, Mr. Speaker, we go through 
these processes in the Assembly, just simply to let people know 
that this is what they intend to do. We obviously ask for your 
advice and your input, Mr. Speaker, and we would also make 
connection with the people that are involved with this particular 
exercise — whether they’re an accountant firm or a member of 
the Crown corporation — to see if they have any advice, sage 
advice for us as the opposition. 
 
So again when it comes to the Crown corporations, we’re all 
very defensive, we’re all very wary when the Saskatchewan 
Party tries to get themselves involved with the Crown 
corporations, Mr. Speaker. And I’ll close on this point as I add a 
few comments here. 
 
The fact is the people of Saskatchewan want to keep the 
Crowns, Mr. Speaker. They want to keep the Crowns that 
provides them with a lot of security. And young and old and 
people from right across the province, Mr. Speaker, they all 
want to see the Crowns retained for the people of 
Saskatchewan. And why I think it offers a sense of security, Mr. 
Speaker, is because these Crowns generate a lot of revenues — 
a lot of revenues, Mr. Speaker. I think Liquor and Gaming 
alone generates something like half a billion dollars. And, Mr. 
Speaker, those profits, that money goes back into provincial 
coffers to be used for education, to be used for infrastructure, to 
be used for health care, and the list goes on. 
 
So these Crown corporations make a lot of money for the 
people of Saskatchewan. They own them. And to me I think, to 
a large extent, the profits made from the Crown corporation 
actually lessens the stress and the strain on the taxpayers, Mr. 
Speaker, because we’re making profit from these entities. And 
that really helps with the bottom line. 
 
So one of the key messages that we have and will continue to 
hammer home when it comes to the Crown corporations, Mr. 
Speaker, is the fact that when the Saskatchewan Party started 
tinkering even in the smallest way, even in the most minute 
way, that we’ve paid very close attention to what they’re doing. 
Because, Mr. Speaker, they have broken their word. They have 
broken their promise to not look at the Crowns. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I think the people of Saskatchewan are not very happy 
with that at all. 
 
So once again I point out that we’re going to have eight other 
people look at this in the immediate . . . interim as a staff, and 
we’re going to have nine other MLAs also having their opinion 
on this particular matter, Mr. Speaker. And we’re going to 
continue, we’re going to continue being very careful and 
watchful as to what the Saskatchewan Party have to do. It could 
be a smaller detail like this, Mr. Speaker, but my assumption is 
that the only reason that they’re doing any change to the Act is 
to serve their political direction and assert their philosophy, and 
that is to try and sell them. 



May 30, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 193 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is something that the people of 
Saskatchewan do not want. I’m not sure how . . . any clearer I 
can get on that. But that’s one of the points that I would want to 
raise at the outset. 
 
So once again, I’m pleased to give initial comments on Bill No. 
2, and I move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 2. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has adjourned 
debate on Bill No. 2, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Crown 
Corporations’ Fiscal Year End Standardization) Amendment 
Act, 2016. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 3 — The Teachers Superannuation and 
Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2016 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of Bill No. 3, The Teachers 
Superannuation and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
A new provincial collective bargaining agreement was signed 
with the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation on February 12th, 
2015. As a result, amendments are required to The Teachers 
Superannuation and Disability Benefits Act to reflect the terms 
of the agreement. 
 
The first change proposed is to repeal clause 27(2)(f) regarding 
denying refunds on members’ contributions where a member of 
the Saskatchewan teachers’ superannuation plan has less than 
20 days of contributory service. The amendment will allow 
teachers with less than 20 days of teaching service to receive a 
refund of their contributions with interest. 
 
The second change proposed is to subsections 43(1) and (3) and 
the inclusion of a new subsection to outline the revised 
contribution amounts for the Saskatchewan Teachers 
Retirement Fund. The new collective bargaining agreement 
identifies that the contribution amounts be amended to 7.25 per 
cent and 9.25 per cent of a teacher’s salary respectively. The 
required amendments for the change in contribution amounts 
are scheduled to be brought into force on July 1, 2016. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move therefore that Bill No. 3, 
The Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits 
Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the Minister of Education that Bill No. 3, The Teachers 
Superannuation and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2016 
be read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thanks again, Mr. Speaker. Again I rise in 
my place to present our initial thoughts on Bill No. 3. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to point out for those that are listening that one 
of the things that is really, really important is to respect what 
the teachers’ wishes are because in the province of 

Saskatchewan we often say that we don’t do enough to 
appreciate the teachers and the amount of respect that we afford 
them, Mr. Speaker. And this is why this bill is so very, very 
important from our perspective. 
 
As an opposition, Mr. Speaker, we look for the leadership and 
the lead on issues of this sort from the teachers themselves. We 
don’t look at the Saskatchewan Party as being the protectors of 
the public health, or public education system, and that’s why 
it’s so very important that we look at what the teachers 
themselves are saying, as represented by their collective 
bargaining team. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 3, The Teachers Superannuation and 
Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2016 primarily has three 
points. Number one is this bill changes the structure for retired 
teachers who are living with a disability. The second change, 
Mr. Speaker, is they were agreed upon by the teachers’ union 
and the government through the collective bargaining process, 
and we’ve heard this particular issue from the teachers’ union 
directly. And, Mr. Speaker, again as I pointed out, one of the 
things that was asserted in this particular agreement, or this 
particular bill — and we continue saying that as an NDP 
opposition — that we support the collective bargaining process 
and look forward to moving these changes along to the 
Assembly. As long as the STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation] and the teachers’ association have agreed to these 
changes, Mr. Speaker, the opposition will certainly respect and 
support our teachers as we should. 
 
One of the important points I would raise, Mr. Speaker, to 
northern Saskatchewan, I want to take a few moments to 
recognize some of the teachers that have worked years and 
years and years and have done so much for the northern 
Saskatchewan communities. I think it’s important to reflect 
some of the values that we have as an opposition when it comes 
to the teachers themselves and how they’ve impacted our lives. 
 
[14:45] 
 
And I’ve travelled to many, many northern communities, Mr. 
Speaker. And whether it’s to Stony Rapids or La Loche or 
whether it’s in Pinehouse or whether it’s in Pelican Narrows, 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve been pretty much to every community in 
the North, and I can tell you that these teachers are making a 
significant contribution to our communities. You often see the 
hub of many of these communities surround itself in terms of 
activity and leaders. Usually it’s a lot of teachers that are 
involved with some of the initiatives and the movement to 
strengthen the various communities. So whether it’s fundraising 
or whether it’s coaching a volleyball team or whether it’s 
awareness to exercise that the community may be doing, you 
can find teachers from all of these communities being very, 
very active. So I want to point out that one of the reasons why I 
think we have made it thus far in northern Saskatchewan has 
been a direct result of some of the influence that teachers have 
had on us in the past, but certainly, Mr. Speaker, the effect that 
teachers have had on our children and our grandchildren, as I 
have witnessed over time. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, northern Saskatchewan itself is quite 
involved with the STF. They’ve got a lot of solid leaders from 
the North that are a big part of the process to make sure teachers 



194 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2016 

are respected and treated fairly. And as an opposition, we want 
to make sure that we are in tune and that we’re in concert and 
that we’re certainly in touch with our teacher bargaining team to 
make sure that their points are raised and to make sure that their 
privileges and their rights are certainly protected. And more so, 
Mr. Speaker, is that we offer that continual dialogue with them. 
I think that’s a really important point I want to raise, that 
continual dialogue is key to making sure that we as an 
opposition know what the concerns are. 
 
So as we look through Bill No. 3, The Teachers Superannuation 
and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, we see that the STF — 
I’m assuming that’s their primary team — that they’ve agreed 
to the changes in this particular bill. We want to take a few 
more weeks to understand the bill better so we know exactly 
what we’re doing as an opposition as it relates to building the 
relationship with our teachers, and that’s why it’s important that 
we take the time to study it, to have more consultations and 
discussion. 
 
But as I mentioned at the outset, again as long as their union’s 
on side . . . And we always indicate as an opposition that we 
support the collective bargaining process. And as I mentioned at 
the outset, we want to move these changes along primarily 
because, and only because, the teaching bargaining unit has 
agreed to this, Mr. Speaker. When it comes to the Saskatchewan 
Party, we will not take the Saskatchewan Party’s take on it. Our 
allegiance is with the STF and the people that represent the 
teachers in the province. 
 
And I just wanted to take a few moments to pay tribute to many 
of the northern teachers that are doing a tremendous job out 
there, a tremendous job, Mr. Speaker. And they are the value 
and the lifeblood of any community, and it’s something that I 
wanted to share with the Assembly today. 
 
So we have a few more people to make comments on this, our 
staff as well as our MLA team, and I’m certain that there’ll be 
other people that’ll pay tribute to the teachers as we move 
along. So on that front, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 
No. 3, The Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits 
Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has adjourned 
debate on Bill No. 3, the teachers . . . [inaudible] . . . and 
disability benefits amendment Act, 2016. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 4 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2016/Loi 
modificative de 2016 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to move second reading of The Queen’s Bench 
Amendment Act, 2016. As members of the Assembly will know, 
this Act establishes criteria for the operation of that superior 
court. 
 

Mr. Speaker, amendments to the Act are required to fulfill 
Saskatchewan’s obligations as a signatory to the New West 
Partnership Trade Agreement, which will allow existing or 
future awards made by dispute resolution panels to be enforced 
against any party as if they were civil judgments of the court. 
Amendments to the Act will be made to allow awards to be 
made by dispute resolution panels under trade agreements to be 
enforced as if they were civil judgments of the court, and allow 
awards to be enforced against persons other than the Crown. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this bill will also make a number of other changes. 
It will amend the reference to the size of the court from a chief 
justice and 31 other judges to a chief justice and 32 other judges 
to reflect the actual size of the court, and it will include a notice 
requirement specific to the appointment of court-appointed 
legal counsel. 
 
In addition, related amendments to The Constitutional 
Questions Act, 2012 will be made to provide for the 
appointment of an administrator for the purposes of managing 
the court-appointed lawyer process, set out rules and processes 
for the appointment of a court-appointed lawyer from a list of 
approved lawyers established by the administrator, provide that 
those lawyers are to be paid at a fee rate set by the 
administrator, and provide that any lawyers appointed outside 
this process are not entitled to payment by the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the lack of a statutory basis for the administration 
of the court-appointed legal counsel program has resulted in 
inconsistencies in when and how such counsel are appointed. 
Providing for a notice requirement specifically designed for 
court-appointed counsel and introducing those rules in The 
Constitutional Questions Act, 2012 will enhance the ability to 
address these matters in the Act, and improve certainty. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members of this Assembly will know that 
Saskatchewan residents have every reason to be proud of this 
hard-working and professional court, and I think these changes 
will facilitate their continued good work. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to move second reading of The Queen’s Bench 
Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the Minister of Justice and Attorney General that Bill 
No. 4, The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2016 be read a 
second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
again I rise in my place to offer initial comments on this 
particular bill, a bill that is referenced or titled An Act to amend 
The Queen’s Bench Act, 1998 and make related amendments to 
The Constitutional Questions Act, 2012. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as I look to this bill, there are so many 
different aspects of law that one has to really understand the 
basis of what the law is all about. And, Mr. Speaker, some of 
the language is very complex and a lot of the people, the lay 
people such as myself, we really need to take the time to 
understand what this bill really means. Now at the outset I can 
point out that it’s important that due process of the law, from 
my perspective again not being a lawyer, that it be done as 
respectful and responsive as possible from my perspective. 



May 30, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 195 

Now what I see happening in terms of Bill 4 itself, and it’s very 
difficult to explain all the nuances of the particular clauses here 
because there are just, let’s see . . . There’s 109 different clauses 
in this particular agreement. It has a wide-ranging impact on 
other parts of the law, including The Adoption Act, The Child 
and Family Services Act, The Children’s Law Act, The 
Dependants’ Relief Act, The Adoption Act, The Divorce Act, 
The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act, The Family 
Maintenance Act, The Homesteads Act. All of these Acts, Mr. 
Speaker, there are numerous of them. The Inter-jurisdictional 
Support Orders Act. The Victims of Interpersonal Violence Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are numerous different Acts that are 
impacted by some of the changes as we’ve identified or as the 
minister has alluded to, and that’s why it’s important that we 
take the time to understand this particular process. And what 
exactly does it mean for the average citizen? What does it mean 
for somebody that isn’t aware of how the law works to a point 
where it’s very manageable in terms of what they understand? 
And certainly, Mr. Speaker, I think that part of understanding 
what this bill is trying to do should be afforded to as many 
people as possible. And that’s why, as legislators, we take the 
time to try and understand the bill and read and observe what 
some of the changes are. 
 
And the great news, Mr. Speaker, is we do have lawyers on this 
side of the Assembly, some very capable and able lawyers that 
could help decipher some of the language that the court uses 
and certainly decipher what is being proposed in this particular 
bill so we can understand better as our constituents may 
approach us and we turn around and we say, well some of the 
Acts that, as it relates to Bill 4, these are some of the concerns 
we have. 
 
But more so, Mr. Speaker, it’s important to note that many 
people and organizations out there are very astute and they’re 
very observant when it comes to any kind of changes to our law 
and certainly to the justice Act because the administration of 
justice is everyone’s responsibility. So a lot of organizations 
and a lot of people, not just the lawyers but outside of the legal 
circle so to speak, they pay very close attention to what is 
happening in these particular bills. And these are the people that 
we want to outreach to and ask for the advice and their support 
in terms of giving us information that they feel is relevant to 
what the Act is going to impact as it relates to any of their 
services or their personal circumstances, etc. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s really, really important that we give 
time to those organizations to approach us and to share their 
perspective. The great news, as I mentioned at the outset, we do 
have a couple of lawyers that do sit in the opposition caucus, 
and very capable lawyers, and they’ll explain to us what a lot of 
the changes are being undertaken as a result of this particular 
Act. 
 
At the outset I can tell you that there are some concerns that are 
being expressed. The Act itself makes changes to the 
court-appointed counsel process and that may result in limiting 
access for legal services for some vulnerable people. And that’s 
exactly the point that we would raise, is that it’s this kind of 
knowledge and background that the opposition needs to rely on 
to ensure that bills of this sort, Bill No. 4, doesn’t forget the fact 
that there may be some areas of concern that lay people such as 

myself would not be aware of. And that’s why it’s important to 
give the time for the opposition to make that connect, get advice 
from our own legal experts so to speak, and to also take the 
time to understand the bill as best as we should. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, again this bill has a lot of implications to a 
variety of Acts that are too numerous to mention. But there’s 
quite a few Acts that it makes changes to or has influence on 
and that’s the part that we have to really, really pay attention to 
as well. But at the outset as I mentioned, there are some 
concerns about how the process works where there are some 
vulnerable people that may not be included in the process. And 
that’s the point that we want to make, is that it’s important to 
understand what impact it has on them and how it can hurt them 
as well. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, there’s a lot of language, 
there’s a lot of documentation around Bill 4. There is tons of 
different Acts that is being impacted. So again it’s important for 
us to get some clear advice and to make sure that we’re able to 
shuffle through what this information is all about and what 
changes that the minister is making on this particular bill. 
 
Again at the outset, the first initial comments we have as it 
results to this bill is that there may be some changes — it makes 
changes; never mind may be — but it makes changes to the 
court-appointed counsel process. And vulnerable people may be 
adversely affected by that process, and that’s not something that 
we want to see happen because the whole basis and premise 
behind the law is justice and fairness, Mr. Speaker. And if it’s 
not fair to one particular group, then it’s not a just law. 
 
So it’s really, really important to point that out that we will have 
more capable and more determined and more knowledgeable 
people within our caucus, and certainly out there that are 
available, that may want to participate in this process. We 
welcome their participation as well. But they will have an 
opportunity to look at this particular bill and they’ll certainly 
have the opportunity to give us advice. And we will certainly 
fight on that front that if there’s any injustice as a result of this 
bill in terms of hampering access to fairness, Mr. Speaker, then 
we will certainly highlight those concerns, bring forth 
amendments, and do our very best to let the people of 
Saskatchewan know that this is what the Saskatchewan Party 
government is trying to do. And if there’s any adverse effects, 
then we will certainly undertake to do that. 
 
So on that point, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that it’s again 
an open invitation to people out there that may want to pay 
attention to the changes. Again it’s Bill 4, and we will certainly 
have our critic and other members of the NDP caucus certainly 
have their opportunity to say a few words on this particular bill 
at a later time. 
 
So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 4, The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 4, The Queen’s Bench 
Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



196 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2016 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 5 — The Electronic Information and 
Documents Amendment Act, 2016 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice 
and the Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of The Electronic Information and Documents 
Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
This Act provides for the legal recognition of documents in 
electronic form where legislation asks for documents to be 
provided in writing. The Act has facilitated the legal translation 
of paper to electronic documents in the private and public 
sectors without requiring each individual Act or regulation to be 
amended to allow for electronic documents. Mr. Speaker, this 
Act does however exempt certain documents, such as wills and 
health care directives, so that paper-only requirements are not 
overridden by the Act. 
 
Following requests from the real estate and credit union 
communities, it’s recommended the Act be amended to remove 
the existing exemption from the application of the Act for 
documents that create or transfer interests in land and that 
require registration to be effective against third parties, and to 
update references in the Act from department to ministry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the exemption provision was originally intended 
to protect the registry system from land transactions occurring 
without adequate evidence and proper registration. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the modern electronic registry process has 
removed this concern and overrides the Act by specifically 
prescribing the electronic registration requirements for the land 
registry. Accordingly, transactions for real estate matters 
between private parties are not caught by this exemption as they 
are not actual documents used by ISC [Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan] to file transfers in the electronic 
registry. However, given that this particular provision is no 
longer relevant, there is no downside to removing this potential 
irritant, regardless of our view that it does not legally inhibit 
electronic real estate transactions. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 
Electronic Information and Documents Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 5, The 
Electronic Information and Documents Amendment Act, 2016 
be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again 
I’m pleased to stand in my place today to give initial comments 
on The Electronic Information and Documents Act. And this 
basically, from what I understood from the minister, that there 
is a . . . really it’s an administrative process that’s designed to 
streamline the delivery of legal services such as dealing with 
particular issues that the court may deem as not overly serious, 

in the sense that an electronic information process is available 
to that court, as opposed to just having paper being the only 
need for the courts to consider some of the issues before the 
courts. 
 
So I think it’s really important to explain as briefly and as 
simply as I can. From what I understand from the minister’s 
points is that there is the opportunity to have electronic 
information shared to the application of justice or in the pursuit 
of services that are associated with justice in the sense that we 
don’t need actual physical paper to be present, that there could 
be electronic form or electronic transfer of that information and 
that would be sufficient. 
 
I understand that this Act doesn’t also engage different parts of 
the law, which is really important to point out because 
obviously there are wills that shouldn’t be part of the electronic 
distribution process. There’s probably a variety of reasons for 
that, Mr. Speaker. Trusts as well, those are some of the things 
that you’ve got to be very careful, that you’re not electronically 
transferring a bunch of documentation all over the place. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, power of attorney, land transfers, these are 
some of the things that I think overall that you’ve got to be 
very, very careful when you have the electronic exchange of 
information. There is certainly some very, very private, 
confidential stuff that people don’t want shared as part of their 
estate or their will or their family business. 
 
So that’s why it’s really, really important that the minister 
pointed out in the bill, The Electronic Information and 
Documents Act, 2000 that there are certain areas that they will 
not accept for court purposes, the transfer of electronic 
information, that they do want the documentation in front of 
them. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, given the fact that in this day and age we 
have so many things that are available to us electronically, Mr. 
Speaker, with the introduction of the Internet and the various 
degrees of information shared on cellphones, it’s really a 
society now, Mr. Speaker, where privacy is something that is 
always at risk, and people are always worried about that. 
 
So it’s really important that we identify, or the minister has 
identified that certain information shouldn’t be sent 
electronically in the application of justice, that there has to be 
paper documentation right at source. And that’s something that 
really needs to be emphasized. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that I would say offhand is 
that — as we begin to identify which parts of the court process 
or which aspects of the court process that the minister will be 
allowing under this new Act — to be allowing the electronic 
information to be part of the process, we need to identify what 
specific areas of the Act is the minister suggesting, through this 
legislation, that he would allow electronic transmission, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s something that we have to find out for sure. 
 
And obviously, if it’s meant to deliver a more efficient system 
in the pursuit of justice and the attached services of justice, then 
certainly it’s something that the opposition would like to look at 
as well because it’s all about improving efficiency. If it’s all 
about improving services and a quicker response for people that 



May 30, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 197 

are impacted by the courts, then, Mr. Speaker, there is some 
value. But you’ve got to be very, very careful, I think, given the 
electronic age that we’re in. As you know, people can hack into 
various secure sites and extract a lot of information. 
 
So again it’s all about making sure that we’re paying due 
diligence to the two aspects as we begin our job to share 
information with the courts, whether it’s electronically or by 
paper trail, that some of this information has got to be protected. 
And as long as that information is protected, and as long as it 
doesn’t go too overboard in terms of having everything 
electronically sent to various court processes, Mr. Speaker, then 
we want to be assured of that. And that’s the purpose of our 
involvement as the opposition. 
 
So one of the key points, as I mentioned in earlier comments, is 
the fact that we do have very capable legal counsel in our team. 
They will look at this particular bill, and I can assure the public 
that if there is any part of the bill that is weak, is misunderstood, 
or not necessary or overly onerous on the process or the system 
we have in delivery of justice, then we will certainly want to 
take the time to point that out, find out about it first and point it 
out, and certainly give our opinion to make sure peoples’ 
interests are protected. 
 
So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on 
The Electronic Information and Documents Act, 2000. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 5, The Electronic 
Information and Documents Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 
 

Bill No. 6 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2016 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2016. 
Mr. Speaker, this bill will make amendments to 24 Acts to 
update language and correct grammatical and reference errors. 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s last general statute revision 
occurred in 1978, and since that time several statute law 
amendment Acts have been introduced to correct various errors. 
 
As time passes, Mr. Speaker, the terminology we use also 
changes. So this bill amends three Acts to remove the term 
“provincial magistrate” in favour of “provincial court judge.” 
And in order to be consistent with the Queen’s Bench rules, the 
bill amends eight Acts to replace “substitutional service” with 
“substituted service.” The bill will also repeal and replace 
words that have a variety of spellings such as extraprovincial or 
tortfeasor to work toward more consistency within the 
legislation. This will assist in accurate electronic searches of 
Saskatchewan legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will also be introducing a second bill to amend 
the bilingual Act. So, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move 
second reading of The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2016. 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
the motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 6, The Statute 
Law Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again 
on Bill No. 6, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2016 and Bill 
No. 7, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2016 (No. 2), I’m 
understanding that there is really two parts of the bill that are 
impacting the delivery of Bill No. 5 overall, Mr. Speaker. As 
we talk about the electronic distribution of certain information 
as part of the legal process, the key point that the minister 
wanted to allude to in both these bills, Bill No. 6 and Bill No. 7, 
really it’s about the spelling, Mr. Speaker, about some of the 
spelling and the terminology used in these various bills. And I 
understand that there’s also not only the English spelling that 
needs to be clarified but there’s also the French spelling, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And there may be also the point of the fact of the designation of 
certain officers. It’s alluded to somewhat in the bill, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s why I think it’s important that if it’s as 
simple as making sure that we have the correct terminology, the 
correct spelling not only in English but certainly in French as 
well, and as a result of the right terminology being implemented 
and the right spelling in both in English and French and that’s 
all part of the process for the electronic filing, Mr. Speaker, I 
think those are adjustments that would have to be made. 
 
And we certainly want to make sure that we’re as diligent in 
making sure that if there’s any problems that we find out. But 
we’ll also be vigilant in ensuring that we don’t hold up bills that 
are unnecessary or that we’re not really playing politics with the 
bills that are going to ensure that the application of justice is as 
swift and fair as possible. 
 
So I think as a result of some of the initial comments we have, 
if there’s any particular designation of a certain title that is 
problematic to any group out there, then we certainly want to 
know about that. If there’s any kind of language that is not 
properly utilized in the bill, we obviously want to know about 
that as well. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, again in the pursuit of 
trying to ensure that our system runs as smoothly as we can 
through the electronic transfer of information, if there are 
designations that have to be changed for the purposes of 
achieving that, if there is spelling that has to be corrected in 
both French and English, then we certainly want to make sure 
that we’re not holding up the process just for the sake of 
holding up the process. 
 
So those are my initial comments on this particular bill. And 
again we’ll have other information that’s attached to the 
previous bill and this new bill as we unfold and connect with 
the various organizations that may have comments on this, and 
we invite that. But on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move that we 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 6 and Bill No. 7. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 6, The Statute Law 
Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 



198 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2016 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 7 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2016 
(No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2016 modifiant le droit législatif 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — I rise today to move second reading of 
The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2016 (No. 2). Mr. Speaker, as 
noted when introducing the English bill, this bill will amend 
three bilingual Acts to update language, remove an unnecessary 
section, and correct a reference error. For example, Mr. 
Speaker, this bill will amend one Act to replace substitutional 
service with substitute service, as an example. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 
Statute Law Amendment Act, 2016 (No. 2). 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
the motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 7, The Statute 
Law Amendment Act, 2016 (No. 2) be now read a second time. 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just 
want to point out that I may have erred in passing the motion to 
debate, to adjourn the debate on Bill No. 7. I understood that 
both these bills were connected and they were both presented 
under the same title. 
 
But however, Mr. Speaker, that being said, I think the same 
process will certainly unfold from our perspective in the sense 
that we will take the time to go through the process and, as I 
mentioned earlier, that if there is something that is going to 
correct spelling, correct designation of title, correct both 
spelling in French and English again to accommodate the 
electronics information effort, Mr. Speaker, we simply want to 
be able to see what the bill entails and to see if there’s anything 
that we should be concerned about or worried about, and to 
connect with the groups and organizations out there. So on that 
front, I think I want to take the time to do that, and as our 
lawyers go through this as well to ensure that there’s nothing 
nefarious about what is being implemented here. And that’s our 
role as the opposition. 
 
So on that front, Mr. Speaker, I again move a motion to adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 7. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 7, The Statute Law 
Amendment Act, 2016 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 8 — The Summary Offences Procedure 
Amendment Act, 2016 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Summary Offences Procedure 
Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Act deals with the procedures for charging 
people with provincial offences and offences against municipal 
bylaws. The Act also prescribes the court’s power and duties 
respecting provincial offences, which generally follow the 
summary conviction provisions of the Criminal Code and the 
enforcement of fines resulting from those convictions. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments that I’m proposing are aimed at 
reducing court volumes and improving court efficiency. These 
amendments were developed in response to the significant 
increase in traffic tickets resulting from the automated speed 
enforcement photo laser project which is currently running on a 
two-year pilot basis in Regina, Saskatoon, and Moose Jaw. The 
bill will implement improvements to court processes to address 
these increased ticket volumes and will also support the 
development of other innovative solutions to further reduce 
court volumes in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this bill establishes a new administrative process 
for defendants who want to plead guilty but want more time to 
pay their fine. Currently, if a defendant wishes to plead guilty 
but would like more time to pay the fine, he or she has to apply 
to a justice for an extension. This bill will move these 
applications for an extension of time to pay out of court and 
into an administrative process through the fine collection 
branch, which will reduce the number of people who need to 
attend court. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this bill will also expand the regulation-making 
authority to support other changes to court processes. One 
potential option is a reduced fine for early payment of fines. 
Expanding this authority will support the future development of 
innovative solutions to reduce court volumes. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, this bill will also incorporate the Criminal 
Code provision that authorizes the swearing of information by 
means of telecommunication and make that provision 
applicable to provincial offences. The information is a 
document that begins a criminal proceeding, and it must be 
sworn by the informant who’s typically a peace officer. 
 
In remote communities, Mr. Speaker, it’s often impractical for a 
peace officer to attend personally before a justice to swear the 
information. The Criminal Code provision authorizing the 
swearing of information by telecommunications such as by fax 
will be adopted into the Act and made applicable to summary 
offences in Saskatchewan, which in turn will improve court 
efficiency. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with that I’m pleased to move second reading 
of The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 8, The 
Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2016 be now 
read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 
recognize the member from Athabasca. 



May 30, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 199 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This is a 
very interesting particular bill that we have probably a lot of 
questions to, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I really want to point out that The Summary Offences Procedure 
Act is an Act in which they’re amending, as the minister alluded 
to, spoke to very briefly in the sense that he’s looking at ways 
and means in which they’re able to really deal with the fine 
collection process when people are charged, I’m assuming 
under not only speeding tickets, but also municipal bylaws and 
so on and so forth. And, Mr. Speaker, he also spoke very briefly 
about the reduced fines for earlier payments and how they are 
able to speak to officers in a sense of how they can make those 
earlier payments and who they make them to. I think the 
minister basically touched briefly on a few of those points. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again when you look at the whole provision of 
justice, we find that there’s tons of activity in our courts on a 
regular basis. And of course, as we know, the severity of some 
of the crime ranges from very, very, very serious to those that 
are minor in nature, Mr. Speaker. It could be anything from 
murder to a simple case of theft of a small piece of property. So 
the courts have a wide variety of responsibility and have a wide 
variety of work that needs to be done to make sure that the 
system is delivered in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now we in the opposition, we always want to make sure that 
the court system is as efficient and certainly as practical as 
possible. Because obviously if you look at the whole notion, a 
lot of people say the court system now we have is bogged 
down. Sometimes it takes two or three years to settle, you 
know, settle a case, that there’s just so many different nuances 
to so many different cases that sometimes justice is delayed on 
a consistent basis. 
 
Now I look at some of the activity that you want to keep out of 
the courts just so that the courts can operate and concentrate on 
those activities that are more serious, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s 
important that we have the opportunity to look at that. So as I 
mentioned at the outset, if there are some ways and means in 
which we can make the justice system more streamlined, more 
efficient, less onerous in terms of time in the courtroom and so 
on and so forth, then I think most of, the majority of the people 
in Saskatchewan look at that as common sense. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there are so many things that could go wrong 
with this system as we try and make it as efficient as we can. 
One of the things I think is important is that you look at the fine 
payment process, or the fine collection process if you will. 
What’s really curious to me in terms of the pilot project that the 
minister has alluded to is, exactly how much revenue have they 
raised from some of the speeding tickets that have been issued? 
How much revenue have they raised from, like in particular, the 
process of municipal bylaws? Are the towns and cities and 
villages, are they involved with this particular exercise? Are 
they in concert with the changes that are being proposed here? 
These are some of the questions instinctively a person has. 
 
So the minister talks about really trying to make sure that if 
people do get speeding tickets or there’s municipal bylaw 
infractions, that there be a separate process, a more streamlined 
process, to allow for two or three provisions, one being that 
there’s actually a reduced fine if you pay earlier. And secondly 

of course is that the fine payment process is better in the sense 
that you don’t have to tie up a lot of the court time or the court 
process simply to deal with a fine, that there is administrative 
opportunity for someone out there to collect the fine for you. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there are two areas that I want to, really want 
to concentrate on. One of course is, what kind of revenues are 
we generating from the issuance of speeding tickets in the 
province of Saskatchewan? Just exactly how much money are 
we making? How are the fines being determined in the sense of 
saying, do you want to do a . . . pay your fine off sooner? What 
kind of revenues are you saving? What kind of savings are there 
for the average person? And who exactly would be in a position 
to accept your reduced fine, on what time frame? And as well, if 
you need more time to pay your fine, who would make that 
final decision? 
 
So again, Mr. Speaker, these are all the questions we have on 
some of these bills. And that’s why it’s important we take the 
time to read these documents and see what exactly is being 
proposed. 
 
So I just want to recap for those that may be paying attention. 
What is being proposed on this particular bill, The Summary 
Offences Procedure Act, is to take some of the process away 
from the court system so our courts are not tied up as much as 
they have been. So there’s a separate process to pay your fine 
off sooner and then you’ll pay less of a fine, and that the fact of 
the matter is that they can also go to an administrator, maybe a 
Justice of the Peace or a peace officer, and they could accept 
that fine or the reduced amount as prescribed by the Act, I’m 
assuming, and that they don’t have to go to court for some of 
these tickets. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that part is I think that the average person 
out there, the average common sense person, would say, yes if 
it keeps our courts clear of all these speeding tickets and all 
these unnecessary tickets that are not life threatening or of 
major concern, then we should undertake that. My only point is 
if that’s what the intent is, if that’s what the intent is on this bill, 
then we should undertake that. But, Mr. Speaker, I’m very 
curious to find out exactly what kind of revenues that the 
Government of Saskatchewan would generate as a result of all 
these speeding tickets being issued, and we also want to make 
sure we have that information available. 
 
I think it’s part of the process of justice to say, well what 
exactly did you collect from all these fines? We should know 
that, Mr. Speaker, because some people out there are telling me 
that there are organizations out there that are worried that all of 
a sudden there’s a backdoor taxation grab, especially around the 
. . . about the hidden cameras catching speeders, Mr. Speaker. 
Exactly how much money do they generate from that? 
 
We would like to know that particular information, Mr. 
Speaker, because at the end of the day, if people of 
Saskatchewan know that the Sask Party government is making 
millions of dollars off those cameras catching speedsters, then 
we need to know that, to share that with them so people of 
Saskatchewan know that this is a tax grab. And hopefully 
they’d slow down and not speed so much, and I think that 
would be a good deterrent for them to find out about. 
 



200 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2016 

So on that point, Mr. Speaker, we need that information. We 
need to find out exactly the full intent of what is being 
proposed. So on that note, I move that we adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 8, The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 
2016. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 8, The Summary Offences 
Procedure Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 9 — The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments 
Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur 

l’exécution des jugements canadiens 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to move second reading of The Enforcement of 
Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Act currently provides a registration 
procedure for the enforcement of civil judgments between 
Canadian provinces and territories, and between Canadian and 
foreign jurisdictions that does not require reciprocity or court 
supervision as a prerequisite to enforcement. 
 
The amendments that we’re proposing will confirm that 
Canadian tax judgments can be enforced under this Act. The 
Uniform Law Conference of Canada has recommended these 
amendments to provide greater certainty with respect to the 
enforcement of Canadian tax judgments. 
 
The Supreme Court of Canada has confirmed that courts in each 
province need to recognize tax judgments from other 
jurisdictions in Canada. These amendments will specifically 
include Canadian tax judgments in the definition of the types of 
judgments that can be enforced under the Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this bill will add a definition of Canadian tax 
judgment to the Act. The new definition will include both a 
judgment for the recovery of money under a tax law and a 
certificate of an amount payable under a tax law that has been 
registered as a judgment in a court of a province or a territory. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Act currently requires that an application for 
directions respecting enforcement be made to the court for 
enforcing any judgment that was obtained without notice 
against a judgment debtor. An exception to this requirement 
will be added to the Act so that an application to the court for 
directions respecting the enforcement of a Canadian tax 
judgment will only be required if one of the parties specifically 
requests it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Manitoba has recently implemented these 
amendments. By being among the first of the provinces to make 
these changes, Saskatchewan will be leading by example and 
will be encouraging other provinces and territories to adopt 
these amendments which will support the efficient enforcement 

of tax judgments throughout the country. Mr. Speaker, these 
amendments will apply to all Canadian tax judgments, whether 
they are issued before or after the amendments come into force. 
Extending the Act to all tax judgments will make administration 
easier and will allow for uniform and equitable enforcement of 
Canadian tax judgments. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading 
of The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 
2016. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
the motion by the Minister of Justice that the Bill No. 9, The 
Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 2016 be 
now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure 
by the time I’m done all these bills, I’ll be a professional 
lawyer. But I think what’s really important, Mr. Speaker, on 
Bill No. 9, The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments 
Amendment Act, 2016 is that it’s really, really important to 
understand how this impacts the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m assuming, Mr. Speaker, that the provisions of this particular 
Act really talks about enforcing the tax judgment from other 
provinces in the country, that we are streamlining our 
operations, streamlining our language, streamlining our law to 
make sure that we’re able to fit in with what the rest of the 
Canadian provinces are doing. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, how does this impact the tax judgments that 
we’re currently struggling with in terms of what does it mean? 
Does it mean a corporate tax judgment against someone? Does 
it mean a personal tax judgment? We need to find out those 
details so people out there know exactly what the bill is 
proposing to, you know, to do. 
 
Obviously, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of different laws and a lot 
of different jurisdictions and provinces, Mr. Speaker. And I can 
tell you that lawyers throughout the province, if you want to be 
able to get an interpretation of some of these Acts and some of 
these bills, some of the opinions may be as diverse as some of 
the language in some of these bills. So it’s really important that, 
from the layman’s perspective, that we understand exactly what 
is being proposed as being presented here by the minister, 
which is An Act respecting the Enforcement and Registration of 
Canadian Judgments and making consequential amendments to 
a certain Act. So what I’m assuming, Mr. Speaker, is that 
they’re streamlining the operation as you made reference to 
Manitoba doing the same process, and that Saskatchewan also 
wants to be part of that particular . . . be ahead of the curve, so 
to speak. 
 
[15:30] 
 
But we really need to know what exactly, what type of 
Canadian judgments are out there, like who’s impacted. How 
big of a problem is that for Saskatchewan? Is there companies 
or businesses that obviously are involved with this, and what is 
their involvement? We need various examples of what exactly 
this bill does, Mr. Speaker, for people that are lay people such 
as myself don’t understand exactly what the intent of this 



May 30, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 201 

particular bill is all about. 
 
So we have, as I’ve mentioned, the call out to various people 
that could be involved with this, a lot of legal firms and groups 
and organizations that, if they have a particular opinion, if they 
have any information, if they have issues that are of concern to 
them as a result of this particular bill, that we would like to hear 
from them. We would like to get their opinion. We would like 
to get their input so that we’re able to bring forward some of 
these comments that they may share with us at a later date. 
 
So again, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day we look at this. If 
this is all about streamlining the administration of justice with 
the proviso that justice is not being interfered with and that it be 
free and clear then, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what our point 
is. We don’t want to have a system that’s onerous and certainly 
out of sync with the rest of the country. So we need to make 
sure that we do all we can to help out. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, on that note I want to move that we adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 9, The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments 
Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 9. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 10 — The Forest Resources Management 
Amendment Act, 2016 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After some brief 
remarks I will move second reading of The Forest Resources 
Management Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
These amendments address a variety of subjects, streamlining 
processes for industry while enhancing government’s ability to 
ensure that forests are sustainably managed and that our 
environment remains protected. The amended legislation is 
consistent with other provincial resource management 
legislation and is also in line with Saskatchewan’s results-based 
approach to environmental regulation. The proposed 
amendments will provide streamlined, more flexible processes 
to adjust management fees that the forest industry pays. The 
amendments will help ensure that fees collected are in line with 
actual forest management costs, ensuring public forests are 
properly renewed and that the Saskatchewan forest industry 
remains competitive. 
 
As well the amendments provide a mechanism for the ministry 
to form partnerships to address the long-standing issue of 
abandoned forest roads and trails. These roads can pose both 
public safety and environmental risk, and legislative changes 
supporting enhanced efforts to address this issue will be 
welcomed by all stakeholders. 
 
The proposed amendments also outline several provisions for 

greater accountability for forest companies operating in publicly 
owned forests. These include requiring long-term forest 
management planning following the second renewal of the term 
supply licence, making licensees accountable for the actions of 
their contractors, and issuing long-term licence prohibitions for 
those who refuse to follow the rules. 
 
Because the amendments address matters in a number of 
diverse subject areas, I’d like to take a moment to expand a bit 
on each one. Under the forest management fees, forest 
management fees are an important mechanism by which 
appropriately the costs of forest renewal are borne by those 
benefiting from the use of publicly owned resource. The 2009 
Provincial Auditor’s report included a number of 
recommendations to the ministry regarding the reforestation of 
lands in the provincial forests that are being harvested for 
timber. One of the auditor’s findings was that the forest 
management fees need to be sufficient to cover the actual cost 
of reforesting the harvested areas which can vary depending on 
the site. The current fee rates as established in the regulations 
are not appropriate in all circumstances, making the proposed 
amendment necessary. 
 
Also supporting the proposed amendment is the fact that 
holders of five-year area-based term supply licences who have 
an obligation to reforest their harvested areas are seeking the 
flexibility of an alternative to fixed regulation fee rates. The 
proposed amendments will enable and establish a mechanism to 
periodically adjust the fee rates to ensure that they are 
consistent with the actual cost of reforesting the harvested 
areas. 
 
Forest management fees are reserved for funding reforestation 
activities conducted by the licensee and must be spent 
accordingly. In the event that a licence holder becomes 
insolvent, the government is the beneficiary of the fees held in 
the forest management fund established for that licence area and 
becomes responsible to ensure that they are spent responsibly. 
 
The obligation to reforest harvested areas is established in two 
types of licences: the 20-year forest management agreement and 
the five-year area-based term supply licences. The terms and 
conditions of the forest management agreements ensure that the 
fees are set at a level to cover reforestation costs. These are 
easily adjusted if costs change. 
 
Area-based term supply licence holders pay rates established in 
the regulations which are not easily adjusted currently. 
Regulatory reforestation fee rates have not been updated since 
1999. Area-based term supply licence holders are seeking an 
alternative to the fixed regulation fee rates similar to the terms 
established in the forest management agreements. In 2014, 
during the development of a new provincial dues system, the 
ministry was advised that an amendment to the Act would be 
required to establish a more streamlined and timelier process to 
adjust the fee rates for area-based term supply licences. 
Ensuring that sufficient fees are collected to renew harvested 
areas, as the proposed amendments will do, will reduce the 
government’s potential financial liability associated with 
nonregenerating areas on provincial forest lands that are not 
under a forest management agreement. 
 
Crown timber dues. On July 1st, 2014 a new provincial dues 



202 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2016 

system was established in consultation with and supported by 
stakeholders. This new provincial dues system has made the 
provision that allows Crown dues rates to be set out in a 
forestry licence redundant. The proposed amendment will 
repeal that provision, streamlining and updating the legislation. 
 
Road agreements. Abandoned roads and trails constructed in 
preceding decades are currently a potential public safety 
concern and a liability for our government. The legacy of roads 
and unreclaimed access remaining on provincial forest lands are 
a result of past industrial activities. Culverts and bridges 
associated with abandoned access are in various states of 
disrepair. The abandoned culverts and bridges have a significant 
ecological impact and pose a safety risk to the members of the 
public who may be using them. In addition, the unreclaimed 
access does not provide a productive environment for the 
re-establishment of forestries and are a major concern in the 
preparation of a woodland caribou recovery plan for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Expanding the existing authority to enter agreements that may 
include road allowances and other rights of ways, as the 
amendments do, will help reduce the ecological impacts and 
serve to protect the public by managing the hazards that the 
roads and water crossings create. This amendment will serve to 
lessen the government’s liability from a maintenance, 
reclamation, and public safety perspective because the cost of 
maintenance and reclamation can be negotiated with the 
proponent. The amendments are focused on addressing the 
unmanaged access resulting from past practices. More recent 
practices are greatly improved and have resulted in significant 
advancements in the proper construction, maintenance, and 
reclamation of roads and trails. 
 
Forest management plans are long-term, strategic plans that 
establish management objectives for large forestry licence 
areas. Requiring the preparation of a forest management plan 
after the second renewal of an area-based term supply is in 
keeping with the intent of the Act. The requirement would 
apply where, in the opinion of the minister, the level of harvest 
activities has the potential to significantly impact the 
sustainability of the forest resources in the licence area. The 
amendment will remove the opportunity for licence holders to 
lobby to circumvent the forest management planning 
requirements, and require long-term planning that will help 
ensure the sustainability and health of the forest. 
 
Originally the Act contemplated term supply of forestry 
licences being issued only to small- and medium-scale 
operators with volume-based timber allocations. Over time, a 
subset of those licences was adopted to be transitional five-year, 
area-based term supply licences. These traditional licences were 
intended to provide a reasonable window of opportunity for 
larger scale companies to harvest timber while seeking to 
transition to the longer term forest management agreement. The 
government has found itself in a position whereby proponents 
were negotiating for multiple renewals of the five-year licence 
with the intent of avoiding the requirement to prepare a forest 
management plan. 
 
This is not to say that current licence holders are trying to avoid 
this important responsibility. The five-year, area-based licence 
holders who would be subject to this provision have all 

committed to preparing forest management plans. This change 
is intended to address future situations where new companies 
may be seeking long-term licences without committing to 
long-term planning and investing in sustainable forest 
management. 
 
Vicarious liability. There’s a general move in the forest sector 
for licence holders to disassociate themselves from the actions 
of their contractors when the contractor’s actions have resulted 
in contraventions of this Act, the regulations, the Saskatchewan 
environment code, The Environmental Management and 
Protection Act, 2010, and The Environmental Management and 
Protection (General) Regulations. 
 
Holding a licensee accountable for the actions of their 
contractors does not preclude compliance and enforcement 
actions against the contractor, but would serve to limit the 
liability of the licensee to shift accountability for the 
contravention without demonstrating their due diligence.  
 
Currently the holder of a forestry licence may be held 
accountable for the actions of their employees, helpers, and 
agents. The current business practices of forest licence holders 
include them contracting out a significant part of their forest 
operations. 
 
Recent court decisions have also brought into question the 
relationship between the licence holders and their contractors, 
underscoring the need for clarity in this matter. Also 
highlighting this need is a small number of licence holders who 
consider it appropriate to disassociate themselves from the 
actions of their contractors. The amendment will clarify that 
licence holders are accountable for the actions of their 
contractors while they’re undertaking forestry operations on 
behalf of the licence holder. 
 
Licence prohibitions. While it is a small minority, we know that 
there are people who simply refuse to follow the rules that are 
in place to protect our forest ecosystems. Currently there’s no 
authority to prohibit persons who have a history of 
non-compliance or who have caused significant environmental 
damage from applying for or obtaining a licence to harvest 
forest products. 
 
Existing remedies only include suspension, cancellation, or 
refusal to issue a licence. Adding prohibitions, as the 
amendments do, would offer another enforcement option in 
serious cases of repeated non-compliance. Prohibiting persons 
with a history of non-compliance from applying for or obtaining 
a licence has proven to be an effective enforcement tool in other 
resource management legislation such as The Wildlife Act, 
1998. This amendment would enable a convicting judge to 
impose a licence prohibition for a period not exceeding five 
years. 
 
As with other legislative changes before this House, this 
amended legislation builds on several important government 
commitments, and they are continued economic growth, 
providing a competitive business environment for 
Saskatchewan’s forest sector, and making sure that our 
provincial forests are sustainably managed and healthy over the 
long term. 
 



May 30, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 203 

Mr. Speaker, these amendments will further enhance the 
public’s confidence that their valued forest resources are well 
managed and that there are significant consequences for those 
who break the rules. The proposed amendments demonstrate 
our commitment to support the province’s forest sector and to 
fully implement a results-based approach to environment 
regulations. The ministry will continue to work with the forest 
sector to identify additional opportunities to refine and 
streamline the province’s forestry legislative framework, 
including the Act, regulations, and the Saskatchewan 
Environmental Code. The proposed amendments represent a 
significant step forward for sustainable forest management in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move that The Forest Resources Management 
Amendment Act, 2016 be read a second time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Environment that Bill No. 10, The 
Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 2016, be read a 
second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 
recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
quite pleased to stand in my place today to speak about the 
particular changes to the forest management Act. And I listened 
with great interest to what the minister spoke about in terms of 
the significant changes that he mentioned prior to getting into 
the details of the significant changes that he proposed, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The whole notion around significant changes, he spoke about 
two things that I think were significant in their minds, Mr. 
Speaker. One is talking about the increased forestry fees, and 
the other, what do we do with the culverts that are left on some 
of the roads built by the forestry companies? And, Mr. Speaker, 
he finished off his statement as it relates to their priorities as the 
government. And one of course is to continue making sure that 
the forests are certainly, that they have business growth, Mr. 
Speaker. He led with business growth. And the third level of 
priority, Mr. Speaker, he spoke about having well-managed 
forestry. 
 
And that’s the point that I want to raise in this particular bill, 
that they talk about some of the smaller details and they’re not 
dealing with the bigger, larger issues, Mr. Speaker, that we 
often talk about in this particular Assembly. 
 
[15:45] 
 
And there’s three or four areas that I want to speak of, Mr. 
Speaker. One is that I was hoping that, as the result of the 
minister bringing this bill forward, that we can actually talk 
about the trappers in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We 
were hoping that in this particular bill, an Act respecting the 
management of forest resources Act, that you would talk about 
the trappers association that are all concerned and very heavily 
involved with the management of the lands in northern 
Saskatchewan and throughout our forest areas of the province. 
 
And there was not a peep about the trapping industry, Mr. 
Speaker. And they, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said time and time 
again, from my perspective the trappers of northern 

Saskatchewan are the conscience of the land. We always 
maintain that. And we see a lot of times, Mr. Speaker, that 
they’re continually being disregarded. They are disregarded on 
a regular basis, not only by the forestry companies, but by the 
government as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’m trying to figure out where in the scheme of this 
particular Act is a provision that recognizes the trapping 
industry — and the long-standing trapping industry, I might add 
— and why their importance is not noted in the particular Act, 
nor is there any provisions to deal with their matters and their 
issues. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve had hundreds of photographs of 
trappers that have trapped in a certain area for years, and they 
take pictures of their traplines and their cabin, and then a few 
months later they come back and most of the land has been 
harvested. And there’s not a provision in there to deal with the 
fact that they’ve lost their livelihood. 
 
Now somewhere along the line, Mr. Speaker, we have to have 
an acceptance that if you affect or impact the livelihood, the 
livelihood of one particular group of people, then that should be 
cause for alarm. That should be cause for concern. That should 
be cause for generally recognizing what they’re going through. 
And we have not had one inkling of any indication from that 
minister about any kind of support to recognizing the trapping 
industry that the forestry companies’ activity has negatively 
impacted. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, a lot of people could say, yes, well the 
trapping industry is not as important as the forestry industry. 
We hear that on a continual basis from many people across the 
way. But, Mr. Speaker, I would say this. I would say this: their 
actions dictate the fact that the trapping association is not 
important to them. Why? Because they cut the trappers’ funding 
to nothing. Nothing. They have not included any trappers’ 
compensation in any forest resources management Act. They 
have continued to ignore the trapping industry. So their actions, 
Mr. Speaker, speak a lot louder than their words. 
 
But it’s clear from this side of the Assembly that the trapping 
industry is not important to the Saskatchewan Party 
government. We see it every single day. And I sat here hoping 
that the minister would make a provision or discussion or even 
a connection to the trapping association in the North. Why? 
Because they’re important, and they’re an integral part to the 
economy in the North, and yet when we talk about the forest 
resources and harvesting the forestry opportunities out there, 
Mr. Speaker, he continually ignores the trapping association. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I also want to talk about the larger issues. 
And I know this is going to come as a shock, you know, to the 
minister, but when you have, when you have a very thorough 
process of deciding how much of the land that you can actually 
harvest, how much of the forestry product that you actually can 
harvest, Mr. Speaker, what I think typically happens, and I can 
be corrected on this, when you allocate a TSL [term supply 
licence] or an FMA [forest management agreement], what they 
do is they assess the wood supply. They actually go in there and 
different companies provide that service and they actually walk 
the area in which they’re going to be doing, which they’re 
harvesting forestry products. 



204 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2016 

So the net result is as these group of people go in there, they do 
an assessment of the area. They use aerial photographs. They 
actually walk some of the areas, and they say, and they say, Mr. 
Speaker, that based on what we see, this particular TSL area or 
FMA area can sustainably be harvested at a certain amount of 
cubic metres per year. They have a lot of science attached to it, 
and they also make sure, they also make sure that it’s done with 
the most up-to-date science. What can a forest actually produce 
in a healthy way so it’s able to reproduce and continue 
providing opportunity for trappers, for hunters, and yes, for 
forestry companies as well? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I can remember several years ago when I 
was talking to the Minister of the Economy where he I think 
overruled, I think he overruled the minister of SERM 
[Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management]. 
Why? Because all of a sudden, in one particular area — I’m 
going to use my area as an example — where there was actually 
a consultant hired to determine how much wood could be cut 
within the northwest communities’ TSL, term supply licence, 
and, Mr. Speaker, after an exhaustive, expensive process, the 
officials came back from that particular company and they said 
well, this area can actually harvest 260 000 cubic metres of 
wood annually, and it’ll be a great sustainable practice. That’s 
what was told to us as a government and certainly to the 
officials that were present. The private company said that that 
area could actually harvest 260 000 cubic metres of wood 
annually in a very sustainable way. Well, Mr. Speaker, what 
happens is you fast-forward a year and a half later, and all of a 
sudden this other forester comes out of Alberta telling this 
particular government, well actually you can double that harvest 
and it’ll still be sustainable. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, how is it that you can double a harvest area 
and it would still be sustainable? How could the first consultant 
or the first forester be so wrong? Well, Mr. Speaker, what I 
think happened was that the Minister of the Economy went and 
found somebody that was willing to say that. The fact of the 
matter is we just can’t see it. The trappers association were the 
ones that brought that issue forward. 
 
So when the minister talks about making sure that it’s all about 
business growth, Mr. Speaker, you’ve got to make sure that you 
have sustainable forestry practices. And some of the people that 
you should consult with are the trappers themselves. You can 
find any consultant that’ll give you the figures that you want, 
and that’s exactly what the Minister of the Economy did at the 
expense of the environment. There is no reference to that point 
in this bill. We’re talking about sustainability of forestry. Well 
the Minister of the Economy should have sat on his hands and 
not said a word. But no, they found somebody that was willing 
to say they can actually double the harvest and it’ll still be 
sustainable. We know it’s not sustainable. The trappers know 
it’s not sustainable. And yet the minister found some guy to say 
that and bang, now they’re doubling that harvest in that 
particular area, and it’s simply not sustainable. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ll point out as well, when the Minister of 
the Economy came along and ripped away the TSL opportunity 
for a number of Métis communities in the Northwest, what he 
done, the Minister of the Economy came along and he wanted 
to talk about forestry dues and forestry issues. And at the end of 
the meeting, the minister walked away with 77 per cent 

ownership to a company out of BC and left the people of the 
Northwest with a 23 per cent ownership of their TSL. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, how respectful is that towards the Aboriginal people in 
that particular area? How respectful is that towards the notion 
of the duty to consult and the duty to accommodate? So the 
Minister of the Economy comes along. He doubles the harvest, 
then he rips ownership away from the Aboriginal groups in that 
area. And today we’re talking about the dues for stumpage fees. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s continue on. The road damages . . . 
Last fall we had a nice visit to Dore Lake and Sled Lake, Mr. 
Speaker, and they’re hauling product out of there. The forestry 
company is hauling product out of there, and people are up in 
arms in that area saying, what is going on? 
 
The reason why they’re angry, Mr. Speaker, is a number of 
points. One is they’re hauling out the forest resources. They’re 
smashing up their road. They’re putting their families at great 
risk of a major accident, and they’re actually literally smashing 
up their road with the big heavy-haul trucks. And the minister’s 
fully aware that he’s gotten letters. The group came to the 
Assembly here and they spoke about these issues, and yet the 
minister is talking about stumpage fees. 
 
I know of one fact that the way the system should work, and it’s 
a fair system, Mr. Speaker, is the Minister of the Economy 
should never trump the Minister of the Environment on some of 
these sustainable forestry practices, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s in 
the constitutional design of our country that you cannot turn 
around and say, well your science on environmental integrity is 
wrong; my effort to try and get some company to double their 
harvest trumps your environmental concerns. That’s what 
happened over there, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what 
happened. 
 
So we look at the damages around the roads. Is that 
incorporated overall with what is being proposed here in 
making sure that the forestry practices are sustainable? How 
about the damages to highways? Is that incorporated in some of 
these discussions? It is not, Mr. Speaker. It is not. So you 
cannot come to us and saying, we’re sustainable, that the 
forestry industry itself is going to be healthy for years to come, 
because you have not incorporated a lot of costs. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to say this, that we have always 
advocated that we need a strong, vibrant forestry industry, Mr. 
Speaker — we do. There are a lot of jobs attached to it. There 
are a lot of issues that people are very, very connected to the 
industry itself. And I’m proud to say that there are certain 
organizations, even in the Meadow Lake area which the 
Meadow Lake Tribal Council are an integral part of the forestry 
development, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But there’s two things the government did wrong, Mr. Speaker, 
in recent years. Number one is they found some guy to give 
them that voodoo science that doubles the harvest of our 
forestry. Second thing they’ve done, Mr. Speaker, is they 
ignored and ripped away the opportunities from the Aboriginal 
people to own forestry rights. That was a slap in the face with 
the Supreme Court of Canada’s ruling around duty to consult 
and duty to accommodate. 
 
And the third thing they’ve done, Mr. Speaker, is they never 



May 30, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 205 

invested in highways. They never invested in highways one 
little bit to make sure that there’s safe transportation of all 
goods, including forestry rights. 
 
And the final piece, Mr. Speaker, is they totally ignored a very 
essential part of the forest management team and that is the 
trapping industry, Mr. Speaker. So you see the disregard, Mr. 
Speaker, it goes on and on under this bill. 
 
And I was hoping that the bill itself would include some of 
these points. I was hoping that the minister would get up today, 
and I was hoping he would say, we erred. Mr. Speaker, I was 
hoping he’d say, we erred in making sure we took away and 
ripped away the TSL opportunity that the northwest 
communities enjoy. And I was hoping the minister would say, 
we erred in the way in which we estimated the total annual 
harvesting amount that was allowed in various areas including 
the northwest TSL. We erred in the way in which we dealt with 
the trapping industry. We should have corrected that, Mr. 
Speaker. And finally, Mr. Speaker, we erred in the way in 
which we respect the regions that support forestry by putting 
the proper infrastructure in place and that includes safe 
highways for our people to travel.  
 
If you think the people of Saskatchewan, northern 
Saskatchewan don’t support development, Mr. Speaker, they 
absolutely do. But they want it to be sustainable, respectful of 
all industries, and making sure that it is safe development and 
that includes safe travel on our highways. And, Mr. Speaker, at 
10 o’clock at night you meet a loaded logging truck on a small 
highway coming out of Dore Lake, your life is in danger, Mr. 
Speaker. Your life is in danger. And that’s the message that 
group brought when they came here. 
 
Now I’m going to go on a bit more in terms of the minister 
mentioning insolvency. Some of these companies are insolvent. 
Well what do we do? We go in there and we get their 
reforestation fund, whatever the case may be. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the reforestation fund that the northwest communities 
enjoyed one time through their TSL, where is that fund? What 
is the amount? Is there a lot of money in there? Like who has 
access to that fund? Nobody seems to want to give the 
northwest community that information. So I know they’ve been 
operating for a number of years, Mr. Speaker. There must be 
some money in that reforestation fund. Who has access to that 
money? What’s the amount? And why have the people of the 
northwest communities not been given that information? I think 
it’s shameful. It’s disrespectful, and they need that information. 
 
And finally I’ll say this, Mr. Speaker, on forest management 
Act, we’ve got a lot of issues that we’re going to deal with 
when it comes to this particular bill. There’s a lot of 
organizations that are going to be paying very close attention to 
this because this really misses the point. This whole notion 
around what the Minister of the Economy done, when he come 
along and he actually, he actually forced, Mr. Speaker, he 
forced the northwest communities to give up their TSL. He 
walked in the room there as the Minister of the Economy and 
said, you guys aren’t using your TSL so we’re going to invoke 
the use-it-or-lose-it clause. And that use-it-or-lose-it clause is 
very simple: either you’re using the forestry rights or if you 
don’t use them, we’ll take them back. We’ll give them to 
someone else. 

[16:00] 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the minister knows very well . . . Both the 
Environment minister and the Economy minister, they know 
very well that at the time the forestry sector was in the tank. 
They were having a lot of trouble. So the northwest 
communities, there was a cluster of seven or eight Métis 
communities that made up the Northwest Communities Wood 
Products entity. Well, Mr. Speaker, what are they supposed to 
do? Are they supposed to go out there and harvest logs they 
can’t sell? Well that doesn’t make any sense. You can’t harvest 
logs you can’t sell. So what the minister does, he tromps into 
the room and says, well you’re not using it so we’re going to 
take it away and give it to a company out of BC. Now how does 
that make sense from a forestry management perspective? 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there’s many fronts that this bill and this Act 
and this government have failed. They have failed miserably on 
many of these fronts, Mr. Speaker, and I think that the minister 
ought to know exactly the sentiment out there in the Northwest, 
that they feel that they’re really hard done by. It starts right 
from the trappers to the local contractors to the original TSL 
owners to the people that argue about sustainability, about our 
forestry rights. 
 
We know the Minister of the Economy trumped the Minister of 
the Environment on this front, and that’s not the way it should 
work, Mr. Speaker. In fact it’s not the way it does work. What 
happens here is the Minister of the Environment has certain 
autonomy even within cabinet where he can’t be told, you will 
let that development through even though it’s bad for the 
environment. He has that independence and the autonomy to 
say, I’m going to make a decision based on environmental 
sustainability not a political agenda by a minister who had no 
right to make that decision, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And not only should he have stood up and said no on that front, 
he should have also got the Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 
saying, well that also throws mud in the face of the Supreme 
Court of Canada ruling around duty to consult and duty to 
accommodate. They had an obligation, Mr. Speaker, to consult 
with the First Nations and the Métis people, and they chose not 
to. 
 
Now what happens now, we’re left to pick up the pieces. The 
company and the people of the Northwest are left to pick up the 
pieces to try and figure out where we’re going. And this 
particular bill talks about fee increases. It talks about abandoned 
culverts. Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got to have a lot more strong 
leadership on that front. 
 
And this is the part that’s really important I think, Mr. Speaker, 
is in the absence, in the absence of good government, people 
will rebel. And in the North the people are getting tired of 
seeing their resources being sucked out of the North and 
nothing left behind in terms of decent highways or good paying 
jobs or partnership in the forestry sector. 
 
And then you get the trappers who see their land being 
decimated. Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the question: when does 
one industry’s need trump the other industry’s need? We used 
to have all this argument all the time. When was it right, Mr. 
Speaker, when was it right that they got to displace the trappers’ 



206 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2016 

economy with that of the forestry sector with no discussion, no 
negotiations, and no provision? Did the forestry companies’ 
activity impact the trapping industry of the North? The answer 
is yes it did. Yes it did. Was there any discussion or provisions 
or negotiations to accommodate that new opening opportunity 
in forestry? The answer is no, there was none of that.  
 
So the point being, Mr. Speaker, is that a smart, astute 
government should have learned from that, and they should 
have accommodated that because we do need the forestry jobs. 
Let me be clear. We do need the forestry jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
And we do need to make sure that there’s peace in the valley, 
that there’s peace in the valley, Mr. Speaker, that the trappers 
can coexist with the logging contractors, that tourism can exist 
with the forestry sector, Mr. Speaker, and that Aboriginal and 
non-Aboriginal people can live in harmony on a land that is so 
rich in all these resources. 
 
And yet, Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing this government make 
certain choices and certain arrogant choices. And I go back to 
the Minister of the Economy, in which he came along and took 
away the TSL from an Aboriginally owned group. And Mr. 
Speaker, there’s not so much as a boo from that particular 
government and yet people are standing around saying, what 
happened here? How did he get away with this? How could he 
do this to us? And there’s that anger, Mr. Speaker, and that 
anger is so very prevalent and still relevant to this whole 
argument around forest resources management. 
 
So the minister should do a couple of things. The first thing the 
minister should do is tell the Minister of the Economy that you 
ain’t trumping me no more on the forest resources harvesting 
technique. I’m going to make that decision on my own. 
 
And secondly, you’re not going to tell who owns forestry 
opportunities. We have to respect the Supreme Court of 
Canada’s ruling that the Métis and the First Nations do have 
rights in their backyard. They do have rights in their backyard, 
Mr. Speaker, and those rights talk about resource development. 
So why isn’t the minister speaking of those issues, Mr. 
Speaker?  
 
And we still can’t find out the basic, basic question of what 
happened to all the forestry dues that were paid by the 
northwest communities? Where is that money? What is the 
amount? Who has control of it? And why can’t that information 
be forthcoming? None of that, Mr. Speaker, is identified in this 
particular bill. 
 
So I just look at all the arguments that were made today, the 
points that he made, Mr. Speaker. He talked about business 
growth being the primary function. Well, Mr. Speaker, you’ve 
got to be careful because industry will tell you, if you 
overharvest your forestry, that dries up their industry. We’ve 
got to do this right. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they didn’t mention anything about the trapping 
association. They are important users of the land. There’s an 
economy attached to trappers. They should have much respect 
afforded to them. We don’t see any of that in this particular bill, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We also have to make sure that if we’re going to look at the 

forestry company, I think road maintenance is a big part of it, 
Mr. Speaker. I think the government should incorporate a whole 
plan to make sure that the roads in the North are safe. Where 
they’re harvesting sustainably, I might add, where the 
companies are harvesting sustainably, there should be the 
proper infrastructure put in place. And, Mr. Speaker, if that’s 
not part of the overall cost of promoting and supporting the 
forestry industry, then I’m not certain what is, Mr. Speaker. So 
the part of the process has got to be . . . If he’s talking about, 
talking about the fees in line with the maintenance cost, well, 
Mr. Speaker, he’s missing a big-ticket item as to how much 
damage is being done to our roads that many people in the 
North suffer from. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to also make a quick point under the notion 
of insolvency. Who makes the determination around a company 
being insolvent? What happens if there’s certain conditions, Mr. 
Speaker, certain conditions around the notion of actions by the 
government to create an insolvency? 
 
And I want to talk about the North West Communities Wood 
Products. They lost 77 per cent of their TSL, Mr. Speaker, 77 
per cent of their TSL. That was an action caused by the 
government, by the Minister of the Economy. The Minister of 
the Economy took away 77 per cent of their TSL, and he gave it 
away. Now does that create insolvency for that company? Well 
most of the mayors that owned that particular forestry company, 
well they’re asking those questions now. So is that part of the 
process when we talk about insolvency? 
 
So I think, Mr. Speaker, this bill has got a bit fat F in terms of 
trying to deal with the big issues around forest resources 
management. The minister primarily talked about culverts left 
on highways and bringing fees in line to deal with the 
maintenance of our forestry. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there are many fronts that this government 
has failed miserably on, and one of them is forestry. One of 
them is sustainability. One is respect for the Aboriginal people 
and the trappers, and one is making sure that they divide all 
these groups so that we’re not working together to build that 
economy, that promising economy, that we have our own . . . 
We’re working apart from what is necessary for the future, and 
that is to make sure that we continue to fight each other, as 
opposed to working from each other’s strength. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I have tons of more questions. I know some of 
my colleagues have a lot of issues they’re going to bring 
forward around forestry. But I can say this: that the Aboriginal 
people and the northern people as a whole — First Nations, 
Métis, and many northerners that make the North their home — 
they are getting tired of the same old treatment of seeing 
resources extracted out of the North but no investment put back 
in. They are getting sick and tired of it. And what I would 
suggest is that before you bring your voodoo science that 
justifies doubling your forestry harvesting because you found 
somebody that’ll say that to you as a government, then you 
have failed miserably on that front as well. 
 
So I’d ask the minister again, do the right thing; deal with these 
issues. And if the northwest communities have questions of you 
around certain issues, be forthright and honest with them. Don’t 
be political nor misleading because that does a great injustice to 



May 30, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 207 

what we’re all about in this province, and that is developing a 
sustainable, integrated economy that makes the best of our 
resources, that makes it last well into the future for our children 
and grandchildren. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I have a lot more comments to make on this 
particular bill, as my colleagues will also be part of the process. 
On that note I move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 10, The 
Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has adjourned 
debate on Bill No. 10, The Forest Resources Management 
Amendment Act, 2016. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 11 — The Forestry Professions 
Amendment Act, 2016 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cox: — Mr. Speaker, after some brief remarks, I will 
move second reading of The Forestry Professions Amendment 
Act, 2016. 
 
Forestry professionals have an important role to ensure that 
Saskatchewan’s forest ecosystems remain healthy in the long 
term and continue to provide us with all the benefits we have 
come to enjoy. The need for legislation recognizes the 
importance of this role, and assuring the people that they can 
rely on the competence and professionalism of those that fulfill 
it was confirmed several years ago.  
 
In 1998 a committee of members from Saskatchewan section of 
the Canadian Institute of Forestry conducted a survey of 
forestry and other resource professionals in Saskatchewan. The 
Canadian Institute of Forestry represents forestry professionals 
from across the country and has a strong presence in this 
province. Seventy-two per cent of the survey respondents 
agreed that a registered professional forestry association would 
be a positive step in enhancing the professional practice of the 
forestry in Saskatchewan. As well, 70 per cent of the 
respondents responded favourably to the idea of the 
Saskatchewan section of the Canadian Institute of Forestry 
pursuing such an association here in Saskatchewan. With such 
overwhelming support from our province’s resource 
professionals, The Forestry Professions Act was developed in 
consultation with the Saskatchewan section of the Canadian 
Institute of Forestry and other stakeholders. 
 
In April 2006, The Forestry Professions Act came into force, 
establishing the Association of Saskatchewan Forestry 
Professionals, an organization independent of government and 
industry responsible for ensuring that its membership subscribe 
to and meet the standards of competence, ethics, and public 
accountability. The Act and the Association of Saskatchewan 
Forestry Professionals established Saskatchewan as a desirable 
place to practise forestry. 
 
The Act initially served as a protection of title, meaning that 
members of the new association had the exclusive right to use 

the titles of professional forester, professional forest 
technologist, forester-in-training, and forest 
technologist-in-training. People retaining the services of a 
forester or forest technologist in Saskatchewan now had the 
option of hiring a registered professional and, with that 
designation, be assured of the individual’s competence, ethics, 
and accountability. Saskatchewan joined seven other provinces 
that already had legislation governing forestry professionals, 
and enabled the province to become signatory to the mutual 
recognition agreement. 
 
In 2013, The Forestry Professions Act was amended to establish 
it as a right-to-practise legislation, adding to its effectiveness. 
Under the right to practise, persons are prohibited from 
engaging in the professional practice of forestry unless they are 
registered with the Association of Saskatchewan Forestry 
Professionals or are exempt under the Act. The change to right 
to practise provided further assurances to the public that those 
undertaking the professional practice of forestry in 
Saskatchewan adhered to consistent standards of competence 
and ethics, whatever they chose to call themselves. 
 
Today The Forestry Professions Act further enhances the 
public’s confidence that Saskatchewan’s forest resources are 
being managed by professionals whose competence, ethics, and 
public accountability are recognized nationally. The Act is 
supported by industry and stakeholder groups including the 
Saskatchewan Forestry Association, the Saskatchewan Trappers 
Association, the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, 
Saskatchewan nature and Tourism Saskatchewan, Ducks 
Unlimited, Saskatchewan Outfitters Association, Fisheries and 
Oceans Canada, and the Saskatchewan Research Council. 
 
[16:15] 
 
This Act protects the interests of the people of Saskatchewan by 
ensuring that the experts charged with making decisions 
affecting our public forests’ long-term health are competent, 
ethical, and accountable. 
 
The amendments before the House today will further enhance 
public confidence in government’s commitment to 
professionally manage natural resources by ensuring that our 
forests are being administered and managed by skilled and 
nationally recognized professionals. 
 
The amendments enhance accountability, enabling the 
application of financial penalties to persons who unlawfully 
engage in the professional practice of forestry. The change is 
required to further enhance the accountability that is built into a 
legislation. Currently the financial penalty provision may only 
be applied to unregistered persons using their professional titles. 
Without these amendments, financial penalties cannot be 
applied to persons who unlawfully engage in the professional 
practice of forestry. 
 
The amendments add an element of accountability that will 
further enhance the Act’s effectiveness. The amendments will 
also ensure that the limitation of prosecution provision in the 
Act is applicable to persons engaging in the professional 
practice of forestry who are not members registered with the 
association. Similar financial penalties are already established 
in law for many other professions in Saskatchewan, including 



208 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2016 

agrologists, engineers, geoscientists, and land surveyors. 
 
The proposed amendments are consistent with provisions 
applicable to forestry professionals in the other New West 
Partnership provinces as well as in other provinces in Canada. 
The amended legislation continues to build on several important 
commitments of this government, and they are sustainable 
economic growth, a competitive business environment for the 
forestry sector, and the sustainable management and long-term 
health of Saskatchewan’s provincial forests. 
 
The Association of Saskatchewan Forestry Professionals, the 
body responsible for regulating this profession in our province, 
fully supports these amendments. Mr. Speaker, I believe that 
the proposed amendments are a substantial step forward for the 
forestry profession and for sustainable forest management in 
Saskatchewan. Through them we demonstrate our government’s 
confidence in our forestry professionals and their association, 
and we acknowledge their key role in ensuring the long-term 
sustainability of Saskatchewan’s forests. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move that The Forestry Professions Amendment 
Act, 2016 be read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the Minister of Environment that Bill No. 11, the 
forestry provisions amendment Act, 2016 be read a second 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? I 
recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 
again I’m pleased to inject myself into the conversation and 
certainly the comments around forestry generally. On Bill No. 
11, The Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2016, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to point out, I want to point out it’s very, very 
important that we engage and that we respect and that we 
support the integrity of those that move forward and their 
particular professions such as the foresters. And, Mr. Speaker, a 
lot of these guys go to school a long time and a lot of years, and 
I think it’s really important that we recognize them and we 
engage them. That’s what’s really, really key, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the point I would raise on this particular bill is that the 
minister alluded to a mutual recognition agreement in which our 
foresters are recognized, those that have the designation and the 
proper certification, that they’re recognized throughout the 
country, and that they certainly have, they have a lot of 
collaborative approaches when dealing with forestry 
professionals overall. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when I prefaced my comment on this bigger 
bill, I talked about integrity, which is a real important part of 
any professional association. And, Mr. Speaker, the association 
themselves, they have a lot of, a lot of good people organizing 
the people that they represent. They lobby for them, they give 
them great venues to express their concerns on their particular 
industry, such as the day at the Legislative Building with a 
bunch of MLAs. 
 
So I really take part in those activities. I want to learn what the 
association does, and certainly I have had access and been privy 
to a few presentations by the professional forestries association. 
And I’ll point out, Mr. Speaker, that it’s always, always key to 

engage professional people that have good standards and have 
solid integrity in terms of their approach. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
professional association of foresters in general have done and 
have met the standards that they aspired to meet. 
 
What’s really important, Mr. Speaker, is that while they 
represent individual foresters overall, it’s important that we also 
have a good, solid discussion around the different approaches, 
different terminology, and the different circumstances, Mr. 
Speaker, around how they operate in each jurisdiction. Like for 
example, you would assume that a forester coming out of BC 
would have a certainly different take on a forester coming out 
of Saskatchewan, as an example. 
 
Now how we interact with the different associations from BC, 
Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, the territories, Mr. Speaker, 
there’s a radical change of activity. There’s also a radical 
change of environment. There’s also the whole issue around 
what forestry products look like and activities that forestry 
companies in each jurisdiction. Because I would assume a 
forester in Nunavut, Mr. Speaker, probably has a lot less 
experience dealing with large tree stands in BC. 
 
So as you begin to meld the two values of one forester from one 
particular region with another, it’s important to incorporate — 
as I know that different associations do — the different 
dynamics and different challenges attached with these 
jurisdictions. So it’s important to incorporate that into how we 
can have what the minister alluded to and that’s certainly the 
whole notion of working together. Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ll 
suggest as well that it’s going to be their professionalism and 
their integrity that’s going to dictate how they proceed in 
dealing with different provinces with different agendas. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s going to be a tough act to balance, but 
clearly I think I want to point out in my final comment on this 
particular bill that we need to ensure that these associations are 
protected. We need to ensure that they’re respected in terms of 
consultation. But we also have to make sure that if we’re able to 
do so under the mutual recognition agreement, is work to 
develop a capacity and answer the questions is, are the different 
jurisdictions different in the sense of the forest management 
practice and knowledge? And if they are, we have to make sure 
that we work together to minimize those differences. 
 
Because I go back to my earlier point, how can one forester, say 
a professional company, a consultant firm say we can sustain 
260 000 cubic metres of harvest in this particular land area, then 
a year and a half later it’s doubled. This is the point I would 
raise is that we’ve got to make sure we eliminate some of those 
wide discrepancies. So if you’re talking about mutual 
recognition agreement, I think the biggest point is these 
associations will move forward on integrity, consistency, and 
professionalism. And, Mr. Speaker, I would say that that 
particular effort by them is something that the government can 
learn from so they’re able to do a better job, Mr. Speaker, 
overall. 
 
So not to worry, Mr. Speaker, I think some of the mutual 
recognition that should be incorporated in all these things are 
different users, the different users, Mr. Speaker, and that 
includes the trappers, that includes the tourism industry, that 
includes the traditional resource users. They are also part of the 



May 30, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 209 

land management scheme. 
 
So I’ll assume, Mr. Speaker, that there’s professional 
associations that will do what they have to do professionally 
and with great integrity, I might add. But there’s another group 
of people that really want to be in on the whole notion of 
mutual recognition. And I would suggest and submit to the 
minister that trappers, people that traditionally lived off the 
land, wild rice growers, the Aboriginal people of the North that 
want a job as well, I think they would like to have that mutual 
recognition as well. 
 
So on that point, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot more information 
on this particular bill. So on that point, I would move that we 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 11, The Forestry Professions 
Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has adjourned 
debate on Bill No. 11, The Forestry Professions Amendment 
Act, 2016. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 12 — The Public Health (Miscellaneous)  
Amendment Act, 2016 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to move second reading of The Public Health 
(Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
Mr. Speaker, amendments to The Public Health Act, 1994 are 
required for several reasons. This amended legislation will 
enable improved public access to public health inspection 
information. Saskatchewan already provides residents with 
public health inspection reports about eating establishments. 
These amendments will allow public disclosure of a broader 
range of public health inspection reports and related 
information. We recognize the value of making information 
available to the public, and we know our residents want greater 
access to information to help them make decisions about their 
health and safety. The changes reflect our government’s 
commitment to being open and transparent with important 
health-related information. This will bring Saskatchewan in line 
with disclosure practices in other provinces. 
 
The Act will also, Mr. Speaker, the amendments will address 
another key public health area in terms of communicable 
disease control. We want to ensure that reporting requirements 
for communicable diseases are current and reflect health 
practitioners’ scope of practice. The amendments to the 
legislation will also better reflect nurse practitioner and clinic 
nurse roles in reporting and following up on communicable 
disease cases. Mr. Speaker, our government is making changes 
needed to strengthen and sustain our health care system for 
future generations. 
 
We believe in, support, and bring these amendments to the 
House today and with that, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move 
second reading of The Public Health (Miscellaneous) 

Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the Minister of Health that Bill No. 12, The Public Health 
(Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2016 be read a second time. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? I recognize 
the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 
again I’m proud to stand in my place today to give initial 
comments around Bill No. 12, The Public Health 
(Miscellaneous) Amendment Act. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
minister basically alluded to three particular areas that he’s of 
concern to that the bill really impacts. And I understood it could 
be the restaurant safety of food handling, addressing the 
communicable disease situation, and certainly identifying the 
roles and responsibility of a nurse practitioner. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s really, really important is that 
obviously public safety is really paramount in terms of having 
restaurants serve, you know, safely-handled food and serve 
food to the public because there’s hundreds of restaurants that 
are coming online, and certainly it’s important as you see just a 
splurge of activity all throughout the province. And whether 
you’re eating in a small restaurant in Eston or eating in a large, 
fancy hotel restaurant or in northern Saskatchewan, I think the 
integrity of public inspection to make sure that food is handled 
safely and that there’s quality staff there, I think if people had 
that assurance, Mr. Speaker, it would really, really be 
something that they would be pleased with and that they would 
certainly continually encourage the government to bring those 
standards forward. 
 
I think the whole notion around nurse practitioner, the 
definition, what we don’t want to see happen, Mr. Speaker, is 
we know that the nurses and the support staff and point-of-care 
health professionals, Mr. Speaker, they’re all part of a team, a 
matrix of support, if you will, for the various people coming 
into our facilities. And they are certainly the people that work 
with the many challenges our province has when it comes to 
health care. And I know that in northern Saskatchewan we do 
use nurse practitioners as other areas do, and while they are 
very, very proficient in their work, we don’t have enough 
numbers, Mr. Speaker. We need more nurse practitioners, and 
they provide an invaluable service, a support mechanism to not 
only the nursing staff but certainly to the doctors as well. So we 
can never, ever be . . . We can never eliminate nor should we 
diminish any role of any part of the point-of-care health staff 
that are working as a team in our various facilities and our 
various communities in various locations of our province. 
 
And the whole notion, Mr. Speaker, is that when it comes to 
restaurant safety, recognition of communicable disease 
challenges, nurse practitioner role and responsibility and 
definition of that, Mr. Speaker, the list goes on as to all the 
different points that the minister raised, that it’s important that 
we take the time to really begin to understand exactly what is 
being proposed and how we can incorporate that with the 
different sectors that are providing those services. And we’ll 
certainly undertake to do that work. 
 
So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 12, The Public Health (Miscellaneous) Amendment 



210 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2016 

Act, 2016. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has adjourned 
debate on Bill No. 12, The Public Health (Miscellaneous) 
Amendment Act, 2016. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
[16:30] 
 

Bill No. 13 — The Cancer Agency Amendment Act, 2016 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of Bill No. 13, The Cancer Agency Amendment 
Act. I want to provide some context for the proposed 
amendments and outline their nature and the intended impact. 
 
Providing high-quality cancer control services to Saskatchewan 
people is a priority for the government and the Saskatchewan 
Cancer Agency. Saskatchewan has a long history of innovation 
in cancer treatment, prevention, early detection, research, and 
technology. Recognizing the need for focused resources to deal 
with cancer, the provincial government established a Cancer 
Agency more than 85 years ago. Mr. Speaker, the members of 
this legislature understood then that progress could only be 
made through research, concerted effort, and by allowing health 
care providers to develop their understanding and skills over 
years of accumulated experience. These pioneers at the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency and in our universities and 
hospitals laid the groundwork for the development of a network 
of services in Saskatchewan today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has strengthened cancer control 
services, with annual funding to the Saskatchewan Cancer 
Agency increasing from $78.5 million in 2007-2008 budget 
year to 157.3 million in 2015-16. This has enabled the Cancer 
Agency to introduce many improvements including expanded 
coverage for a range of drugs, a provincial screening program 
for colorectal cancer, digital imaging equipment for 
mammograms. Funding for health regions has also increased, 
resulting in better access to chemotherapy, improved diagnostic 
services, and strengthened support for prevention and healthy 
lifestyles, just to name a few enhancements. 
 
Despite these efforts, Mr. Speaker, the number of new cancer 
cases diagnosed in Saskatchewan is projected to increase 54 per 
cent by 2036. In order to counteract this expected increase, the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency developed a strategic plan for 
influencing care across the province while establishing 
Saskatchewan and the organization as leaders in cancer 
research, treatment, education, population health, promotion, 
and disease prevention. The long-term goal is to create a 
province where people understand how to minimize their risk of 
getting cancer and play an active role in their personal health 
and well-being. The desired future is one where the cancer 
services that are needed can be accessed equitably, safely, and 
in ways that best support those who are dealing with cancer as a 
chronic illness. Our government supports the Cancer Agency’s 
vision for the future. 

I’m pleased that these amendments update the language being 
used in legislation related to the agency’s work and resolve 
some instances where its legislative authority lags behind its 
needs for effectively administering services and handling 
information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments in this legislation will 
fill some gaps in The Cancer Agency Act so that we can better 
equip the organization to perform its role of strengthening 
cancer control in our province. 
 
The Cancer Agency Amendment Act will provide statutory 
authority for the agency to request and collect information from 
other organizations, to report to various registries, and to enter 
into agreements. The proposed amendments also provide 
consistent definitions of cancer services and reflect the current 
government structure in naming conventions. 
 
In cases where the administrative authority of the Cancer 
Agency is not already consistent with that of its sister 
organizations, the regional health authorities, this Act will allow 
for better alignment with provisions of The Regional Health 
Services Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments will ensure the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency has the statutory authority it 
needs to request, collect, and disclose information in order to 
effectively meet its responsibility for providing cancer control 
services. 
 
Another amendment will enable the Ministry of Health to 
inform the agency when, in the course of administering health 
services, the ministry becomes aware of a reportable case of 
cancer. One example would be when the ministry is billed for 
services provided out of province. This will help the agency 
maintain an accurate picture of an individual’s care status and a 
more accurate picture of cancer services provided to 
Saskatchewan citizens. The amendment also clarifies the 
agency’s authority to disclose information to the North 
American and international cancer registries which act as 
central registries for cancer research, surveillance, statistical 
reporting, analysis of outcomes, and assessment of cancer risks. 
 
All central registries in Canada and the United States are 
members of these multinational registries which enable the use 
by authorized organizations of de-identified patient information 
in order to better understand, prevent, and treat cancer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to assure all members that the Office of the 
Information and Privacy Commissioner will be consulted about 
the agency’s ability to collect information and disclose it for 
specific purposes, and to specific organizations that will be 
prescribed through the regulations. Our government appreciates 
the commissioner’s insights in this area and his office’s role as 
an advocate for and protector of the privacy rights of our 
citizens. 
 
These amendments align with ongoing work by government 
and the health system to create a citizen- and patient-centred 
system that values continuous improvement and innovation. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of 
The Cancer Agency Amendment Act. 



May 30, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 211 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the Minister of Health that Bill No. 13, The Cancer Agency 
Amendment Act, 2016 be read a second time. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? I recognize the member 
from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again 
I’m very pleased to stand in my place this afternoon to hear 
what the minister is proposing through this particular Act, The 
Cancer Agency Act. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out this 
is certainly a topic that affects many, many families, the notion 
that we have to do what we have to do to make sure we provide 
as much knowledge, that we do as much research and we 
provide as much support and that we prevent as much as we can 
the introduction of the disease of cancer. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that cancer can be 
beaten. We’ve had many presentations with the Cancer Society 
of the province of Saskatchewan. And they certainly are 
champions in determining how people perceive cancer. And 
certainly it’s a challenge to have them continue to fight. It’s not 
everybody’s challenge to fight cancer, but there are quite a few 
families and an alarming number of people in the province that 
do battle with cancer. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they’re champions; there’s no question about 
it. They’re champions, the Canadian Cancer Society, and of 
course the Saskatchewan chapter. They’re doing their very best 
to promote the four attributes spoken when the minister alluded 
to the Cancer Agency overall, and of course the Act that guides 
them. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in northern Saskatchewan we have many 
people that struggle and battle with cancer. And the whole issue 
around health transcends a lot of the political ramifications of 
sitting in this particular Assembly because we’ve seen the battle 
of cancer and the face of cancer in many of our northern 
communities as well as southern communities. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as you look at some of the rural parts of our 
province, when we see the alarming rates of cancer amongst our 
farm families, men and women that struggle with cancer in rural 
parts of our province, Mr. Speaker, we need to provide critical 
support and certainly focus our effort in making sure that many 
of the farm families . . . that we’ve seen the trends and that 
perhaps we have to really focus on ensuring that the prevention, 
knowledge, research, and supports are there right across the 
board. And perhaps the Cancer Agency needs more support. 
They need more outreach. They need more resources to help 
many of the areas that are struggling with cancer overall. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the rural parts of our 
province and the challenge of cancer itself, as I’ve said, many 
families have struggled with that. I go to a lot of home visits 
with people that have that challenge in the northern part of the 
province and they speak to me about some of the issues that 
they want to raise. And I do this because it is part of the Act, it 
is part of the bill, it is part of the knowledge effort around what 
the Cancer Agency does, Mr. Speaker. We’re talking about 
knowledge. We’re talking about prevention, research, and 
support. These are some of the issues that we hear of back in 
the northern part of the province. 
 

What happens, Mr. Speaker, is lot of the northern people that 
struggle with cancer . . . As I’ve said, they’re champions, but 
they have to travel a long distance. The cost of travelling and 
relocating to the cities is also problematic, Mr. Speaker. And 
they also need the supports of their family when they’re getting 
treatment or being diagnosed or in many cases being cured of 
cancer. You can see the support and the thankfulness that many 
of them have when they do beat cancer. But it’s always a battle, 
Mr. Speaker, and it’s important that we continue supporting the 
work of The Cancer Agency Act and all the supports it provides. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve got a quick story to tell you. A number 
of years ago — it was 1981 to be exact — I had an uncle of 
mine who worked in Uranium City for a number of years. He 
worked very closely with a number of other people from the 
North. In 1981 he had succumbed to cancer. And a couple of 
weeks before he passed away, I had the opportunity to go visit 
with him while he was still talking because shortly thereafter he 
went into a deep sleep and then thankfully, Lord, and thankfully 
his suffering ended. And as difficult as it was for the family, 
they let my uncle go. And the most amazing thing is he was 
very stoic. He was very strong and he was very courageous, and 
to me that’s the face of cancer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think the Cancer Agency certainly have a lot of that 
experience. I know they have a lot of that experience and it’s 
important that we provide as much support, as much of a 
benefit to the people that are going through this. Mr. Speaker, I 
think that’s key that we recognize that. 
 
So from the opposition perspective, Mr. Speaker, any supports 
that we can do to strengthen the Cancer Agency, any supports 
we can do to recognize the specific areas that have extra 
challenges, the challenge overall but other areas that have extra 
challenges, whether it’s rural people or the farm families that 
are suffering through the increase in cancer rates, Mr. Speaker, 
or the northern people that have specific challenges traveling 
for treatment, and those that get cancer in our urban settings, 
Mr. Speaker. It is a tough, tough task. 
 
And getting back to my uncle’s story very quickly, it was 1981, 
Mr. Speaker. And as I sat and visited with him one day he said 
to me, he said, you keep working hard and you’ll have it made. 
You’ll have it made, he said. And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll always 
remember those words because I wanted to talk about him and 
he wanted to talk about me. So I always thank my uncle George 
for the great courage he showed me on that day, and that he 
made one comment to me that had a profound effect. He said, 
it’s going to be your turn to work. It’s going to be your turn to 
live, but you’ll have it made. Just keep working hard. That’s 
what he said. And a week later he took a turn for the worse, and 
then he went into a deep sleep and later on he passed away. 
 
And the words he said to me, Mr. Speaker, were profound 
because it wasn’t until a full seven years later, Mr. Speaker, that 
I entered the race for mayor of Ile-a-la-Crosse. And we worked 
very hard. We remembered his words. And later on we became 
the MLA, and by virtue of the support of my colleagues, we 
were placed in cabinet and we got a lot of things done for our 
region. 
 
But we never forget those that made the sacrifice in cancer to 
promote more understanding, not only of how the disease 



212 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2016 

works, but how people react to it and respond to it. And some 
are very courageous. Some are in need of support. But, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s a battle nobody wants but many people have to 
live through. 
 
So I want to point out that any work that the Cancer Agency 
does . . . We need to improve on services, yes. We need more 
expansion of knowledge and research, yes. But the number one 
thing, Mr. Speaker, is to provide supports where supports are 
necessary. And that’s the critical point I want to make as a 
result of this particular bill. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it is with great urgency that I express to the 
government to continue to build the Cancer Agency, strengthen 
it. We will support every effort in that regard. But the more 
people that are out there helping those that are struggling with 
this particular disease, the better. 
 
So I would say that we will look into this legislation to see 
where we’re able to improve it, where there may be some lapses 
in supports. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s the job we do as an 
opposition member. It’s not there to criticize people that are 
struggling with cancer, because we all are very supportive of 
that battle. Just to make sure that we do it right. And that’s the 
reason why we take our time to research the bill that’s 
presented. 
 
So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 13, The Cancer Agency Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
[16:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has adjourned 
debate on Bill No. 13, The Cancer Agency Amendment Act, 
2016. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 14 — The Horned Cattle Purchases  
Repeal Act, 2016 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, at the end of my remarks I will move second reading 
of The Horned Cattle Purchases Repeal Act, 2016. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is moving forward with the repeal 
of horned cattle legislation in the province. The Act came into 
force in July 1939 to penalize the marketing of cattle with horns 
in Saskatchewan. The intention of the Act was to reduce the 
number of cattle with horns being marketed. The deduction was 
set at that time at $1 per head. In 1940, more than 40,000 cattle 
were penalized, representing 19 per cent of cattle marketed that 
year. 
 
Horned cattle breeds were dominant in the cattle industry, and 
the transportation and handling of horned cattle risked injury to 
people and other animals. In particular, at that time cattle were 
transported long distances by rail. 
 

The Act was amended in 1949 to increase the penalty to $2 a 
head. Almost 80,000 cattle were penalized, representing 
19.2 per cent of cattle marketed that year. It was noted in the 
1949-50 agricultural annual report that little improvement had 
been made in reducing the number of cattle marketed with 
horns since the Act came into force. 
 
At its peak in 1977 and ’78, nearly 180,000 cattle were 
penalized for horns. But a lot has changed in the industry over 
the last 40 years. Now only 15 to 17,000 head of cattle are 
penalized each year. That’s just over 1 per cent of cattle 
marketings. And this is due to a number of reasons including an 
increase in the use of polled or hornless genetics in common 
breeds of cattle, market price signals, and more diligent 
dehorning. In addition, the industry has developed and adheres 
to a code of practice that recommended dehorning cattle to 
decrease the risk of injury to workers and animals and to 
minimize economic losses due to carcass bruising. 
 
The code of practice for the care and handling of beef cattle are 
nationally developed guidelines. These codes did not exist in 
1939, so industry asked government to intervene with 
legislation, legislation that is no longer required in 2016. We 
don’t enact legislation that penalizes producers for failing to do 
other important management tasks such as vaccinating animals 
against disease, so why would we continue to focus on horns? 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is not the only province to repeal 
horned cattle legislation. Alberta and Manitoba both repealed 
similar legislation several years ago. In fact British Columbia is 
the only other province with horned cattle legislation at this 
time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, continuing The Horned Cattle Purchases Act 
doesn’t make sense from an economic perspective. In 1949, the 
penalty of $2 per head was established. That penalty remains in 
place today. It doesn’t make sense for government to be in the 
business of horned cattle penalties or to subsidize the collection 
and administration of The Horned Cattle Purchases Act. It 
would be an unnecessary expense for us and for taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the deduction is set in the Act at $2 per head. It 
only generates 30,000 to $35,000 of revenue per year, and this 
revenue collected no longer covers the costs of inspecting, 
collecting, and administering the penalty. The horned cattle 
fund is nearly depleted. If the government were to subsidize the 
collection and administration of the penalty, it would represent 
a new and additional cost for government and for taxpayers. 
 
The last time The Horned Cattle Purchases Act was looked at 
was in 2002, almost a decade and a half ago. In June 2002 The 
Horned Cattle Purchases Amendment Act was assented to but 
was never proclaimed. That amendment Act would have 
increased the penalty from $2 per head to $10 per head and 
updated the membership of The Horned Cattle Purchases Act 
advisory committee. There are some industry stakeholders, 
most notably the Saskatchewan Stock Growers Association, 
who support proclaiming the amendment Act. However, after 
the amendment Act was assented to, the Saskatchewan 
Cattlemen’s Association was created as a development 
commission under The Agri-Food Act. The SCA [Saskatchewan 
Cattlemen’s Association] would not have been represented on 
the advisory committee if the amendment Act were proclaimed. 
 



May 30, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 213 

Mr. Speaker, it’s important to recognize that the repeal of The 
Horned Cattle Purchases Act has the support of cattle 
organizations and many beef cattle producers in the province. In 
April the Ministry of Agriculture met with industry reps to 
discuss the possible repeal of the Act. There were some 
concerns, but most agreed that existing legislation is outdated 
and a new approach should be considered. 
 
The first step in modernizing means repealing the existing 
legislation. The Ministry of Agriculture is already working with 
the cattle sector to explore industry-led options. Industry 
supports this approach. The Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s 
Association, for example, has already requested information 
related to administration costs and is prepared to lead industry 
discussions around penalizing horned cattle. If the cattle sector 
decides that producers marketing horned cattle need to be 
penalized, then we will work with them to develop an 
industry-led solution. I’m confident that a viable solution can be 
found. 
 
However I’d once again like to stress that the solution has to be 
industry led. It’s worth repeating that less than 1.5 per cent of 
cattle being marketed have horns, compared to 19 per cent in 
1940. Our neighbouring provinces of Alberta and Manitoba 
have repealed similar legislation and have not seen an increase 
in cattle marketed with horns. Many of our cattle producers see 
this as being unnecessary regulation and that the marketplace 
will determine the value of these animals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s put our trust in our cattle producers and let 
industry figure this out. They will know the right thing to do 
when it comes to marketing cattle with horns. Our government 
talks a lot about how our producers need to maintain and grow 
the trust of the public. How can we encourage that without 
showing that we trust our producers? So let’s trust them. Let’s 
listen to them. Let’s work with them through their associations 
to develop an industry-led solution supported by this 
government. 
 
The Horned Cattle Purchases Act is outdated and a fresh, 
modern, industry-led approach should be explored. All existing 
horned cattle legislation needs to be repealed. Therefore, Mr. 
Speaker, I move that The Horned Cattle Purchases Repeal Act, 
2016 be read a second time. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the Minister of Agriculture that Bill No. 14, The 
Horned Cattle Purchases Repeal Act, 2016 be read a second 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? I 
recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to point out, Mr. Speaker, that in northern Saskatchewan . . . A 
lot of people don’t assume that there is a lot of cattle industry in 
the northern part of the province, but the reality is there is, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
There’s a lot of history in northern Saskatchewan and certainly 
was a lot of history in the sense that at the time . . . [inaudible] 
. . . the Thatcher government that promoted and wanted to see 
agriculture become part of the northern economy, and as a 
result of that they established three farms, Mr. Speaker. The 
three farms were in Green Lake, Ile-a-la-Crosse, and in 

Cumberland House, Mr. Speaker. There was actually land that 
was cleared and cattle brought in and they certainly began a 
cow-calf operation and they actually had these farms operate for 
many, many years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So a lot of times what I see nowadays is since then, when the 
Conservative government was in charge in the 1980s and part 
of the early ’90s, Mr. Speaker, they shut down those operations 
even though the operations were very, very valuable to the 
people. Because some of the spinoff benefits of that, Mr. 
Speaker, is people actually started getting into cow-calf 
operations themselves. There was a few families that assumed 
that role, and certainly Green Lake is still very active in that 
regard. 
 
Although there isn’t a cattle operation in Ile-a-la-Crosse, there 
are a few people in the community that did raise cattle and 
continue raising cattle. And one of them of course is my Uncle 
Gordon and my Aunt Bernice. They bought a piece of land. 
They continue having a small cow-calf operation. I’m not sure 
the number of head that they have nowadays, but they continue 
building this industry, and Green Lake of course is much further 
ahead. So, Mr. Speaker, we do have a bit of experience. Not to 
disrespect any of the industry — we know the incredible value 
and the incredible opportunity attached to the cattle industry. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would say I’ll remember this day for a long 
time, which the Minister of Agriculture introduced this 
particular bill, Bill No. 14, The Horned Cattle Purchases 
Repeal Act. Because, Mr. Speaker, when they had challenges 
around the transportation system in which many of the 
producers in the province of Saskatchewan were struggling 
with, you didn’t hear a peep from the Minister of Agriculture at 
the time. And there was billions of dollars left in producers’ 
storage bins, and the minister was sitting on his hands and not 
saying a word, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I think there’s a lot of different areas of focus that this 
government could continue to look at in terms of what is 
necessary out there. I think water management is a key area, 
power generation, environmental stewardship, developing an 
adequate transportation system to get our commodities to 
market, Mr. Speaker, certainly doing a regional economical 
modelling, strategic supports for certain industries, Mr. 
Speaker, working with the RMs [rural municipality] and the 
council to these various areas. And, Mr. Speaker, one of the 
things I think that a lot of the farm families consider as really 
key is to make sure that their children have a school to go to 
and their families have a health centre that they can go to when 
the time comes for those services that they may need, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I look at the effort by the particular bill, Bill No. 14, and I 
can tell you on many other fronts, and this will soon become 
apparent, I think the Sask Party has simply lost their way, Mr. 
Speaker. They don’t have any innovative strategies for the rural 
parts of the community and the province. And The Horned 
Cattle Purchases Repeal Act simply is not going to be the 
panacea and the silver bullet that’s going to help the people in 
rural Saskatchewan be happy at all. 
 
There are tons of area in which they need their strategic help, 
Mr. Speaker, and that’s why it’s important that we continue 



214 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2016 

paying attention to what they’re doing on some of these bills, 
but more important, Mr. Speaker, what they’re not doing and 
what they’re unable to deliver on. And, Mr. Speaker, that 
research will continue and we will continue building and 
educating all members of our caucus on what the farm families 
need and what the rural parts of the province desperately need 
to continue strengthening them. Because a strong rural economy 
means a strong provincial economy, Mr. Speaker. We clearly 
understand that from the opposition perspective. And every bit 
of effort, whether it’s The Horned Cattle Purchases Repeal Act 
or acknowledgement of some of the health concerns of our farm 
families, Mr. Speaker, we’ll continue supporting those efforts. 
 
The problem we have is a Sask Party government that simply 
can’t think beyond the smaller efforts such as this particular bill 
and start dealing with the larger picture items, which is things 
like a decent transportation system in the province of 
Saskatchewan. They have failed to deliver on that front. They 
continue to fail, Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure the farm families 
will be pleased to hear that we’ll continue holding them to 
account on their failures as a government when it comes to their 
supporting rural parts of our province. 
 
So on that note, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot more comments on 
this particular bill, and if those people that want to add to this 
bill on how things could be strengthened in the rural parts of 
our province, we would suggest to you, our door’s always open. 
 
So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 14, The Horned Cattle Purchases Repeal Act, 2016. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has adjourned 
debate on Bill No. 14, The Horned Cattle Purchases Repeal 
Act, 2016. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I move that this Assembly do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that this Assembly do now 
adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt this motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly now stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:58.] 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 181 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 181 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 181 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 181 
  Fiaz ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 182 
  Reiter ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 182 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 182 
  Ottenbreit .................................................................................................................................................................................. 182 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 182 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 182 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 183 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Reginans Support Fort McMurray in Time of Need 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 183 
 Watson Student Recognized at National Science Fair 
  Phillips ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 183 
 Lakeview Educator Receives Saskatchewan Order of Merit 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 184 
 Weyburn Officer Completes Marathon for Mental Health 
  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 184 
 2016 Moose Jaw Transplant Trot 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................... 184 
 Moose Jaw Rotary Club Celebrates 100th Anniversary 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 184 
 New Group Home Opens in Regina Rochdale 
  Ross ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 185 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 SaskPower Rate Increases 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 185 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 185 
 Employment and Services in First Nations, Métis, and Northern Communities 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 186 
  Reiter ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 186 
  Ottenbreit .................................................................................................................................................................................. 186 
 Aboriginal Population in Correctional Facilities 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 186 
  Tell ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 187 
 Multi-Ministry Team on Aboriginal Issues 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 187 
  Reiter ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 187 
 Funding for Heritage Language Education 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 187 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 187 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 188 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 188 
 Funding for Education Infrastructure 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 188 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 189 
 Prince Albert Bridge 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 189 
  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 189 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Medical Isotopes 
  Harrison ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 190 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 190 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 15 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2016 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 190 
 Bill No. 16 — The Adoption Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’adoption 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 191 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Merriman .................................................................................................................................................................................. 191 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 2 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Crown Corporations’ Fiscal Year End Standardization)  
 Amendment Act, 2016 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 191 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 191 
 Bill No. 3 — The Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2016 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 193 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 193 
 Bill No. 4 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 194 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 194 
 Bill No. 5 — The Electronic Information and Documents Amendment Act, 2016 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 196 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 196 
 Bill No. 6 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2016 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 197 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 197 
 Bill No. 7 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2016 (No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2016 modifiant le droit législatif 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 198 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 198 
 Bill No. 8 — The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2016 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 198 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 199 
 Bill No. 9 — The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 2016 
 Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’exécution des jugements canadiens 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 200 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 200 
 Bill No. 10 — The Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 2016 
  Cox ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 201 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 203 
 Bill No. 11 — The Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2016 
  Cox ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 207 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 208 
 Bill No. 12 — The Public Health (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2016 
  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 209 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 209 
 Bill No. 13 — The Cancer Agency Amendment Act, 2016 
  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 210 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 211 
 Bill No. 14 — The Horned Cattle Purchases Repeal Act, 2016 
  Stewart ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 212 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 213 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


