






















































Hansard: October 20, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 28A  THURSDAY, OCTOBER 20, 2016, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (Ind.) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10; Independent (Ind.) — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 765 
 October 20, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — Joining us today in the Speaker’s gallery is 
someone that doesn’t need an introduction, but we’ll do one 
anyhow. We have Mr. Bob Pringle, the Advocate for Children 
and Youth in Saskatchewan. Give us a wave here, Bob. I invite 
you to join me today as we honour Mr. Pringle and his years of 
service to youth and to the citizens of this province at a farewell 
tea being held in room 218 starting at 12:30 with a program 
starting at 1. Members, please join me in welcoming Mr. 
Pringle to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
I recognize the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to you and through you 
to all members of the Legislative Assembly, an important 
advocate for Western Canada. Joining us today in your gallery 
is Martha Hall Findlay, the new president and CEO [chief 
executive officer] of the Canada West Foundation. She has 
joined the foundation on September 1st and succeeded Dylan 
Jones as president and CEO. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ms. Hall Findlay is in Regina today to meet with 
government officials and business leaders. She has a 
distinguished career as a lawyer, an entrepreneur, an academic, 
a consultant, and in public life as Member of Parliament for the 
riding of Willowdale in Toronto. She’s been outspoken about 
the importance of free trade, foreign investment, and marketing 
freedom in agriculture. She has made timely and articulate 
interventions in support of pipelines and the need for Canada to 
get our resources to international markets, and she has been 
steadfast in her advocacy for building stronger relations with 
Aboriginal people in this country. Mr. Speaker, with that I 
would ask all members to welcome her into her new position 
and welcome her to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
Official Opposition we too would like to welcome Ms. Findlay 
to our Legislative Assembly and congratulations on your new 
appointment. As you know, Saskatchewan is an exporting 
province and all the advocacy we get, we certainly appreciate. 
So thank you for that, and we look forward to your work in 
your new position. So welcome to this Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
welcome the following Master of Nursing grads to their 
legislature today: Nicole Aschenbrenner, from Martensville, 
Saskatchewan; Kim Veronneau, from Gatineau, Quebec; and 
her mother, Lena Roger, also from Quebec. Accompanying the 

graduates are Joyce Bruce, program head of CNPP 
[Collaborative Nurse Practitioner Program] at Saskatchewan 
Polytechnic; and Dr. Glenn Donnelly, associate dean at the 
University of Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re so proud of our nurses and I’m excited to 
meet with these students over brunch tomorrow and to attend 
their convocation. This is a big day for all students at the 
university and I’m honoured that these Master of Nursing 
students are letting me take part. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the minister opposite in welcoming these important individuals 
to their Legislative Assembly to say, je voudrais dire bienvenue 
à l’Assemblée législative et aussi félicitations en vérité, 
monsieur le Président. 
 
[Translation: I would like to say welcome to the Legislative 
Assembly and also congratulate them in person, Mr. Speaker.] 
 
I want to say congratulations to them at this exciting time in 
their nursing career, and may this be one milestone on a road 
with many more great moments to come for them as they serve, 
hopefully here in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
So again I’d like to join with the minister opposite and welcome 
these individuals to their Legislative Assembly and say 
congratulations. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Mr. Speaker, it is Foster 
Families Week here in Saskatchewan, and I know we’ll hear 
more about that in a member’s statement shortly. But I want to 
stand today and welcome a few very special guests in your 
gallery. We have Deb Davies, who’s the executive director of 
the Saskatchewan Foster Families Association — if you could 
just give us a wave, Deb; Kevin Harris, he is the board Chair of 
the Saskatchewan Foster Families Association; and also Owen 
Manz, the director of the out-of-home care at the Ministry of 
Social Services. 
 
Thank you all so much for the great work you do in providing a 
safe and caring home for our children to go to. And I would like 
all members to join me in welcoming these folks to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask for leave for 
extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, I want 



766 Saskatchewan Hansard October 20, 2016 

to thank Mr. Bob Pringle for attending today and for all the 
work that he’s done. And I see there’s some staff from the 
Children’s Advocate office there as well. And previous to being 
elected, I worked as a social worker as well and I had clients 
who used the children’s advocacy office, and they always said 
that they were treated with much respect and they felt that their 
issues and needs were met. And so I would like to thank you. 
And also as a front-line practitioner, we found that the issues 
that Mr. Pringle would address were issues that we saw right on 
the front line, and we appreciate the hard work that you’ve done 
for all of our youth in our province and thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to welcome the foster parent 
association for attending today. I had the pleasure of going to an 
event this week which addressed the foster parents week. And 
so I appreciate all the work that you do to support foster parents 
in Saskatchewan, and I look forward to working with you in the 
next few years. So thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Carlton. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, I’d like to introduce two people sitting in the west 
gallery that are very important to me, and they are two of my 
three sisters. And I’m trying to be very nice to them of course, 
as I’m the youngest of five and they’re the oldest. I don’t know 
if I was . . . Apparently that’s not politically correct to say that 
but I got it in anyway. 
 
Anyway my one sister, Ellen Clarke, she lives here in Regina 
and she faithfully watches us on TV on the legislative channel 
every day. And my oldest sister, Elaine, she flew in from Prince 
George, BC [British Columbia] because she is a political junkie 
and she just couldn’t wait to attend a session in the House 
especially with her brother sitting down here. So anyway I’d 
like everyone in the House, all the members, to join me in 
welcoming them to the legislature. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again in this House to present a petition to improve PTSD 
[post-traumatic stress disorder] coverage for Saskatchewan 
workers. The petitioners point out, Mr. Speaker, that 
post-traumatic stress disorder or PTSD can severely impact the 
lives of Saskatchewan workers and a delay in diagnosis and 
treatment for PTSD can be detrimental to recovery. They also 
point out that PTSD is not on the list of workers’ compensation 
illnesses presumed to be work related in Saskatchewan, that as a 
result many workers suffering from work-related PTSD are 
burdened by lengthy investigations and approval processes. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to make the necessary changes to ensure that 
if Saskatchewan workers are exposed to traumatic events 
on the job and are then diagnosed with PTSD, it is 

presumed to be caused by the worker’s employment and 
the worker will subsequently be covered under workers’ 
compensation and receive the same benefits as others with 
work-related injuries. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens of 
Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition for citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of Carrot 
River, Meadow Lake, and Nipawin. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 
again I am proud to stand in my place to present a petition for a 
second bridge for Prince Albert. And, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan ask that the 
Sask Party government stop stalling, hiding behind rhetoric 
and refusing to listen to the people calling for action, and 
to begin immediately to plan and then quickly commence 
the construction of a second bridge for Prince Albert using 
federal and provincial dollars. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people pray for this to occur, Mr. 
Speaker. 

 
And the people that have signed this petition and many other 
pages of petition are primarily from Prince Albert and Wakaw. 
And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m presenting a 
petition from individuals concerned about wetlands and the 
function they serve within our ecosystem. The petitioners point 
out that as wetlands . . . In worst cases, as in some places on the 
prairies, as much as 90 per cent of our wetlands have 
disappeared. And as they continue to disappear, so too do the 
many benefits they provide. So the petition reads . . . I’ll read 
the petition: 
 

We, in the petition that reads as follows, respectfully 
request the Government of Saskatchewan to: 
 
Increase funding to do proper inventory work, putting 



October 20, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 767 

Saskatchewan in a better position to manage the water 
resource. 
 
Speed up the evaluation of high-risk watersheds where 
there’s significant damage annually from flooding. This 
evaluation must include a recognition of drainage works 
that could be closed and restored that will alleviate some of 
the issues downstream with respect to flooding and nutrient 
loading. 
 
[Also the last one is to] create a sound and transparent 
mitigation process that adequately addresses sustainable 
development. 
 
The sequence should first focus on avoiding the 
environmental harm whenever possible before a secondary 
focus on minimizing the harm, with compensation being 
sought only when the development is deemed essential and 
the first two stages cannot be met. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by citizens from 
Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to 
present a petition in support of Wakamow Valley Authority. 
And we know that as a result of the passage of The Wakamow 
Valley Authority Amendment Act, 2016 on June 30th this year, 
the Wakamow Valley Authority lost statutory funding of 
$127,000 from the Saskatchewan government, in addition to 
$30,000 in supplementary funding. And this lost of annual 
funding negatively affects the ability of Wakamow to maintain 
its lands and repair its facilities and provide services to the 
community and throughout for people in this province. It’s a 
well-known fact this would negatively impact the Moose Jaw 
economy through job loss and negatively impacts Moose Jaw 
tourism and businesses. And also on June 21st, 2016 the 
provincial government voted in favour of this bill, resulting in 
cuts to Wakamow. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action:  
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to immediately repeal The Wakamow Valley Authority 
Amendment Act, 2016 and reinstate statutory funding to the 
Wakamow Valley Authority. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from the city 
of Moose Jaw. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

present to you a petition condemning the Sask Party’s cuts to 
the SAID program [Saskatchewan assured income for disability 
program]. The Sask Party’s latest cold-hearted cut will take 
money away from people who are unable to work due to 
disability. 
 
Many people who are being hurt by the Sask Party cut live with 
serious illnesses such as multiple sclerosis, cancer, autism, and 
other illnesses. And that contrary to the Minister of Social 
Services’ claims, the government underfunds clients in regards 
to shelter allowance, and that shelter allowance should be 
reflective of the current rental cost, not availability. 
 
[10:15] 
 
I will read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to stop their plan to cut 
the SAID funding and immediately restore funding for 
those living with a disability; that shelter allowance is 
reflective of the current rental costs; and that the 
Saskatchewan Party government implement the 
recommendations of the advisory group on poverty 
reduction. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the residents who signed this petition are from 
Saskatoon. And I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition calling for a stop to the Sask Party’s sell-off 
of SaskTel. And the petitioners point out that this is against 
what was promised in the last campaign, Mr. Speaker, and 
indeed campaigns before that by the Sask Party. And certainly 
that there’s a great return from the corporation and it provides 
invaluable service to the people of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the petitioners point out that once SaskTel is gone, 
there’s no getting it back. And then there’s no telling what else 
the Sask Party will sell off, Mr. Speaker. 
 

In the prayer that reads as follows, the petitioners 
respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan call on the Saskatchewan Party government 
to keep their promise, stop their plan to sell off SaskTel, 
and keep our valued Crown corporation in the hands of the 
people of Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from the city of 
Regina. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition calling on the government to reverse the cuts 
to the Aboriginal court worker program. The Government of 
Saskatchewan cut the budget for the Aboriginal court worker 
program in the 2016-2017 provincial budget, and the signatories 
to this petition would like to bring attention to the following. 
The Aboriginal court workers play an important role, helping 



768 Saskatchewan Hansard October 20, 2016 

Aboriginal people in criminal and child apprehension cases. 
Aboriginal peoples are disproportionately represented in 
Saskatchewan’s correctional centres, and Aboriginal court 
workers successfully help to make our communities safer 
through reduced recidivism rates. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan reverse its 
short-sighted and counterproductive cuts to the Aboriginal 
court worker program. 

 
The signatories to this are from the Regina area. And I do so 
submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
to stop the redirection of funding of the Northern Teacher 
Education Program Council, Inc. A recent report shows that 94 
per cent of NORTEP [northern teacher education program] 
grads found employment in the North. NORTEP has improved 
teacher retention rates in northern Saskatchewan. NORTEP has 
a positive economic impact in northern Saskatchewan. 
NORTEP provides a high-quality, face-to-face instruction and 
services to students. The province’s financial deficit cannot be 
fixed by cutting indigenous education in northern 
Saskatchewan, and a program that has served northern 
Saskatchewan for over 40 years. And the prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to immediately restore the 
five-year agreement to fund the Northern Teacher 
Education Program Council, Inc. and to continue funding 
NORTEP-NORPAC programs in La Ronge. 

 
It is signed by many good people of northern Saskatchewan. I 
so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moosomin. 
 

Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership  
Exporter of the Year Award 

 
Mr. Bonk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I had the 
privilege, along with some of my colleagues, to attend the 
Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership conference and 
20th anniversary celebration this week. Known as STEP, this 
arm’s-length organization is unique in the way that it involves 
both private and public partners, actively facilitating 
international relations and trade to the benefit of our province. 
For the last 20 years, STEP has worked hard to see global 
markets open to Saskatchewan exports around the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a wealth of natural resources and some of 
the most innovative people and businesses in the world, and last 
night we saw that those businesses were showcased. We learned 
last night that the 2016 STEP Export of the Year was Crestline 
Coach Ltd. Crestline, established in 1975 in Saskatoon, has 

grown to be one of North America’s leading ambulance and 
specialty vehicle manufacturers. And I believe they export to 34 
countries around the world now. They are a deserving recipient. 
 
The finalists this year also included Carrier Forest Product out 
of Big River, Ceres Global Ag Corp. out of Northgate, O & T 
Farms Ltd. out of Regina, and Vendasta Tech Inc. out of 
Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members in the House to join me 
in congratulating the winners and finalists of the 2016 STEP 
Exporter of the Year and acknowledge the hard work that STEP 
does every day to grow Saskatchewan’s economy — a true 
Saskatchewan success story. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

2016 Queen City Marathon 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Queen City 
Marathon, or QCM for short, was held on September 11th of 
this year. The QCM is a massive community undertaking with 
hundreds of volunteers and thousands of participants. Queen 
City Marathon is a qualifying race for the Boston Marathon. 
The majority of participants do not run the full 42.2 kilometres 
though, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The QCM features sponsored half-marathons, 10-kilometre and 
5-kilometre races along with corresponding relays and walks. 
This year I, along with the Leader of the Opposition, ran the 
half-marathon. Now I won’t tell you his time, Mr. Speaker, 
because he’s begged me not to, but I will say that he barely beat 
me by a few minutes. Neither of us can imagine, however, 
running the full 42 kilometres, never mind coming out on top. 
 
However Regina Douglas Park has connections to a couple of 
the marathon winners. Kaytlyn Criddle, former candidate for 
the New Democrats in Regina Wascana Plains and former 
resident of Regina Douglas Park, won the women’s marathon in 
a time of three hours and 18 minutes. 
 
The winner of the QCM men’s marathon was none other than 
Douglas Park resident Iain Fyfe. Iain, a volunteer on my 
election campaign and a whiz with numbers, completed the race 
in just over two hours and 35 minutes. 
 
I’d ask members to join me in congratulating Iain and Kaytlyn, 
as well as congratulating the Queen City Marathon on yet 
another successful event. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Remembering Terry Hincks 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
celebrate the life of a long-time Regina city councillor, Terry 
Hincks. 
 
Terry was a councillor for Ward 9 for 13 years, from 2003 until 
his passing last Friday after a five-year battle with cancer. He 
will be greatly missed by all citizens of Regina, but none more 



October 20, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 769 

so than his son, Andrew, and his grandchildren, Payton and 
Aairc and Philip. 
 
He will be remembered not only for his tireless dedication to 
serving the people of Regina on city council, but also for his 
many achievements in the Saskatchewan sports scene, whether 
it was as a player for the Regina Rams or the countless teams 
and kids he influenced as a coach. Mayor Fougere, who worked 
with Terry the most, remarked Terry “. . . had a passion and 
commitment to our city that really is second to none . . . His 
heart was as big as Regina.” 
 
The people of Regina will say goodbye to Terry in a memorial 
service this afternoon at the Brandt Centre. I ask all members to 
join me in celebrating the life and accomplishments of a man 
who served his community, his city, and his province so well. 
Rest in peace, Honker. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Foster Parent Appreciation Week 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week is Foster 
Parent Appreciation Week. On Monday I was pleased to attend 
the annual foster parent appreciation banquet for the northeast 
region in Prince Albert. 
 
As a social worker I have seen first-hand the trials and 
tribulations as well as the joy and fulfillment which foster 
parents experience as they welcome vulnerable and at-risk 
children into their homes. The work they do and love they give 
the children in their care is admirable. The love, guidance, and 
mentorship given to the children by their foster parents see 
them through difficult times in their lives, and every foster 
parent needs to be acknowledged for this. They give unselfishly 
of themselves day after day, and the children in their care 
benefit greatly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am so pleased that this banquet was held to 
acknowledge the work, dedication, and love of foster parents in 
the northeast region. They are all so deserving of this 
recognition. Congratulations also to the workers at the Ministry 
of Social Services in Prince Albert, Melfort, and Nipawin for 
organizing this banquet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in 
acknowledging the great contributions made by our foster 
parents and families, and thanking them for their dedication to 
our most vulnerable children. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Gardiner 
Park. 
 

Saskatchewan Businessman Wins 
Entrepreneurial Award 

 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 
today to congratulate someone who exemplifies the prairie 
spirit in their business and community endeavours, who has 
been awarded with Ernst & Young’s entrepreneurial award for 
the prairie region. The winner was Murad Al-Katib and, as 
many know, he grew up in Davidson where he learned the 

values of hard work and how business can be a force for good 
in his community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the entrepreneur award recognizes exceptional 
business leaders. The judges look for financial performance, 
vision, leadership, personal integrity, and entrepreneurial spirit. 
Murad’s business, Alliance Grain Traders, based out of Regina, 
started 15 years ago when he purchased a seed processing plant 
just outside of the city. There were three employees at that time. 
AGT has now grown to an annual revenue of $1.7 billion, 
adding at the rate of about 300 million per year the last few 
years. There’s 2,000 employees that work in 41 plants on five 
continents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have some of the most innovative business 
leaders in the world right here in Saskatchewan. It’s my 
pleasure to invite this Assembly to join me in congratulating 
Murad Al-Katib and the other Saskatchewan finalists in a job 
well done. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 

National Foster Family Week 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise in the House today to join with the minister in welcoming 
guests and remind all members that this is Foster Family Week 
in Saskatchewan. Our government is proud to work closely with 
Saskatchewan Foster Families Association to recruit new foster 
families and to improve services and supports for the more than 
500 foster families we currently have across the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a former foster parent, we open our hearts, our 
homes to children and teens with often complex needs. In doing 
so we provide them so much more than food and shelter. We 
provide them a home and a loving, secure, family environment. 
We also provide hope, hope for a brighter future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, being a foster parent isn’t a job. It’s a calling to 
care for some of our most vulnerable citizens. Caring for 
children whose lives have been disrupted oftentimes by abuse, 
neglect, or abandonment is not easy. Yet foster families take 
these children into their homes, make them part of their 
families, and provide them with unconditional love. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it takes very special people with very big hearts to 
do what they do. I want all foster families to know how much 
their efforts are appreciated. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

New Democratic Party Convention 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP [New Democratic 
Party] convention is this weekend. It’s their first chance to 
regroup and try and develop some new policies to show they’re 
not completely out of touch with Saskatchewan people. So let’s 
see what they came up with. 
 
There’s a resolution to boycott and sanction Israel. That’s a real 
top of the mind issue for Saskatchewan voters, cutting off trade 
to Israel, one of our growing export markets for chickpeas and 



770 Saskatchewan Hansard October 20, 2016 

lentils. There’s another one from Nutana to shut down all 
coal-fired power plants, which of course kills hundreds of jobs, 
good-paying unionized jobs, in southeast Saskatchewan. 
There’s a resolution to decriminalize all illicit drugs. You heard 
that right, not just marijuana, all illicit drugs — heroine, 
cocaine, meth. 
 
And then there’s this: be it resolved that Saskatchewan NDP 
will adopt the Leap Manifesto on a provincial level. The NDP is 
going to consider a resolution that would completely shut down 
the energy industry and put tens of thousands of people out of 
work. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, the NDP is going to consider a 
resolution to change the name of the party to the Saskatchewan 
Democratic Party. They say this is to distance themselves from 
the federal party. Now only if they could distance themselves 
from the provincial party, they might be on to something. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Role of Global Transportation Hub 
in Land Acquisitions 

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Let’s try this again, Mr. Speaker. Why 
was the GTH [Global Transportation Hub] used by the Sask 
Party to acquire lands instead of Highways, as is normal 
practice, as they were planning to do, and as would have saved 
millions of dollars? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this answer has been 
provided before. The process that the department, the Ministry 
of Highways, has used for a long time in terms of acquiring 
land requires the long-term usage plan for the purchase before 
it’s made. And that particular timeline wouldn’t have worked in 
the case of assembling land for what is now the Global 
Transportation Hub. That was the reason. 
 
[10:30] 
 
Now the government’s looking at that practice. That is a 
long-standing practice that was also undertaken by members 
opposite when they were in government. Highways would be 
precluded from actually acquiring land until all of the long-term 
questions are resolved. And of course in a market where you 
have rapidly escalating prices, that might not be the best policy. 
And that’s one of the things that’s being looked at, along with a 
number of other recommendations the auditor made in her 
report on the GTH — the same report, by the way, that 
indicated that there was no conflict of interest, there was no 
fraud or wrongdoing by the board of directors, including the 
minister of the day. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, another non-answer from 
the Premier. And the fact of the matter, if the Premier would 
look at it as revealed through investigation, is that Highways 
was actively working towards acquiring those lands and would 

have saved millions of dollars. Why did that Premier, that 
cabinet instead use the GTH instead of Highways and saving 
taxpayers millions of dollars? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I just answered that question. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — You know, this is ridiculous. We have a 
scandal that’s ever growing and a Premier that won’t provide 
answers to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
We’ll try another one here. How does that Premier think that he 
can use SaskPower as his sort of personal piggy bank for his 
government, and thus the bills of Saskatchewan people, to 
bankroll this scandalous deal? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, here’s what’s ridiculous. 
What’s ridiculous, I would say, is members on that side of the 
House calling on the Provincial Auditor to look at the GTH land 
acquisition deal. And then the Provincial Auditor completes the 
report per the request by members on that side and by a 
directive by the cabinet, wherein we enabled the auditor, asked 
the auditor to do her work. We also indicated to the auditor that 
every single cabinet document she needed, and notwithstanding 
cabinet confidentiality, would be available to her for the report. 
And here is a quote from the press release that accompanied the 
release of her report, June 30th: “The audit did not find [any] 
evidence of conflicts of interest, or indications of fraud or 
wrongdoing by the GTH management or Board of Directors.” 
 
She went on to say to the media on the 4th of July of this year: 
 

We were also looking for red flags. And because this is a 
land transaction, we did look for conflicts of interest. We 
didn’t find evidence of conflict of interest or indications of 
fraud or wrongdoing in the course of our work so there 
were no red flags there. 

 
It’s not the answer that members opposite want, but it’s the 
truth. It’s on the public record. These are the words of the 
Provincial Auditor. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Another question, no answer. We know 
the Premier likes to hear the sound of his own voice but 
Saskatchewan people would like to hear some answers on this 
scandalous deal that wasted millions of their hard-earned 
dollars. 
 
Question again to the Premier: why does he and his cabinet 
think they can use SaskPower as their personal piggy bank, thus 
passing along rate hikes to Saskatchewan people to bankroll this 
scandalous deal? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 



October 20, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 771 

Speaker. Answers are being provided. I’m not sure if the Leader 
of the Opposition didn’t listen to the Premier’s answer. He gave 
a very direct answer to the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
The fact remains: the cabinet asked the Provincial Auditor to 
conduct a special audit, given full authority to conduct that 
audit, access to any of the individuals, access to any of the 
documents including cabinet documents, to which she asked or 
requested to conduct that audit. She conducted that audit, and 
the fact is that she said there was no evidence of any 
wrongdoing. There was no evidence of conflict of interest or 
fraud. She said there were no red flags in the conduct of that 
investigation that would require any sort of further 
investigation. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — And members clap. Another question to 
the Premier not answered. Another minister answering and 
talking about an auditor’s report that was clearly 
process-oriented, and that minister knows it. 
 
The question to the Premier: why did he think it was 
appropriate to use SaskPower as the personal piggy bank of that 
government to bankroll this scandalous deal? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. The auditor had full authority to look into every 
element of the transaction that she wished to look into, and she 
made a very thorough audit with access to all of the individuals, 
with access to all of the documents that she requested, that she 
needed in order to conduct as thorough an audit as she did and 
which she felt necessary in this . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the 
conduct of that audit and that report, the auditor made a number 
of recommendations — two for the GTH, eight for the Ministry 
of Highways. The government’s accepted those 
recommendations. We’re moving forward with implementing 
those recommendations. As late as a couple of days ago, the 
board of the Global Transportation Hub was working on how 
best to implement the recommendations that were made. We’re 
going to continue to move forward. That’s our focus. That’s my 
focus in making the GTH a success. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Another question to the Premier not 
answered. So I guess as far as this fishy deal with SaskPower, 
using it as a personal piggy bank, if these lands . . . They’re not 
even being planned to be used now. So I guess the Premier, if 
he wants to answer this question, can he explain to 
Saskatchewan people about what the plans for those lands are, 
which we now understand there’s no plans for those lands at all. 
Can he explain why that deal happened — $25 million just 
within weeks to be able to bankroll this scandalous deal? 
What’s the plans with those lands? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, Mr. Speaker, plans have been going 
on at SaskPower since 2009. And I’m sure that you don’t 
appreciate the answer to this, and the opposition certainly 
doesn’t, but SaskPower operates out of 27 locations, 27 
facilities in the city of Regina. And it only makes sense, Mr. 
Speaker, to move forward from an efficiency perspective to 
consolidate some of those. And that’s precisely the reason why 
these lands were purchased, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Those plans continue to be . . . to unfold at some point in time, 
Mr. Speaker. Some of these facilities are reaching the end of 
their useful life, Mr. Speaker, and there’ll be an opportunity to 
construct a multi-purpose facility out there to consolidate those 
operations, Mr. Speaker. The lands at the GTH provide the best 
opportunity for SaskPower to consolidate those operations, Mr. 
Speaker, and we’re going to continue working on those plans. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — The lands are sitting there not being 
used. The dollars bankrolled this scandalous deal. Will the 
Premier finally admit? You know, he’s made claims that the 
GTH was directing the traffic on this deal. We recognize now 
through investigation that that’s not the case, that that claim was 
completely wrong, that it was his cabinet and the 
scandal-plagued minister that were directing the traffic. Will he 
clarify that here today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure how many 
times we have to answer the same question over and over from 
the opposition. We have been looking at trying to consolidate 
operations at SaskPower. A number of these facilities, as I have 
already mentioned, are reaching the end of their useful life in 
Regina. There’s lots of efficiency problems with that, Mr. 
Speaker. And SaskPower believes that by coordinating, by 
integrating a lot of these facilities into one place, we can 
provide a much more efficient corporate operation and capacity 
to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We’ve started 
working on these plans since 2009 and we’re going to continue 
to work on the plans so that we can provide better and efficient 
operation of the corporation. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Questions to the Premier, nothing 
answered here today. I thought we’d get some straightforward 
answers to some pretty simple but important questions. But I 
guess we shouldn’t be surprised, Mr. Speaker, because we’ve 
seen pretty much that this Sask Party will say anything to get 
elected. And then what they do after is really something else, 
like hiding the truth in this land scandal with the GTH lands, or 
hiding the true state of the finances and the size of the deficit in 
advance of the election and beyond. 
 
And we should be able to trust, we should be able to trust what 
that Premier is saying about the finances. But again in just June 
of last year and just a few months ago, this Premier was making 



772 Saskatchewan Hansard October 20, 2016 

claims about the size of the deficit that were proven wrong to 
the tune of hundreds of millions of dollars just weeks later. 
Now we see them scrapping a report, something I’ve written to 
the Premier to call on him and to demand a financial report. 
This is a new low for the Sask Party. Saskatchewan people 
deserve the truth. They deserve to know the true state of our 
finances. 
 
Saskatchewan workers are losing their jobs. This Premier is 
slashing supports for the most vulnerable in our province and so 
much more. So why is the Sask Party obfuscating, not 
providing the true state of our finances? Why won’t that 
Premier come clean with Saskatchewan people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve had a bit of an unusual year this year obviously with the 
federal election last fall, and then that bumped our provincial 
election up until April . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well is 
the Leader of the Opposition interested in an answer, Mr. 
Speaker, or interested in heckling from his seat? Because we 
have an answer for this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The fact of the matter is we had an April election which pushed 
the budget back to June 1st. That was almost the entire first 
quarter of the fiscal year, Mr. Speaker. We had a full month in 
this legislature to debate that budget, to ask questions in 
estimates of that budget of all the different ministers. And on 
June 30th, the last day of the first quarter, we passed The 
Appropriation Act in this legislature. That was the end of the 
first quarter, Mr. Speaker. So all of the forecasts that were built 
into that budget were passed in this legislature on June 30th. 
 
We will be bringing out a Q2 [second quarter], a mid-year 
report, by the end of November as is legislatively required, Mr. 
Speaker, and reporting all of the information to the people of 
Saskatchewan in due time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Release of Pipeline Inspection Reports 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Hope springs eternal, Mr. Speaker. So let’s try 
another topic and see if we can get an actual answer. When it 
comes to pipeline safety, the Sask Party has been as transparent 
as the thick, black oil that flowed into the North Saskatchewan 
River this summer. When we asked to see the inspection 
records from Husky’s pipeline, the Sask Party refused. They 
blocked every inspection record going back to 2011 because 
they said it could affect their investigation. Mr. Speaker, they 
blocked the release of inspection records from years ago and 
from hundreds of kilometres away from that particular leak. 
 
Now, we know that pipelines are the safest way to move oil and 
gas and we of course need to get our products to market. But 
the people of Saskatchewan deserve to know how this 
government is protecting the water they drink and the land that 
they live on. Will the Minister for the Economy do the right 
thing and table these reports in the Assembly today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, as the member will know, we are working closely with 
Husky. We are also working with the National Energy Board. 
We’re working as well with the Water Security Agency on this 
investigation. 
 
The investigation is still ongoing. We are looking at not only 
the operation of this pipeline, but as well what we wanted to 
ensure was that people could be assured that their drinking 
water supplies in this province are safe. And that’s why we are 
conducting additional inspections, visual inspections, as well as 
looking at the compliance of operators of pipelines that run 
under the water beds of any potable drinking water source in 
this province, Mr. Speaker. That work is ongoing, Mr. Speaker. 
We are working hard on that investigation and we will be 
making all of those reports public when the investigations are 
complete. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, if this Premier is looking for 
someone in this Assembly who supports the federal 
government’s plan to force their carbon price in Saskatchewan, 
he should look beside him to the Minister of Justice who is a 
card-carrying supporter of the Prime Minister’s party. So when 
the Premier stomps his feet and angrily threatens to sue the 
federal Liberals, has he thought this through? His hand-picked 
Attorney General will have to fight his own federal party leader 
in the courts. 
 
But back to pipelines, Mr. Speaker. We also asked for the 
inspection records of five other pipeline companies, and the 
Sask Party is delaying that request for another 30 days. Mr. 
Speaker, the world is watching, and if the Sask Party makes 
Saskatchewan look less than responsible, it will hurt our ability 
to get these important projects built and sell our resources. 
While this government just digs in and fights, the Government 
of Alberta is showing leadership. They are constructively 
working with other jurisdictions and working to get pipelines 
built. When will the Sask Party release these inspection records 
and finally work to restore people’s faith in the pipeline 
inspection system? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I just want to be clear that my office is not involved in 
the work that is done to put together and respond to an FOI 
[freedom of information] request. Mr. Speaker, that is done by 
the ministry as it is done by all ministries. 
 
With respect to the request for Husky information, we are 
looking at and wanting to ensure that they are in compliance 
with the regulations and with the directives that are set out — 
not only for this pipeline, but we want to look at it as a 
company, their manner in which they’ve operated in the past. 
When it is appropriate, after the investigation is complete, that 
information will be released along with all of the reports related 
to the investigation. 



October 20, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 773 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

Status of SaskTel 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, mere months ago during the 
election campaign, the Premier stood, hand over heart, and 
swore that he would not sell SaskTel. Then after the election, 
the Premier softens the ground so he can break his promise to 
the people of Saskatchewan. He’s already asked for and 
received a corporate assessment of SaskTel and even appointed 
a minister in this latest cabinet shuffle with special orders to be 
responsible for the sale. 
 
[10:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier asked the Sask Party-appointed board 
of directors to report back on the Goldberg assessment of 
SaskTel. So when can the people of Saskatchewan expect to 
hear more about that response and more about the Sask Party’s 
latest plans for SaskTel? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister in charge of SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the more things change, the more they stay the same. 
I’m pleased to be on my feet to provide a response on this one. 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to be clear that we are not actively 
seeking offers for SaskTel, nor has an offer been made with 
respect to SaskTel. We certainly did not campaign on the sale 
of SaskTel. But as a government, we have said that if an offer 
was ever delivered to the province of Saskatchewan that 
certainly met some notional conditions, that we would want to 
take that to the shareholders to get their perspective on it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to the assessment, the member is 
correct. We are preparing a response to the risk analysis that 
was done by the Goldberg group and that will be released later 
this fall. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Again, Mr. Speaker, just last year the Premier 
was saying, and I quote, “The public is comfortable with the 
status quo in those major Crowns.” And then, you know, Mr. 
Speaker, before that they took the pledge on the Crowns in 
2007, in 2011, and then 2016 to protect the Crowns. Now they 
say they are open to offers and will hold a referendum to 
consult the people, you know, which was the old position of the 
Sask Party back when they said, you know, we’d be crazy not 
to entertain offers in 2003 and earlier. 
 
Can the minister tell the House if the government plans to hold 
a referendum? Is the government ready and able to do so? And 
what will be the price tag of such a referendum? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, no we are not ready and 
able to do so, because there is no offer. We are not actively 
seeking the sale of SaskTel, nor has an offer been received for 
SaskTel. 
 

What we have gone through, though, is the fact that the 
landscape is changing in telecommunications, where the 
second-to-last regional carrier, MTS [Manitoba Telecom 
Services], is going through the process of being sold to one of 
the national firms. And that did raise questions about what does 
this mean for the future of SaskTel operating as the sole 
regional carrier left in this country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so as we have said before, we did not campaign on 
the sale of SaskTel. But in the event, as the second-last regional 
carrier is in the process of being sold, if there ever was an offer 
that notionally reached some ideas in terms of benchmarks, in 
terms of what it would deliver potentially to the shareholders, 
the people of Saskatchewan, we would have an obligation to 
inform the public that in fact there is an offer and this is what it 
could mean for the people of Saskatchewan, and get their 
response. 
 
Probably, in my view, the best way to do that would be through 
a referendum. But again there is no offer, so all of this is 
hypothetical. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s hard to believe, but 
over the summer this government found ways to make even 
more cuts to our children’s classrooms. The Minister 
Responsible for WCB [Workers’ Compensation Board] decided 
to use the surplus in the workers’ fund to give employers a 
kickback. 
 
School divisions were supposed to receive over $4 million in 
rebates, money that our already cash-strapped schools certainly 
could have used. But instead the Education minister, who just 
happens to be the minister for WCB, clawed back the rebates 
out of the school division operating grants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he authorized the WC [Workers’ Compensation] 
bonus to school boards with one hand and he took them back 
with the other. This is the same minister who walked away from 
his commitment to fully fund teachers’ pay. How can this 
minister think that making such deep cuts to our children’s 
education is acceptable? And the question that everyone in 
education wants to know: what’s next? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we’re a government that is 
committed to education and committed to the students in our 
province. Mr. Speaker, we’ve increased operating grants to the 
divisions by some 33 per cent. In 2007-2008, the budget for 
education was $1.41 billion which included $714 million of 
EPT [education property tax]. 2016-2017, it was increased to 
$1.88 billion, at the same time lowering education property tax 
for the citizens of our province to $680 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has made a strong commitment to 
education. We value the citizens of our province. We value the 
students in our province. We value the teachers, Mr. Speaker. 
And we’re going to continue to do that. 



774 Saskatchewan Hansard October 20, 2016 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Funding for Health Care 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, health care got hit with the 
same clawback, and there is no question the health care system 
needed those funds. 
 
Earlier this week, a fire inspector visited St. Paul’s Hospital in 
Saskatoon. After walking through, the inspector issued an 
ultimatum: they need to deal with the fire hazards or face fines. 
But these fire hazards are human beings. There are so many 
people lining the halls of the hospital that the fire inspector is 
concerned for everyone’s safety. 
 
These last few weeks, the Saskatoon Health Region has seen 
record over-capacity numbers and close to 120 patients in 
hallways, makeshift forts, and in the ER [emergency room]. 
When will the Sask Party stop the cuts to health care and start 
caring about the health and safety of Saskatchewan people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
start with I want to address the preface of that question — cuts 
to health care. Since this government was given the privilege of 
forming government in 2007, we’ve increased funding to health 
care over 50 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now to address the direct question, which is very 
serious. Mr. Speaker, our officials have contacted the St. Paul’s 
Hospital. They’ve taken measures to attempt to deal with the 
pressures. They’re immediately moving patients to 
appropriately designated locations. They’re ensuring that their 
discharge processes are in place so that that doesn’t cause a 
problem. Mr. Speaker, they’re doing some other measures to 
ensure that they can deal with the situation. 
 
But what we should remember, Mr. Speaker, is that first of all 
this isn’t a new issue. These issues were prevalent under the 
members opposite when they were in government, and frankly, 
Mr. Speaker, these issues are a national issue. I just returned 
from the meetings of the provincial Health ministers, Mr. 
Speaker, and I would be happy to elaborate on issues across the 
country on the next question. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, under this government they 
have had record revenue, but they have also had record 
over-capacity levels in our hospitals in Saskatoon. So let me 
give the Health minister another try on an important issue. 
 
Yesterday, after the results of a national study showed 
significant rates of HPV-related [human papilloma virus] 
cancers among men, the Minister of Health was asked about 
changing the policy of HPV vaccination in our province. 
Saskatchewan is one of the few remaining provinces that does 
not offer this vaccination to boys. The minister had very little to 
say on this policy beyond, and I quote, “I’m a boy so I’m 
concerned about everyone.” 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s not quite the thoughtful and 
productive answer we were looking for. I do hope the minister 
knows that girls can be concerned for everyone too. But for 
now let’s put the Sask Party’s record on gender equality aside, 
and I will ask the minister simply if he will move to save lives 
and provide HPV vaccination to Saskatchewan boys. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, in response to the member’s 
flippant question about what I said during scrum yesterday was, 
there was an insinuation from one of the reporters in the scrum. 
The question was something like, you do the vaccinations for 
girls; why don’t you for boys? Aren’t they as important? I was 
just simply commenting. Obviously there was no concerns with 
that on my part, Mr. Speaker. We treat everyone equally. And 
to answer the question, the vaccinations are under consideration 
at this time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the member’s overall tone about this though, 
let’s put in place . . . The members opposite still hold 
themselves out somehow as the champions of health care. Mr. 
Speaker, since we formed government, 50 per cent increase in 
funding. Over 3,000 more nurses than when those members 
were in government, Mr. Speaker. Over 650 more doctors. We 
built long-term care facilities. We’re building hospitals. Mr. 
Speaker, those members just can’t get over the fact that they 
don’t own the whole health care system anymore, Mr. Speaker. 
The citizens of this province have more faith in the members on 
this side, clearly, than they do the members that side. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Government House Leader on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — I’d like to raise a point of order, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the House Leader to make his 
point of order. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. During 
question period the Leader of the Opposition said, I quote, 
people shouldn’t be able to trust him, referring to our Premier. 
Rule 51 of the standing orders, it’s deemed inappropriate 
language. This term, cannot be trusted, has been ruled out of 
order on March 29th by Speaker Toth. I’d ask the Leader of the 
Opposition to withdraw and apologize. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d encourage Mr. 
Speaker to review the record in terms of what was said. The 
recollection of the Leader of the Opposition is that what he had 
said was that people should be able to trust in the Premier. 
Certainly, Mr. Speaker, that is well within the accepted rules 
and usage of terms in this House and, you know, if the record 
shows otherwise, we’re open to review that. But that is our 
understanding of what occurred, and I await the Speaker’s 
ruling on this matter. 
 



October 20, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 775 

The Speaker: — Certainly I too listened very closely. I will 
have to review and I’ll defer a ruling on this point of order to a 
later time. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Education Funding 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to move the 
following motion: 
 

That this Assembly . . . 
 
[Inaudible interjection] . . . At the conclusion of my remarks I 
will move the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the government for failing 
Saskatchewan students by neglecting to provide mid-year 
funding adjustments, failing to provide much-needed 
infrastructure money, underfunding necessary student 
supports such as educational assistants, occupational 
therapists, and English as a second language programs, and 
for bargaining in bad faith by not funding the very contract 
that they negotiated. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it is during Education Week that I rise today in 
this Assembly to put forth this motion on education. The theme 
of this year’s week to honour education in the province is, 
Celebrating Today, Preparing for Tomorrow. Those are nice 
words and I wholeheartedly agree. 
 
There’s much to celebrate in our schools. Some of the most 
important work done in this province happens in our schools. 
Education is key to our future. As I’ve heard many First Nation 
leaders proclaim, education is the new buffalo, the most 
important tool that we have to right the years of wrong 
experienced by indigenous people in this country and this 
province. 
 
Education is the key to reconciliation. It is the key to a 
well-informed public, the key to meeting the challenges of this 
century and beyond. Education is the key to our economy. It 
plays a pivotal role in the lives of children and families every 
day in this province. And it is education that is . . . and 
decisions by this government. Education is under threat by this 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I rise today to condemn this government in the 
strongest terms possible for their failure to provide the 
leadership and support needed to ensure that all students in our 
province receive the education that they deserve, the education 
that they require to meet the needs today and into the future to 
ensure that they reach their full potential and, Mr. Speaker, the 
education that is needed to ensure that we, everyone in this 
province, thrives into the future. 
 
[11:00] 
 

In 2009, the same year that I was elected as a public school 
board trustee, this government decided to unilaterally withdraw 
boards’ abilities to set their own mill rates. And the education 
sector has been marked with uncertainty, insufficiency, a lack 
of transparency, and frankly a lack of respect for the role of 
publicly elected school boards ever since. 
 
Schools across our province vary greatly in terms of the 
makeup of their student body and their needs. Some of the 
schools are geographically isolated and provide service to a 
large area. Schools differ in terms of the number and density of 
students with special needs, medically fragile students, students 
living in poverty, and students for whom English, rather, is an 
additional language. And all of these factors have implications 
for the cost and the method of delivering an equitable education 
for students regardless of the location of their school or where 
their classroom is located. Mr. Speaker, it is precisely because 
of these differences in the makeup of our classroom in this local 
context that the role of local school boards is important. 
 
School divisions also vary greatly with regard to the pace of 
growth within their school divisions and the number of schools 
that they are responsible for, as well as the physical condition 
that they find their schools in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what does not vary across this province is that 
schools are struggling to provide the education needed to 
students, given the lack of transparency, the lack of predictable 
and adequate funding. Mr. Speaker, when these concerns have 
been repeatedly brought to this minister, as we saw today, he 
has deflected the question. We’ve been accused of 
fearmongering. We’ve been accused of exaggerating and not 
understanding. He’s provided us with lists of numbers and 
denied the problem within the classroom. 
 
The minister has tried to deflect by bringing up issues with the 
previous governments, some over 20 years ago. Mr. Speaker, 
we are not fooled or dissuaded by the minister’s strident 
attempts at deflection and rhetoric, and neither are parents, 
community members, school board members, teachers, and 
other school-based staff. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our schools are in crisis, and it’s not 
fearmongering. And the minister has added fuel to this fire by 
raising the spectre of transformational change after an election, 
suggesting that everything — including amalgamations, the 
future of trustees, and further cuts — are on the table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this province is experiencing difficult times. And 
some of that is not the fault of this or any other government; 
they don’t control world oil prices. But Mr. Speaker, they are 
responsible for their choices. And I’m here to tell all members 
of this Assembly that the choice to cut funding for our 
children’s classroom is simply a failure of leadership. It’s a 
failure of vision. It’s a failure to recognize that education is 
simply the most effective means we have to ensure that all 
children have what they need in order to realize their full 
potential. And when children are not able to realize their full 
potential, they suffer and, as a province, we suffer. Our future 
suffers. 
 
Now I want to be clear, Mr. Speaker. There’s very good work 
going on in our schools across the province. What has always 



776 Saskatchewan Hansard October 20, 2016 

struck me with educators is their ability to go in and get the job 
done, to put their students first. But, Mr. Speaker, the needs in 
our classrooms are higher now than ever. And those working in 
our classrooms simply don’t have the supports that are needed 
from this government. 
 
The minister is quoted as saying: 
 

There is a lot of really good and really competent people 
within the divisions, so our expectation and our hope is 
that they roll up their sleeves and try and find efficiencies 
and economies and start sharing things. 

 
Well I agree with the minister. We do have good and competent 
people within our divisions. We agree on that point. But when 
he suggests that this is simply a matter of rolling up one’s 
sleeves and starting to share things, I’m afraid that he reveals 
just how out of touch he is. Mr. Speaker, the sleeves are already 
rolled up. There are no sleeves left. There is no . . . The 
low-hanging fruit is gone. The reserves are being depleted and 
cuts, this government’s cuts to education are impacting our 
classrooms today. And to suggest that school boards should 
start now to find efficiencies and to share services shows a 
profound and wilful ignorance of the work that school divisions 
have been doing to find efficiencies and share services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not the first year that school boards across 
this province have experienced cuts. For the last three years that 
I was on the public school board, we had to come up with funds 
for shortfalls in funding. And every year, in our particular 
instance, we saw growth of about 400 students a year, the 
number of students that you would find in a large or two small 
elementary schools. And not once did our school board or other 
school boards experiencing growth get full compensation that 
they needed in order to provide timely service to those students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they continue to make decisions that make the 
work in classrooms even more difficult. The sharing of services 
that the minister suggests that they should undertake got a lot 
more difficult when this government this year decided to cut the 
funding to the RIC [regional intersectoral committee] programs. 
These 10 programs across the province, together the saving is 
about $1 million, or one-third of what they gave to 
SkipTheDishes.  
 
The RICs brought a broad-based group of different social 
service agencies together to work on a variety of issues, 
including work on poverty reduction, affordable housing, and 
early childhood development. Mr. Speaker, the work of the RIC 
was valuable to those communities that had the RIC program, 
and the impact, the positive impact was felt in the schools of 
that body to be able to share information and ideas and 
resources. And the cuts to that program will be felt across 
communities, but particularly in schools. When asked after the 
budget, a provincial government spokesperson said that the 
RICS weren’t totally funded by the province, and they hoped 
that a lot of the work that they did would be continued by 
another agencies. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure how often this government gets 
out and actually listens to what’s going on out there, but there 
are not a lot of agencies with the resources to pick up the 
important work done at these RIC tables. And that leads me to 

another point. This summer and fall, my colleagues and I have 
been around this province talking with people. And unlike the 
minister who’s been stopping in for photo ops, we’ve been 
listening, listening to the impacts that this government’s cuts 
are having on our children and in our schools and in our 
community. 
 
I spoke with parents of children who no longer receive the 
supports they need in the classroom. Their EAs [educational 
assistant] have been cut, something that they want and 
desperately deserve in order to get the most out of their 
education. I’ve heard about inner-city kindergarten classrooms 
where one teacher — one teacher — is responsible for almost 
50 students and no EA. This is one of the most disadvantaged 
neighbourhoods in the province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the minister tells me he has a list. Well I 
have a list. School cuts: Prairie Spirit, 14 teachers cut and 60 
educational assistants; Prairie South, 25 assistants. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Their choice. 
 
Ms. Beck: — The heckling is saying, it’s their choice. Mr. 
Speaker, the choice is this — where are you going to cut? It’s 
not a matter of gold-plated toilet paper in the executive 
washroom. We are making cuts that affect children on the front 
line, and suggest that this is simply a choice shows a profound 
ignorance of the situation. 
 
I will continue, Mr. Speaker: Prairie South, 25 school assistants, 
cuts to band programs and school counsellors. And if you think 
this is funny, you’re not paying attention. Mr. Speaker, 
Northern Lights School Division trimmed curriculum and 
extracurricular programs. Northwest School Division cutting 
five teaching positions. Saskatoon’s two major school divisions 
will have to dip into their operating budgets to find the money 
to pay for the teachers’ contract. Mr. Speaker, that is completely 
unprecedented in this province and frankly has sent a chill 
throughout the province, wondering can they trust this 
government to keep their word? 
 
Mr. Speaker, more cuts. Regions across the province will not 
hire new teachers to accommodate increases in enrolments. 
Saskatoon Public and Catholic board alone this year will see 
over 900 new students, and there will not be the adequate 
supports in place for those students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, schools exist in every corner of this province, and 
they serve children from every community. And while dealing 
with cuts to their own budgets, schools are not immune from 
the cuts elsewhere. When the economy is slow and 
unemployment is rising, those impacts show up in our schools. 
When we make cuts to social programs, to health care, the 
impacts of those cuts show up in our classrooms. If the family 
cannot adequately assess timely mental health care for 
themselves or for their child, that shows up in the school 
system. 
 
We’ve heard from families being repeatedly drawn away from 
work because their children are acting out in desperation as they 
await mental health care and supports. And schools are 
struggling to deal with the increased needs and numbers of 
students in so many classrooms. If parents can’t find enough 



October 20, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 777 

funds after paying stubbornly high rents to feed their children, 
that child shows up to school hungry. Yet we’re seeing these 
choices that are so easy for the members opposite. The choices 
are being cuts to lunch programs. And so teachers are paying 
out of pocket, and other professionals in schools, to ensure that 
kids have enough in their bellies so that they can actually learn. 
These are the choices that are so flippantly spoken about from 
members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this country has one of the highest rates of child 
poverty in the country, and we have one of the highest rates of 
food bank use. And, Mr. Speaker, it is absolutely shameful that 
the highest growth in that food bank use, even in the middle of 
the boom, was amongst seniors and students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the situation that members on this side of 
the House want to condemn. So all of this is going on in 
education, Mr. Speaker, and after an election which . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Someone opposite wants me to shut 
up, so I will with that read the motion and table it: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the government for failing 
students by neglecting to provide mid-year adjustments; 
failing to provide infrastructure . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Before the member completes her member’s 
statement, I believe it is unparliamentary language that was 
used. I would ask her to apologize and withdraw the comment. I 
recognize the member from Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — My apologies, Mr. Speaker. And I withdraw. 
 
If I may make the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the government for failing 
Saskatchewan students by neglecting to provide mid-year 
adjustments; failing to provide much needed infrastructure 
money; underfunding necessary student supports such as 
educational assistants, occupational therapists, and English 
as a second language programs; and for bargaining in bad 
faith by not funding the very contract that they negotiated. 
 

With that, I do so move. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Economy with a 
point of order. What is the nature of your point of order? 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank 
you for your intervention on the matter. I just want to make 
very clear that nobody on this side of the House said what the 
member opposite had said that we did, so I just want to make 
that very clear for the record. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, this is highly unusual in terms of 
the member opposite, after the member from Lakeview has 
already apologized in accordance with your direction, to come 
in and debate the Speaker’s ruling. It’s highly unusual, and I’d 

ask you to take that into consideration as you weigh these 
matters. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Appreciate both House leaders’ comments on 
this. I asked for the word that the member used; she apologized 
and withdrew. But the nature of her use of that word was that it 
was coming from across the aisle, and that was clearly not the 
case. The case was that she referred that she somehow had to be 
quiet because of comments coming from the other side. And 
during the time, it was quiet in the Chamber, and it was the 
conversation between her and her colleague that prompted her 
to end her comments early. 
 
So with that, we’ll carry on the 75-minute debate. Next member 
up will be someone from the government. I recognize the 
member from Lloydminster. 
 
[11:15] 
 
Ms. Young: — I’m going to begin by stating that I definitely 
will not and cannot support the motion just put forward by the 
member from Regina Lakeview. I think the member and her 
colleagues needed to do some more in-depth homework and 
facts checking before they decided to put forth such an 
erroneous motion. 
 
When the new funding model for school divisions was 
presented, discussed, and introduced to school boards in about 
2011, there was some concern about what impact it may have 
mid-year on their budgets and particularly in school divisions 
who were seeing student enrolment increases and students 
presenting with learning challenges. 
 
School boards at the time were told that supports for learning 
transition dollars would be provided mid-year if needed but that 
it was not a permanent solution going forward. Fact: mid-year 
funding was not only given in the 2012-13 school year but 
again in 2013-14 and again in 2014-15. 
 
Then in 2014-15, the ministry implemented a revised supports 
for learning funding calculation with a transition strategy that 
ensured no school division experienced a decrease in funding 
compared to the prior year. Well guess what? We have 
continued the transition strategy for 2016-17 but with some 
components that balance out the needs and challenges faced in 
some school divisions, particularly those with increased 
enrolment, vulnerability, and immigration data. 
 
Our supports for learning funding for 2016-17 has been 
increased from $286.5 million to $288 million. And we are also 
providing an additional 5.4 million to support Syrian refugees 
who require EAL [English as an additional language] 
instruction. And just a reminder to the Assembly, years in 
which the NDP gave mid-year funding adjustments? How about 
none. 
 
So over the past nine years we have responded to school 
divisions’ needs by increasing overall school division operating 
funding by 33 per cent. And I would surmise that the NDP 
didn’t have to worry too much about increasing education 
funding prior to 2007. As we all know, the economic 
environment they created in this province had people leaving 
and taking their children with them. And without students 



778 Saskatchewan Hansard October 20, 2016 

enrolled in our classrooms, they started closing schools — 176 
schools — and had us ranked eighth amongst our provinces in 
per-student funding. 
 
And since the Sask Party government took office we have 
consistently climbed the ladder, spending more each year per 
student in our schools to now be ranked by the Fraser Institute 
as number 1 amongst the provinces. Through this government’s 
renewed economic climate we have grown our population and 
welcomed back students into our schools. Along with this we 
have consistently increased school divisions’ operating grants 
and supports for learning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, but don’t just take my word for it. I would highly 
recommend that the member from Regina Lakeview read the 
September 2016 edition of the Fraser Institute Barbara Mitchell 
Centre for Improvement in Education bulletin highlighting 
Saskatchewan’s education spending. The centre provides 
well-researched information to Canadians regarding the state of 
K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] education, and focusing 
particularly on the change in per-student education spending in 
public schools across this country. And it repeatedly reports that 
Saskatchewan now has the highest, the highest per-student 
spending level in our schools. 
 
It states that Saskatchewan saw the largest increase from 2005 
to 2014, and that being an increase of 67.3 per cent. 
Saskatchewan recorded the largest difference among the 
province as well between the actual spending on public schools 
and what would have been required to account for price per 
student and enrolment changes. As a matter of fact, we spent 
712 million more on education than need be to account for 
inflation and enrolment changes over the same time period. 
 
You’d want to, you know, negate what the Fraser Institute is 
saying but here’s another interesting fact. The Fraser Institute 
also studied and provided on what public education would look 
like had the 2005 — under the NDP — per-student spending 
levels been maintained. If per-student funding in public schools 
had remained constant over this period, education funding today 
in Saskatchewan would be twenty-eight two per cent lower, 
lower than it would have been in 2005. 
 
So I am so glad this government is in charge of education. And 
it also validates the value, importance, and priority we have and 
continue to have and place on education in this province. 
 
Let me just talk for a minute about infrastructure funding in our 
school divisions. We didn’t lose students and close 176 schools. 
No way. Instead we chose to invest 1.4 billion — and that’s a 
billion with a capital “B” — dollars into our schools’ 
infrastructure needs since 2007. 
 
We’ve built 40 new schools and done 25 major renovations. 
And I have the list right here if the member opposite wants to 
look at the projects we’ve done. We also created the 
preventative maintenance and renewal program which allows 
for us to respond to maintenance issues more quickly. Our 
budget allocation for infrastructure has gone from 16.447 
million in 2014 to 33.385 million for this 2016-17 year. 
 
As compared to what, you may ask? Well in the NDP’s last 
year in government, they only provided 18 million in capital 

funding. And this year we are providing an additional 391 
million. 
 
So the member from Regina Lakeview also seems to believe 
that we are underfunding other necessary student support such 
as EAs, occupational therapists, and EAL teachers. Well, fact: 
our government, since taking office, has increased to 754 more 
regular teachers in our classrooms; 164 more EAs; 
psychologists are up 44 per cent; speech language pathologists 
are up 39 per cent; occupational therapists are up 64 per cent; 
and social workers are up 6 per cent. 
 
And in 2014 we heard loud and clear from teachers that the 
money previously earmarked for standardized testing software 
would be better spent in classrooms. So we reallocated that 4.6 
million directly back to support classrooms. Again that is why 
we are validated by the Fraser Institute and ranked as number 
one across provinces. 
 
I also want to remind the member from Regina Lakeview that 
school divisions have the legislative authority to determine 
staffing complements and classroom supports. Funding is 
provided and they determine where it goes. So based on the 
increased numbers I just gave for supports to the classrooms 
and increases to per-student funding year-over-year by this 
government, if students in this province are not receiving the 
supports they need, it can only be laid back on school boards 
not making appropriate decisions which are in the best interest 
of students. 
 
And insofar as the member’s comment about bargaining in bad 
faith and not funding the negotiated contract, as the Minister of 
Education has repeatedly stated again and again in this House, 
the teachers’ collective bargaining agreement will be fully 
honoured and teachers will be paid the amount that was 
negotiated. 
 
I will finish by saying the overall budget for education has 
increased from 944 million in 2007 to nearly 2.2 billion this 
year, an increase of 130 per cent, strongly validating our 
position that education funding continues to be a priority for the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, I will not and cannot support the 
motion put forward by the member from Regina Lakeview. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 
pleasure to enter the debate, the 75-minute debate on this 
motion. And I will fully and completely support this motion. I 
think it’s one that we have . . . very timely as we come back. 
 
And it is our priority. Education is a priority. It is the priority 
for our side here because of some of the concerning actions of 
this government. And I just want to just make a few comments 
on the earlier speech from the member from Lloydminster, who 
probably feels that oil was invented on November 8th, 2007. 
Potash was discovered for the first time on November 9th of 
2007. There was no economic activity in Saskatchewan at all. 
 



October 20, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 779 

I would suggest to the minister of Lloydminster she do her 
homework, she do her homework about the realities of what 
happened in Saskatchewan in the ’80s, the ’90s, and how we 
turned it around. I would tell her to do some history, take some 
history lessons in what happened in this province from the 
Conservatives who drove this province to a wreck — to a 
wreck. And they have the courage to stand up and pretend to 
quote from the Fraser Institute of 2014. I think she should 
withdraw all her comments, take a history lesson of what really 
happened in Saskatchewan. 
 
So this motion is most important, most important because of 
some of the things that she said. It’s very, very alarming. And I 
will include in my comments about what happened in 
Vancouver on Monday to the school boards in Vancouver. And 
I hope she’s paying attention to that. Because if she’s saying it’s 
the fault of the school boards that they can’t deliver and they 
shouldn’t advocate . . . Or is she implying that they should get 
fired like the Liberal government did in BC? Is that what she’s 
saying? Do your job or you’re going to get fired? I have a real 
problem with that. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, before I go too much further, I want 
to say that this is critical because this government is going to go 
through some transformational discussions with the school 
boards, and I think the school boards have a right to be a little 
alarmed, to be a little alarmed about the actions of this Minister 
of Education. She can talk about all the big numbers she wants 
to, but I’ve got to tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about some of 
the concerns that have been raised by parents. They’ve come to 
the legislature right here. They came here last May and they 
raised concerns about a program — a program that costs only 
$127,000, had been implemented since the ’90s, had seen and 
lived through some very tough times on both sides of the House 
but survived because we value our multiculturalism here in this 
province. 
 
But that government saw that as one of the first cuts it should 
make: to the kids who are taking lessons in their cultural 
language. But this government couldn’t find $127,000 but 
instead chose to fund SkipTheDishes. Three million for 
SkipTheDishes at 3 million, but 127,000 for heritage languages 
— no way. No way. That’s too much because this government 
is all of a sudden under pressure, couldn’t do its work, like 
release its first quarter report. That’s too much to do. When you 
talk about homework, that’s a commitment to the people of 
Saskatchewan. A basic report like that, couldn’t do it, couldn’t 
meet the obligations of that. 
 
But here, here we are talking about . . . It’s like that member 
and those members over there are from a different planet. And I 
wish they would come into the modern day. And then, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, as I’m speaking, the member did offer to table 
some documents. I hope she does table all the documents that 
she was referring to, the list of schools that they’ve built and the 
repairs that she’s done. So I would ask her to table that. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do want to say that there are some 
huge signals that cause alarm from the other side, so we think 
this is important. You know, neglecting to provide mid-year 
funding adjustments, failing to provide much needed 
infrastructure money, underfunding necessary student supports 
— educational assistants, occupational therapists, and English 

as a second language — and bargaining in bad faith by not 
funding their very contract they negotiated. 
 
[11:30] 
 
And I want to say on that point, that is really, really a critical 
issue, a critical issue because as we go forward . . . And we do 
understand that we are in challenging times, and all the people 
in this province understand that. It’s not just the government 
that’s living in challenging times. We all realize that we have to 
make some difficult choices. So when you do bargain and you 
bargain in good faith, it’s really critical that all parties to that 
contract live up to their part of the deal. And the part of the deal 
to the government was they would pay for the teachers’ salaries 
increase. And that’s really, really critical. 
 
And I ran into somebody, I just want to relate this story about 
running into somebody, a substitute teacher yesterday in the 
parking lot of a grocery store and talking about how bargaining 
is going for substitute teachers. And we saw what had happened 
in La Loche with the supply teacher that had been injured in the 
shooting in La Loche and what that meant because we’re all 
over the map when it comes to substitute teachers, when it 
comes to what they’re being paid in this province. 
 
So what is the signal here from this government in terms of how 
they’re going to look after all the segments of the people who 
are working in our education system such as substitute teachers, 
supply teachers, and in those schools where it’s hard to find 
teachers on a regular basis? So when you have a minister like 
that sending signals, yes, we’ll come to the table. We’ll bargain, 
but don’t count on us to live up to our end of the deal. That’s a 
dangerous, dangerous signal. 
 
So I know this is going to leave school boards in a really tough 
situation because they’re saying, what does it mean? What does 
it really mean to have the government there leading the 
discussions, but they’re not going to live up to their end of the 
deal? And does this mean, as I said earlier, that we could have a 
situation like we have in Vancouver, where they have members 
from the opposite side standing up and telling school boards to 
do their work, almost in a way that’s threatening. Do your work 
or you’re going to pay a penalty, and don’t advocate, don’t 
challenge this government because we see what’s happening 
across Canada. 
 
And I just want to quote a few articles on this because I think 
this is a dangerous signal that we have where we saw this 
government take away the right for school boards to raise taxes. 
And that was a pretty major development right after this 
government took power. And really . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . Yes, you know, you bought it, you own it. This is the issue 
that we have with this government. They want the control, but 
they don’t want to have the responsibility in our communities 
and our cities, our towns, our villages, where school boards are 
the face of the decision makers. 
 
And here we have a minister who cut heritage languages just 
like that, not a problem, $127,000. Others in that budget were 
winners. Others were losers, such as heritage language. Now 
that’s a problem if you’re a parent and you can have . . . You 
know, the thing with heritage language, if I can just say how 
important it is for school performance, and how it’s been shown 



780 Saskatchewan Hansard October 20, 2016 

a second language is a great indicator of further success. 
 
But you have a situation, as I said, and I just want to highlight 
this in terms of BC. But this is a cold, cold wind coming from 
the West, and a message that this government in the winter 
months uses as a way to start the discussion: hey, did you hear 
what happened in BC? This is just not on. 
 
I just want to quote the article here: 
 

“The people of Vancouver elected trustees to stand up for 
public education, not to do the provincial government’s 
dirty work of closing schools, cutting programs and selling 
off public assets to address a budget shortfall of their own 
making. The Vancouver school board is now being run out 
of Premier Christy Clark’s office,” Lombardi said at a 
news conference. 

 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if that’s what’s happening here in 
Saskatchewan, that the school boards are now being run out of 
the Premier’s office and Fraser Institute as a research document, 
I have some big, big concerns. 
 
There’s lots of issues. And I didn’t get a chance to talk about 
the WCB kickback that my colleague talked about. And then 
the clawback, the very clawback where these folks are looking 
for extra resources, this government takes it back. Mr. Speaker, 
I will be supporting this motion. Thank you very much. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would like 
to start by saying that I don’t think I could get as excited as the 
member from Saskatoon Centre started. I want to apologize for 
that, but I don’t think it would be good for me. I’m not sure it 
was good for him. 
 
When I read this motion . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, 
your blood pressure went just . . . [inaudible] . . . When I read 
this motion, the first thing I thought of, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
I thought of my young daughter. I thought of a moment when 
she was about six or seven years old, and I was down 
explaining things as I know it to her. And maybe there was 
some rambling and possibly some imagination going on in my 
story. And she looks at me and really, really serious — and she 
has the big blue eyes — and she looks at me and she says, Dad, 
what colour is the sky in your world? And for some reason 
that’s the first thought I had when I read this motion, is what 
colour is a sky in their world? 
 
And then I was talking to the member from Melville-Saltcoats, 
and he was telling me about a tour he had taken this summer. 
And he had gone to Ottawa, and he had toured a Cold War-era 
bunker. It was called the Diefenbunker, named after our 
illustrious prime minister from Saskatchewan, John George 
Diefenbaker. 
 
This bunker is four storeys high, 42 feet into the ground, took 
100 000 tonnes of concrete in this bunker. It was four storeys 
high. It was built in 1959. Surprisingly it was all built in 18 
months. Pretty impressive. It was able to withstand a 5-megaton 
nuclear blast from within a mile, 1.8 kilometres or miles — 
miles, I believe at that time. And it was built to be the house of 

government back during a nuclear war — a 100,000 square-foot 
building, 18 months, 100 000 tonnes of cement. This could 
house 535 people and had provisions for 30 days. This was 
finally taken out of useful activity sometime in the ’70s, and all 
communications were cut off to this in 1994. 
 
And I should have asked the member from Melville-Saltcoats if 
he happened to see the NDP caucus in that building when he 
was there. Because I’ve got this visual in my mind of this hatch 
being opened up and this little plate helmet kind of poking up 
and this little sheet of paper being handed out, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And when you opened this sheet of paper, this 
resolution was on it. Five hundred and thirty-five people could 
last there for 30 days. The NDP caucus could last there for 52 
months. 
 
Maybe they didn’t notice that the oil prices had taken a hit. 
Maybe they didn’t notice potash prices were down a little bit. 
Our ag industry, we’ve got a little too much snow in it. And 
then they wonder when people say that maybe their party is a 
little out of touch, like maybe they could be in that bunker for 
the last 52 months. 
 
You know, when I read this resolution what I look at is, I look 
at . . . You know, we neglected to add funding. We neglected to 
add infrastructure funding. We’ve added money, added money, 
added money. That’s what they want. These people have never 
seen a tax that they haven’t fallen in love with. 
 
That it’s just an incredible thing to at this time read . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, are you against that maybe? 
You’re against the government tax, and yet yesterday, yesterday 
the member from Nutana says we’ve got to tax our electrical. 
We’ve got to tax our oil. We’ve got to . . . Yesterday said that, 
and now they’re talking about that they’re not against taxes? 
You know, that no, let’s . . . If we can’t remember the last few 
years, at least let’s remember yesterday. 
 
You know, and what’s the answer to this? Because there are 
some needs in the system. Is the answer more money? So if we 
as a government — and I think the member from Lloydminster 
pointed this out — but if we as a government had raised it to 
cover the enrolment, if we had raised it to cover the cost of 
living going up, the dollars that would be missing out of this 
year’s budget is $718 million. That’s how much extra we 
increased it. 
 
So is an answer really more money, more money, more money? 
No, I think the answer is, let’s do things better. Let’s look at it. 
Let’s see if we can make some transformational changes where 
we can stop and we can look at doing the right thing for our 
students, equip our students with the ability to move on into 
post-secondary or the workforce. 
 
But yes, the answer isn’t just back up the truck and dump more 
money. You know, that may be what consultants in Ontario will 
tell you when you spend your money down there. That’s who 
was putting all the food in for that 52 months, was the 
consultants. That’s why it came to 72 per cent. 
 
But you know, you go through it and you go through what they 
said, mid-year adjustments. We added mid-year adjustments, 
and we did it for three years. This time, we took the funding at 



October 20, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 781 

the beginning of the year and built it in there. How many times? 
How many times? May I remind you, 718 million additional 
dollars in education? 
 
And you laugh because on your colour of sky, it just doesn’t 
matter. It must be green with all the money . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . What has this got to do with education? Yes, 
that’s a good point. What has this got to do with education? 
Because I was sitting there, and I was listening to the member 
from Lakeview, and you talk about infrastructure. And yet 
we’ve added money to infrastructure. We’ve added so much 
money. We’ve built 25 new schools. We have 40 major 
projects. You know, we have. I don’t know. You know, we’ve 
done, added more money to these things. As we continue along, 
we will continue to add more money to it. 
 
There’s false flags all over the place, a false flag about the 
union contract. When I sign a contract, it says to me that I get 
paid this much for this much that I’m doing. If I’m working 
next year and I have a contract, it says to me that’s what I get 
paid. And I think we have not heard any teachers saying that 
they’re not getting paid that amount. Like it is just a false flag 
up there. You know, the difference between . . . And I’m going 
to be against this resolution. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to join in 
on the 75-minute debate here today, and at the end of my 
remarks that I have an opportunity to share a little bit. And I 
think it’s important, you know, the comments that my 
colleagues have shared about, I guess, the frustration, some of 
the challenges. 
 
But before I get into some of those challenges, I think it’s 
important to share with the members here the positive things in 
education. Being a past board member within Northern Lights 
for eight years, the NORTEP board of governors for eight 
years, Gabriel Dumont Institute . . . And just some of the 
challenges and successes because there’s so many successes out 
there, and, you know, to watch a school division do the great 
work for the most precious, our children. There’s nothing more 
precious than our grandchildren and our children. And the 
school divisions and the one that I had an opportunity to be 
elected in by the people to represent them and, you know, to 
share and to work to make sure that we had a better quality 
education for our kids. 
 
[11:45] 
 
And I have to say that with the school division that I sat on, 
there was a lot of great work. Did we have our challenges and 
struggles? Yes, we did. There always is challenges and 
struggles, but there was lots of success. We had a team effort. 
We had staff. Whether you’re teaching, non-teaching, everyone 
came together, and they worked for the betterment of those 
students. 
 
But, you know, saying that and being a part of that and 
watching that whole process, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the 
challenges that we’re facing, yes sometimes you have the tough 
financial challenges. And school divisions did that. And I say 

this with the most respect, that those elected officials or elected 
people that represent the school divisions — being like I said, I 
was on Northern Lights — and elected by the people. 
 
It is an elected board. It’s not appointed. Government can’t 
control it. It’s elected by the people. And you know, when you 
think about that . . . And I see sometimes how important that is 
to have the opportunity to elect your representative to represent 
your community, your school district. And you know, I was 
lucky, along with a number other of my colleagues, to get 
elected and get elected three times to share and to work on 
behalf of the students.  
 
But having said that, I want to shift a little bit about the actual 
school programs and some of the great programs in northern 
Saskatchewan that went on. We talk about the culture, and we 
had unique situations. We had opportunities to share our 
culture, but not only with the First Nations, the Métis, our 
northern people. We had teachers who came from southern part 
of the province. They came from different places in Canada, 
and they came to the North to help teach, to get a . . . But they 
also received an education in that. And I heard many of them 
tell the stories, how beautiful they see the culture, the lifestyle. 
It’s a different lifestyle. It’s a different way.  
 
Those isolated communities have challenges. They do. There 
are challenges there. You have small schools, you know, 
one-room school with a teacher and trying to give all the 
resources. And I think about that because I think we have to 
give credit to those teachers that do the great work out there — 
our administrators, our support staff, you know, right through 
everyone that takes part whether it’s a parent council. There’s 
so many individuals and people that are committed to educating 
our children. Very challenging for, you know . . . And we see 
that. We see the challenges sometimes that students have. 
 
And I know my colleagues talked about making sure there’s 
lunch programs. There’s a breakfast program. There’s just the 
ways that you want to make sure that you help the students 
achieve that, that they get the best education they can. And you 
want to make sure that the graduation rates . . . And you know, I 
think about the graduation rates when it comes to Aboriginal 
people. And we have to do a better job.  
 
You know, my uncle was a principal, and he worked hard in the 
community that he was a principal, worked hard. And they got a 
lot of credit for the great job they did in the Duck Lake area, 
making sure that their students were achieving a graduation 
rate. It’s unreal to watch. But that was his commitment as an 
individual. And my aunts, my mom’s side of the family, there’s 
three of them were teachers. And I watched that how they did 
that and their dedication and commitment.  
 
But at the end of the day, I also watched the frustrations 
sometimes. And there has been some cuts that this government 
has imposed on many of the school divisions, many of the 
families that are struggling, a government that’s supposed to 
make sure that you get the best quality of education, that we 
have the best retention rates, we have the best graduation rates. 
Yes, we want to achieve that, and they need to achieve that, the 
government. But at the end of the day, you know, you talk 
about that.  
 



782 Saskatchewan Hansard October 20, 2016 

And the government likes to take photo ops. I’ll be honest, I 
watch where . . . They like to take photo ops and say it’s all 
going good out there. But there’s many challenges that school 
boards are being faced. And one of them was a huge one. And I 
know when this government took away the opportunities of the 
school divisions to generate some dollars with the mill rate to 
increase special projects that meant something, that were 
working well in communities, isolated communities. They had 
that ability to take a little bit of dollars from raising taxes and 
actually helping out some of the most vulnerable and some of 
those programs that needed to be taken care of. They had that 
ability. And as a school division, when I was there, we had that 
ability, and we had many discussions. You have to have a 
budget. You have to make sure you’re doing your best. But you 
have to make sure you’re honouring the children that were 
supposed to be getting this education. 
 
I think about one group and that group that was here yesterday. 
The NORTEP-NORPAC [northern teacher education 
program-Northern Professional Access College] students’ 
association were here along with one of their staff. And again 
the frustration that I see and the success of the NORTEP 
program — 94 per cent of the NORTEP grads that graduate stay 
in the North, and they go back. And it’s about the culture. And 
they go back into these communities. And the retention rate, the 
retention rate of keeping a teacher who knows the students in 
the community, who knows the culture, who has a better 
understanding. Not that someone can’t come from the South 
and learn the culture and work. There’s amazing . . . I’ve seen 
amazing work done by individuals. 
 
But this government has areas where they have wasted so much 
money. When I think of SkipTheDishes, when I think of the 
GTH land deal, those type of situations that our Saskatchewan 
people are starting to see, and it’s going to unfold. And then we 
see the waste of this government. They’ve had years of record 
revenue. They saved nothing to help times when times get 
rough. They could have saved a little bit but no, they spent it 
all.  
 
Now they want us to believe that you had your priorities; you 
had your opportunities. And the good people of our province 
gave you that. You had three terms. And they said, please take 
care of the finance. Take care of our province, not just parts of 
the province, all of the province. You govern all. When we do 
that and we have to do that . . . 
 
So when I see all the cuts that are going on, and I see what this 
government wasted, so much of our taxpayers’ dollars and our 
good income that came into the province. And it’s the people of 
this province that have earned those dollars. It’s the people of 
this province that do the good work. You have inherited so 
much. You inherited, as a government, so much, but you have 
wasted so much. And I hope . . .  
 
And I’ve talked to teachers who’ve approached me. And they’re 
teachers who supported your government, voted for you, said 
never again will I vote for them. And I don’t go up and talk. 
They’re approaching me, and they’re very frustrated. They can’t 
believe what you have walked away from. Negotiated an 
agreement with them, and then you walked away. When you 
have the majority of those committee members that work on the 
bargaining committee . . . You appoint five of them, I believe it 

is, and there’s four from Saskatchewan school boards.  
 
But you have such an opportunity to make better education. But 
you know what, Mr. Speaker? They had such an opportunity, 
but you know what we see now is a waste of the money, the 
good dollars that are there. And now they’re asking the school 
divisions, and they’re asking the most vulnerable, the most 
vulnerable — the students, the teachers — to pay a price for 
their mismanagement. It is wrong; it’s unacceptable. And you 
know they just kind of think like, you know, well it’s . . .  
 
And you know, I think about one of my colleagues talking 
about the workmen compensation and the money that came 
back to employers. You pay a certain fee and they’re getting 
those dollars back, and they get them back. And to go after the 
school divisions, and I think it’s also Health is getting . . . And 
they pull those dollars. The minister and you individuals, those 
dollars could have been used. The members opposite . . . Those 
dollars could have been used for some great things to enhance 
some of the programs that our students . . . We see the most 
vulnerable and I say this, the most vulnerable, whether it’s 
NORTEP, whether it’s teacher aides, you know, those that work 
in the classroom, work with kids with disabilities and the 
challenges that those teachers are facing, the class size. 
Everything. Listen to the teachers. You guys have to be hearing 
what’s going on. You can’t tell me you sit here, and you are not 
hearing what’s going on, or they’re not.  
 
But I will be, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting this motion. 
And again I just want to say this is a good motion, and it puts 
light on what’s going on. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Campeau: — Mr. Speaker, it is my honour to rise and 
participate in this debate. I will also apologize because I’m 
going to be a little calmer than the members opposite. 
 
It is debates such as this that gives the members opposite and 
the members on this side of the House an opportunity to 
compare records.  
 
I would like to add a title to my remarks this morning and name 
it 176 schools. Mr. Speaker, I am calling these remarks 176 
schools because I think the members opposite need to be 
reminded of the exact number of schools that were closed under 
their watch. The member from Lakeview calls this rhetoric, but 
this information is relevant. 
 
Now there’s been a trend in the last few years with the current 
members opposite who like to distance themselves from the 
decisions of the NDP government of the past even though there 
are members who are still sitting across who have been part of 
the past government and with a few who even sat in cabinet.  
 
Mr. Speaker, members of this Assembly who have been part of 
the previous government when decisions were made such as 
closing 176 schools. Others have said, oh wait, that wasn’t me, I 
wasn’t around when this happened or decisions were made or I 
was in high school and actively distancing themselves while 
sitting next to members who were around in the previous 
government. Or that isn’t relevant; it happened so many years 



October 20, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 783 

ago. Well, Mr. Speaker, it is relevant. It’s part of their record 
and they must own it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk about capital and how important it 
is to invest in capital when it comes to investing in the 
educations of our children. Our government has invested nearly 
1.4 billion in capital since 2007 and ’08, built 40 new schools, 
25 major renovations, created the preventative maintenance 
renewal, and created emergent funding. 
 
The NDP record is they provided only $18 million in capital in 
their last year, 2007, and closed 176 schools. They also did not 
have preventative maintenance renewal or emergent funding. 
Let me say that again. They closed 176 schools. 
 
I would like to read into the record the 40 new schools and 
included in that number is the 18 joint-use schools. The member 
from Saskatoon Centre asked for this information and I’m going 
to read it off. 
 
Forty new schools: Humboldt Collegiate Institute, which was 
16.9 million; Oxbow prairie heights school, 17.8 million; Scott 
Collegiate, Regina, 31 million; École St. Anne, which is in 
Prince Albert, 14.7 million; Porcupine Plain Composite High 
School, 15.6 million; St. Mary community school in Saskatoon, 
15.8 million; Douglas Park School which is in Regina, 19.9 
million; Arcola School in Regina, 17.8 million; birch ridge 
school which is 4.2 million; Seven Stones . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Wait, just wait, wait. Let me finish. 
 
Seven Stones school, Regina . . . David, you . . . Sorry . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . You had a chance to talk. 
 
Seven Stones school, Regina, 20.5 million; Holy Family School 
which is in Saskatoon, 17.9 million; Willowgrove School which 
is in Saskatoon, 20.4 million; Warman Middle Years School, 
29.2 million; École St. Thomas which is in Lloydminster, 8.8 
million; All Saints Catholic School which is in Swift Current, 
25.2 million; École Centennial School in Swift Current, 26.1 
million; Emerald Ridge Elementary School in White City, 22 
million; College Park elementary which is in Lloydminster, 
11.5 million; Hudson Bay Community School, 27 million; 
Langenburg school, 23.5 million; École Connaught Community 
School in Regina, 21 million; Sacred Heart Community School 
in Regina, which is estimated 27 million. 
 
So there’s also 18 joint-use schools which are opening in the 
fall 2017 which add up to 635 million. Holy Mary which is in 
Martensville, public school in Martensville; Holy Trinity which 
is in Warman, public school, Warman; St. Nicholas, Evergreen, 
Saskatoon; St. Lorenzo Ruiz, Hampton Village, Saskatoon; St. 
Thérèse of Lisieux, Rosewood, Saskatoon; St. Kateri 
Tekakwitha, Saskatoon Stonebridge school; St. Elizabeth’s, 
Greens on Gardiner, Regina; St. Kateri Tekakwitha which is in 
Regina, Harbour Landing which is in Regina; St. Nicholas, 
Coopertown, Regina . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I listened to 
you when you spoke, so you give me a chance. 
 
So the arrogance of members opposite who gleefully state in 
their motion that “failing Saskatchewan students by neglecting 
to provide mid-year funding.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the mid-year funding adjustment was never 

designed to be a permanent solution. We gave enrolment 
increases in years where we could and this year we projected 
what enrolment numbers for each school division will be in 
September and have funded accordingly. 
 
[12:00] 
 
Years in which we gave a mid-year adjustment is 2012 to ’13; 
2013 to ’14; and 2014 to ’15. And years in which the NDP gave 
a mid-year adjustment, none. Let me say that again because I’m 
not sure the members heard the first few times. You closed 176 
schools. 
 
“Failing to provide much-needed infrastructure.” We have built 
40 new schools and 25 major renovations at a cost of 
approximately 1.4 billion. And I’m repeating that again because 
they don’t seem to listen. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, you know sometimes . . . I’m a little older now 
and I’m at an age where I forget things, little things, not 
remembering where I put my keys. And some of my friends 
who are around the same age and the gender experience the 
same thing, especially if we have several things on the go. 
Sometimes walking into the kitchen and then forgetting what I 
went in there for. I did some reading, and it’s quite common. It 
affects more short-term memory than long-term and it’s 
temporary. Comes in little short bursts and noticeable when 
looking for my keys and already late or already in my truck and 
can’t remember if I turned off the straightening iron. 
 
But I find it hard to believe that all the members opposite would 
experience the same phenomenon — collective amnesia. I know 
it’s happened somewhere in the world but I find it hard to 
believe that it’s happened in here. It’s gotten so that sometimes 
I’ll write myself a little note where I put my keys and would be 
happy to do that for the members opposite and so that they 
would remember it was that NDP government who closed 176 
schools. So back to the motion, I do not support the motion. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions? I recognize . . . Oh, may I ask why 
the member from North Battleford is on his feet? 
 
Mr. Cox: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Okay. I recognize the member. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The last time the NDP 
was in power in Saskatchewan — and perhaps it will be the last 
time, Mr. Speaker — their idea of making improvements in 
education infrastructure was boarding up windows and locking 
the doors on 176 schools. 
 
Our government has taken a different approach. We’ve invested 
nearly $1.4 billion in education infrastructure, funding major 
renovations for 25 existing schools, and the construction of 40 
new. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the member from Regina 
Lakeview. Will you agree that our approach of building and 
renovating schools is far better than the NDP’s approach of 
closing 176 schools? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 



784 Saskatchewan Hansard October 20, 2016 

Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member opposite for his 
question. No, I will not agree, is the short answer to that 
question. And there you go, an actual direct answer to a 
question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is definitely a deficit in infrastructure 
spending within the school sector in this province. I think we’re 
now up to about a tune of $1.5 billion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I happened to sit at the table of the Regina Public 
School Board at a time when the P3 [public-private partnership] 
schools were being negotiated. Now there’s very little that 
anyone can say about that process but let me tell you, it did not 
in any way give me any confidence in that process. And I think 
it’s an inefficient, short-sighted way to build schools. 
 
Yes, we needed those schools; that is for sure. But it is solving a 
problem to which . . . it doesn’t exist. The stated goal was to 
have them on time and on budget. Guess what? We already 
build our schools the traditional way on time and on budget. 
Look at École Connaught. It is a short-term way to build 
schools that costs long term more money. And no, I do not 
agree with the member opposite. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — We keep hearing about the Sask Party’s 
choices when it comes to helping out their friends who own 
land surrounding the GTH, but they’re not making choices that 
benefit our kids in the classroom. This government helped 
negotiate a deal, a deal with the teachers. This government 
approved a 1.9 per cent increase. The minister himself admitted 
that the point five per cent the boards received is “less than 
what that upward pressure should be.” Mr. Speaker, he outright 
admitted to shortchanging school boards, teachers, our kids 
with this budget. To the member from Melfort: since it was 
clearly known that education was getting shortchanged, how did 
this government still manage to claim that they were setting up 
our kids for success? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you for the 
question. I want to note that the teachers’ collective bargaining 
agreement will be fully honoured and teachers will be paid the 
amount that was negotiated. Plain and simple, that’s the answer. 
Now something we don’t talk about in 176 schools being closed 
— I wonder, Mr. Speaker, how many teachers were in those 
schools that were under contract, that thought they had 
employment for the next five, three, ten years, that were just 
fired, let go? And that’s the forgotten people. So thank you for 
the question. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As was noted in the 
recent Fraser Institute report titled Education Spending and 
Public Student Enrolment in Canada, Saskatchewan had the 
largest increase of per-student spending in all of Canada. In 
public schools, per-student spending went from 8,702 in 

2004-05 to 14,562 in 2013-14. That’s an increase, an increase 
of 67.3 per cent, yet the members opposite stand in this House 
and accuse our government of failing students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the member from Regina 
Lakeview: how can you say that our government is failing 
students when Saskatchewan spends the most per student in all 
of Canada? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, the answer to that question is very 
clear. I will believe every day in this province what I hear from 
parents and teachers and school boards over the Fraser Institute. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, this government has a habit of 
breaking promises when it comes to education. To the member 
from Saskatoon Fairview: why did this government make a 
five-year commitment to NORTEP, only to go back on their 
promise and cancel the funding? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Campeau: — Thank you for the question. This gives me 
the opportunity to highlight that according to the Fraser Institute 
2016 edition, Education Spending and Public Student 
Enrolment, Saskatchewan saw the largest increase in 
per-student spending in public schools after adjusting for 
inflation. That province experienced a 39 per cent increase from 
10,476 in 2004 and ’05 to 14,562 in 2013-14. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I find it ironic that 
the members opposite would be so critical of our government’s 
consistent, consistent increases in education funding. When 
members opposite were in power, education funding in the 
province for two consecutive years was cut in education, and 
the third year they didn’t increase the budget at all. 
 
Our government has made record investments in teachers and 
education infrastructure, while the NDP record closed 176 
schools and took teachers for granted. And yet the member 
from Regina Lakeview says education is under threat under this 
government. Totally wrong. Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
member from Regina Lakeview: how can you stand in this 
Assembly and be critical of our government’s increases in 
funding when the NDP record is one of education cuts and 
school closures, 176 school closures? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite asks me how I 
can stand in this Assembly, and you know what? I stand on firm 
ground. You know why? Because I get out into the community 
and I talk to people in those communities. And I bring their 
voice here, and that is what they are telling me. 



October 20, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 785 

Mr. Speaker, I have three children at home. When they tell me 
that they did something but someone else did it before or 
someone else might have done something worse, you know 
what I tell them? Take responsibility for what you’re 
responsible for. And I wish the members opposite would do 
that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is a timely 
debate in terms of what’s happening in education in this 
province because just yesterday, though the minister said 
otherwise, we saw a delegation come down from La Ronge 
talking about their concern for the future of NORTEP and 
NORPAC. And this is an institution that is very valuable in 
terms of the education that is provided in the province but 
certainly for the North where it is desperately needed, Mr. 
Speaker, and moreover where that program has been very 
successful. 
 
NORTEP-NORPAC came in for mention from the government 
when they tabled their response to the TRC [Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission] as something that was meeting the 
efforts that they should be undertaking. But of course they’d 
signed the contract, Mr. Speaker, for five years and then 
reneged on their signature for the remaining four. So I want to 
ask the member from Saskatoon Fairview: how is that in any 
way defensible? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the 
member opposite for the question. This gives me an opportunity 
once again to highlight that according to the Fraser Institute 
2016 edition, Education Spending and Public Student 
Enrolment, Saskatchewan saw the largest increase in 
per-student spending in public schools after adjusting for 
inflation. That province experienced a 39 per cent increase from 
10,476 to 2004-05 to 14,562 in 2013-14. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our 
government has made significant investments in building and 
upgrading our province’s schools. We have built or are in the 
process of building 40 new or replacement schools — for 
example, a major addition in Cumberland of 34 million.  
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the member from Cumberland: 
how could you, how could you vote against a budget that 
provided funding to Churchill Community High School in your 
constituency and then say that our government isn’t providing 
infrastructure money to this wonderful province? 
 
The Speaker: — Time is expired. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 1 — Provision of Medical Imaging Services 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Mr. Olauson.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I’m 
happy to be back here to continue our debate on MRIs 
[magnetic resonance imaging]. I’ll just read into the record the 
motion that was put forward right before we broke last session: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the NDP for their 
ideologically based attacks against privately provided MRI 
and CT scans for Saskatchewan residents, an initiative that 
provides better choice for patients and expands the 
capacity of the public system at no extra cost to taxpayers. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to join in this debate again, and 
there’s a few comments I’d like to get on the record. And we 
have some new numbers about what the private MRIs have 
done over the past couple of months since we had taken a break. 
And since private-pay magnetic resonance imaging MRI 
services began in February 2016, more than 1,800 patients are 
benefiting from a private MRI scan at no cost to the public 
health system. This volume equals an additional MRI machine 
operating five hours per day, 7 days a week at a total cost that 
would be close to $1 million if the scans had been billed to the 
public system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think some of these numbers actually speak for 
themselves. And I know that the NDP has problems with 
private clinics, but it’s helped 1,800 people since February 29th 
2016, Mr. Speaker. And I think when it comes to some of the 
decisions that we make as a government, some of the most 
important decisions we have to make is what will best serve the 
people of our province. And I believe moving forward on some 
of these private MRIs, private CT scans that we committed to in 
the election . . . And I’ll just bring up that we committed to CT 
scans in the election, and you know on April 4th what the 
results were. 
 
So our commitment on the election campaign was, a 
Saskatchewan Party government will amend the province’s 
health facilities licensing Act to allow individuals to pay for CT 
scans using the two-for-one mode now in place for MRI scans. 
Under this model, for every scan paid for privately, the clinic 
must provide one scan at no charge to a patient on the public 
list, thereby reducing the public wait list. This is the same 
model charged to the Saskatchewan Roughriders, and they pay 
up for a private MRI as well as WCB, Mr. Speaker. For the 
period September 1st to November 30th 2015, the average wait 
time for patients to receive a non-emergency CT scan in 
Saskatchewan was 26.5 days. 
 
[12:15] 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this motion is about trying to provide the best 
care for the people of the province, for patients that need to get 
access to timely health care. And I think when we joined this 



786 Saskatchewan Hansard October 20, 2016 

debate, I believe that the members opposite didn’t have the 
newest numbers that we now have as of . . . well this release 
actually is as of Oct 20th, 2016, so it’s today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’m thinking that they might want to change their position 
on this policy, Mr. Speaker. I think the members opposite, 
they’re good people; I think they want to provide some service 
to the people of the province. And I believe that they will see 
that this decision that was made by our government last term, in 
the promise that we made, the commitment we made when we 
campaigned to provide better health care, I think they might 
agree that this is working. 
 
I know it’s something that is much different from their 
ideology, but I think for once they’re going to put ideology in 
the back seat and care more about patients first, care more about 
people that are waiting to get a CT scan to know what their 
health situation is. And I was going to talk about a few friends 
of mine that have used some of these scans, but I actually came 
across a letter to the editors on November the 4th, “MRI reality 
must trump ideology.” And this is from the Leader-Post, Mr. 
Speaker, and it says: 
 

My wife recently had an MRI done at Mayfair Diagnostics 
in Regina. She was referred there by the Regina 
Qu’Appelle Health Region. The service was outstanding, 
especially by technician Kevin. When informed that my 
wife has shotgun pellets in her body, he researched her 
records to be sure that the MRI would be safe. The next 
time we need an MRI we won’t be waiting 11 months.  

 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a couple more, and these are from people 
that have used the new MRI’s and CT scans in the province. 
And from another letter was: 
 

I was diagnosed with blood cancer, which spread to my 
spine, causing paralysis from the chest down. 
 
My doctor asked if I would pay for an MRI in Calgary. It 
was done in three days and showed five tumours on my 
back. 
 
If I had not gone to Calgary, I would not be here today. 
 
I am not one of those rich friends of the government who 
has lots of money to jump to the top of the line using a 
credit card — as CUPE’s ads imply. 
 
What is wrong with private clinics if . . . [it saves lives]? 
 
Private MRIs will create jobs here and put money into our 
economy. This would provide more opportunities to keep 
our children in our province. 
 
Why not make Saskatchewan a leader in health care 
instead of a follower? 
 
Incidentally, I spent three months in the Royal University 
Hospital in Saskatoon for cancer treatment and a week in 
Swift Current Hospital for a bladder infection. 
 
The food in RUH was gourmet compared with that in Swift 
Current [sorry] — which I’m told is trucked in from 

Regina. It was horrible. 
 

I must say the staff of both hospitals are amazing.  
 
To Premier Wall, I say this: Your government needs to use 
some common sense on simple things like hospital food. 
 
To the brains at CUPE, stop playing politics with the lives 
of me and my fellow citizens. 

 
And these are from people across the province that have used 
the system to their advantage, Mr. Speaker. And I think when 
people come out and say how much they’ve benefited from our 
policies, our change in policies from what used to be done by 
the former government, and being able to talk with people and 
see the benefits they and their friends and their family has had, I 
think it really goes to the heart of what we think about health 
care on this side of the House, is we need to put patients first. 
We need to try new and innovative ideas so that people can get 
better health care, safer, faster. 
 
And I believe that goes to the heart of this motion brought 
forward by the member from Saskatoon University last session. 
In last session we didn’t have some of the number that we do 
now, and I’m going to say that I think these are numbers that 
show that our direction in health care is showing that we are on 
the right track. We know that there’s a lot more work to do, a 
lot more work to do in the health care sector, and I think we 
have . . . The minister is going to take a big bite out of that. I 
know he’s enjoying his time. 
 
And I think the former minister of Health is enjoying his time 
with Energy and Resources now. And he did a fantastic job for 
four years, and some of these were piloted under his leadership. 
And the numbers work out, Mr. Speaker. The numbers show 
that being able to make some different choices in health care 
and being innovative leaders, like the statement said in the letter 
to the editor in the Leader-Post, why can’t we be leaders in 
health care? We have for many, many years chosen some 
different routes in health care and been able to lead. And I think 
we can do that once again. Saskatchewan can be a leader once 
again in Canada. 
 
And a couple more letters to the editor I would like to read 
before wrapping up my statements. “MRI reality must trump 
ideology.” And this is an article: 

 
Dr. Sally Mahood stated that Saskatchewan has a system in 
which health regions prioritize the need for MRIs. This 
sounds great in a quote. 
 
What Dr. Mahood did not mention is that all physicians in 
Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region (RQHR) were recently 
sent a memorandum from the radiologist head of the MRI 
section indicating that the RQHR MRI department is 
unable to meet target deadlines established by the Ministry 
of Health by . . . [urgent] classification. 
 
The wait time for arthrogram investigations is currently up 
to one year. Elective MRI scans currently take up to five 
months for most examinations. 
 
It’s all very well for Dr. Mahood to speak from an 



October 20, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 787 

ideological point of view supporting the current system. 
Full disclosure of the current facts show that the system is 
not working. The Workers Compensation Board of 
Saskatchewan certainly knows this. The WCB pays for 
private scans to get ahead of the usual wait times. 
 

So I think: 
 
As a family physician, I have seen an increase over the past 
few years in the number of patients heading out of country 
to get the treatment they need. 
 
We need to move beyond ideology and deal with the facts. 

 
And that was a letter submitted by Dr. John Morris. And I think 
that’s the most important comment that we can make, is we 
need to move away from ideology to a fact-based discussion 
and talk about how people are getting health care sooner, faster, 
safer, with some of the new improvements that have gone on 
over the past couple of years in the health care sector. 
 
I, for one, am always going to be a voice for the people. I have 
friends in the Walsh Acres area and a couple older gentlemen I 
play hockey with that have had to get MRIs because they have 
hurt knees because they are getting older so . . . And they said 
they’ve had fantastic . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — What are you saying about getting older, 
bad knees? 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Sorry, sorry, Deputy, sorry, Whip. But I just 
want to . . . I’ll end with saying I think we’re going to need to 
bring forward some more innovative ideas in the health sector 
to ensure that people are getting the care they need. And I’ll 
support our current Health minister in any endeavour to do that, 
because getting people the timely care they need is the most 
important, and it’s what’s most important to this side of the 
government. And we’ll put patient care over ideology every 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, I’d like to 
thank the Regina Walsh Acres minister — or MLA [Member of 
the Legislative Assembly], sorry — for all his wisdom and 
thoughts. And I just . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, well 
some wisdom. Anyway, MRIs and CT scans are very important, 
and I think if we can get people to support this and get health 
care quicker, I would be very much in favour of it. 
 
There’s a lot more I’d like to say about the motion, and in the 
coming weeks when the motion comes back I’d like to be able 
to speak on it. But right now I’d like to move to adjourn the 
debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Canora-Pelly has moved 
that this Assembly do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
Sorry. The member from Canora-Pelly — I got a little anxious 
here, being the first week — has moved adjournment on debate. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Deputy House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that this Assembly do now 
adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly now stands adjourned 
until Monday at 1:30. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:24.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 765 
  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 765 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 765 
  Eyre ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 765 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 765 
  Beaudry-Mellor ......................................................................................................................................................................... 765 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 765 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................... 766 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 766 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................... 766 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 766 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 766 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 767 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 767 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 767 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 767 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 768 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership Exporter of the Year Award 
  Bonk ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 768 
 2016 Queen City Marathon 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 768 
 Remembering Terry Hincks 
  Steinley ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 768 
 Foster Parent Appreciation Week 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 769 
 Saskatchewan Businessman Wins Entrepreneurial Award 
  Makowsky.................................................................................................................................................................................. 769 
 National Foster Family Week 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................... 769 
 New Democratic Party Convention 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................... 769 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Role of Global Transportation Hub in Land Acquisitions 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 770 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 770 
  Harrison ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 770 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 771 
  Doherty ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 772 
 Release of Pipeline Inspection Reports 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 772 
  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 772 
 Status of SaskTel 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 773 
  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 773 
 Funding for Education 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 773 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 773 
 Funding for Health Care 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 774 
  Reiter ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 774 
POINT OF ORDER 
  Merriman .................................................................................................................................................................................. 774 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 774 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 775 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Education Funding 
  Beck .................................................................................................................................................................................... 775, 784 
  Harrison (point of order) ......................................................................................................................................................... 777 



 

  McCall (point of order) ............................................................................................................................................................ 777 
  The Speaker (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................... 777 
  Young ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 777 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 778 
  Phillips ............................................................................................................................................................................... 780, 784 
  Vermette ............................................................................................................................................................................ 781, 784 
  Campeau ............................................................................................................................................................................ 782, 784 
  Cox ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 783 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 784 
  Kirsch ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 784 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 784 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 785 
  Wilson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 785 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 1 — Provision of Medical Imaging Services 
  Steinley ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 785 
  Dennis ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 787 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


