






















































Hansard: June 22, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 21A  WEDNESDAY, JUNE 22, 2016, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Hon. Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Hon. Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Merriman, Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 51; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Maurice Riou http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 619 
 June 22, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
wish to request leave to make an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to you and through you, I would like to take this opportunity to 
recognize some of Saskatchewan’s longest serving volunteer 
crop reporters. From seeding to harvest, crop reporters provide 
valuable information that many rely on locally and 
internationally. Having accurate and timely crop reports 
available each week allows international traders to better predict 
market trends. Local producers are able to plan and evaluate 
each crop season to make the best business decisions. 
 
The volunteer crop reporters that are here today have served 
from 25 to a remarkable 40 years in the field, providing 
valuable updates on agricultural progress in Saskatchewan. I 
want to recognize and thank each of the volunteer crop reporters 
here today. I ask that each volunteer crop reporter and their 
spouse give a wave as I announce their names. 
 
The 25-year recipients are Kay and spouse, Ray Berry, RM 
[rural municipality] Battle River; Paul and spouse, Teresa 
Heglund, RM Reno; Ken and spouse, Lorrene Johnson, RM 
Prairiedale; Leslie Sarauer and his spouse, Deborah 
Bryson-Sarauer, RM of St. Peter; Einar and Barb Thompson, 
RM of McKillop; David and spouse, Linda Bettschen, RM of 
Wolseley; Lyle and spouse, Linda Ehrman, RM of happy dale 
. . . Happyland, that is. I don’t want to make it sound any 
happier than it really is. Don and spouse, Charlotte Payak, RM 
of Weyburn. 
 
And the 40-year recipients are Mike Shawaga and daughter, 
Evelyn Thomas, RM of Fish Creek; Thressa Whitfield and her 
son, Darwin Whitfield, and spouse, Michelle Whitfield, RM of 
Oakdale. I’d also like to congratulate those who could not join 
us here today: celebrating 25 years, Bill Mescall, RM of 
Marriott; Linda Osmachenko, RM of Eagle Creek; and 
celebrating 40 years, William Bindig, RM of Sasman. 
 
I now ask that all members join me in thanking those volunteer 
crop reporters for their service and dedication to agriculture and 
to Saskatchewan, and to welcome them to their legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And to you and 
through you and on behalf of the official opposition, I’d like to 
take a minute to also welcome these volunteers to their 
Legislative Assembly.  
 
Forty years is a very long time, and it’s a huge commitment. 
And I think, without that kind of dedication and volunteerism 
and commitment to keeping those records going . . . My aunt 
used to always write them on her calendar. She had her 
calendar, you know. So these records are invaluable. They’re 
local; they’re grassroots records. But they are really important 
and, as the minister indicated, they do contribute greatly to the 
business of agriculture, so it’s very important work. So on 
behalf of the official opposition, congratulations. Thank you, 
and welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, I’d like to join with the minister and the member on this 
side to welcome all you folks, all you volunteers. 
 
But I want to give a special introduction to my uncle, Leslie 
Sarauer, who is here. I couldn’t think of someone more 
deserving of recognition. He farms the family farm, Mr. 
Speaker, in Lake Lenore with his son, Ken, who I had the 
opportunity to introduce to the House last week actually. On top 
of that he’s involved in several boards including one on 
conservation and development, and he’s also on the board for 
the CMT grain terminal near Naicam. And if I missed anything 
or got anything wrong, I got my intel from dad, so please blame 
him. 
 
Accompanying him is my aunt, Deborah Bryson-Sarauer, who 
is here as well and very accomplished in her own right. She’s 
got a very impressive CV [curriculum vitae], Mr. Speaker. 
She’s got a master’s of social work. She was the dean of St. 
Peter’s College. She was a mental health counsellor at the 
Saskatoon Health Region. She’s a lecturer at the University of 
Regina, and she’s formerly the executive director at Family 
Service Saskatoon. I’m so pleased to have both of them here, 
and I’d ask all members join me in welcoming them to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the rest of the Assembly, I am pleased to 
introduce 25 public servant employees seated in your gallery. 
They’re part of the parliamentary program for the public 
service. They have quite a full day in the legislature, in and 
around and meeting with yourself as well as myself and the 
opposition, a number of other meetings, Mr. Speaker. They are 
here from various ministries such as Agriculture, Education, 
Finance, Health, Highways, Justice, the Public Service 
Commission, Social Services, a number of ministries, Mr. 
Speaker. And I look forward to answering some of their 
questions at about 3 o’clock. I’d like everybody to welcome 
them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 



620 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 2016 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d just 
like to join with the minister on behalf of the official opposition 
as the critic for Public Service to welcome these public servants 
to their Legislative Assembly. And certainly the public servants 
that take the keen interest that these folks are demonstrating to 
gain that better understanding of how the parliamentary side of 
this public policy process works is to be commended. 
 
And certainly as an example of just how busy things are in the 
life of the session these days, I won’t be able to join with them, 
but certainly the Deputy Leader of the Official Opposition will 
be fulfilling that duty for our side, as I’m off in estimates, Mr. 
Speaker. But certainly they’ll probably have a better time with 
him anyway. But again I join with the minister in welcoming 
these important public servants to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, I’d like to introduce a massive group of students 
from L.M. Hanna School, Mr. Speaker, sitting in the west 
gallery. Give everybody a wave. Mr. Speaker, accompanying 
this group of grade 3 and 4 students is Ms. Corina Wesdyk, Ms. 
Dina Lazurko, and parent chaperones are Shawna Aufner, Amy 
Jeannotte, Sandra Truckair, Pam Guest. 
 
And I will have an opportunity to get stumped again by their 
questions and will enjoy a juice box. But that will be coming up 
later, Mr. Speaker. I ask all members to help welcome this 
group to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join the 
minister in welcoming the group from Hanna School to their 
Legislative Assembly and welcome all of the parents and 
chaperones.  
 
But I do want to single someone out. I see Pam Guest is here 
with us today. Pam has been a tireless crusader and advocate for 
the rights of children and around the prevention of sexual child 
abuse of children. She has been an advocate for the 
implementation of Erin’s law, which would require jurisdictions 
to provide sexual abuse prevention training to students through 
the K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] education. Certainly a 
worthwhile cause, and I look forward to working with her and 
members of this Assembly to bring this important cause to light. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to introduce to you and through you to all the members 
of the House, Katelyn Duncan. Katelyn, please stand up and 
wave and be acknowledged. 
 
Katelyn is a leader in her own community. She is employed 
within the Ministry of Agriculture, but Katelyn, her brother and 
her sister farm just south of the city. Katelyn is one of these 
young leaders in our community. She’s one to watch. I’m so 

proud to be able to call her my friend. 
 
And I think that . . . One day I’m hoping she will consider 
seeking public office because she has the perfect mindset. She 
understands policy, but she also has her feet firmly rooted and 
landed on the ground. So please, welcome Katelyn to this 
Assembly. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It gives 
me great honour to welcome a couple of members of my 
family. It’s still my dream to have my wife and my three 
daughters and my five grandchildren in the Assembly altogether 
at once, but it’s not going to happen today yet, Mr. Speaker, 
after 21 years.  
 
But I’d point out that I do have someone very close, or several 
people that are very close to me visiting the Assembly today. 
They travelled all the way from Ile-a-la-Crosse. And with us 
today are my two nieces, Ally McKay and Cheryl Tootoosis. 
And along with Ally and Cheryl is their mother, adopted 
mother, who is my wife’s aunt, and that is Suzanne Aubichon. 
 
So my Auntie Sue is in the building, and she said to me today, 
you make sure you behave. You’ll send a note to the Premier 
and promise him you’ll be on your best behaviour today. So, 
Auntie Sue, the Premier got my note. I am going to behave 
today. So I would ask all members to please welcome my 
family from northern Saskatchewan, Regina, and North 
Battleford. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cox: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And to you 
and through you, I’d like to introduce and join with the 
Agriculture minister and the members opposite to welcome two 
very special friends of mine who are seated in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker, and that’s Kay and Ray Berry. And I thank all of the 
volunteers in the Ag for the work that they do. 
 
But I would just like to say that I’ve had two great neighbours 
for many, many years. We farm right across the road from the 
Berrys, and Ray’s been an excellent . . . He’s a very 
knowledgeable cattleman. And he’s given me a lot of great 
advice over the years, as well as a lot of help whenever I’ve had 
problems on my farm. I certainly appreciate that, and welcome 
to your Legislative Assembly, Kay and Ray. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, it is my great pleasure today to rise and to welcome some 
guests to our east gallery. It’s always special when we have 
students with us, but I’d like to single this group out for some 
special praise. With us are 13 members of the leadership 30 
class from grades 10 to 12 at Sheldon-Williams Collegiate, 
accompanied by their teacher, Ms. Samantha Taylor. 
 
This group of students have done some amazing work over the 
past year. They set a goal to raise $15,000 for extra ESL 
[English as a second language] teaching through the Regina 



June 22, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 621 

Open Door Society. And not only did they raise that money, 
they surpassed it. I know that they held a number of events, and 
I think the Leader of the Opposition was able to attend one of 
their main events at Sheldon-Williams. 
 
I just want to commend them for taking what they learned in 
school in their leadership class and applying it to the situation 
that they saw around them to make this city a better place, and 
to raise awareness around the issues that face newcomers and 
refugees, and to really extend a welcome to them and to provide 
some practical support in the way of that tutoring. 
 
So I would invite all members of this Assembly to join me in 
congratulating and welcoming them to our Assembly, to their 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, to you and through you, I’d like to introduce a number 
of officials from the Ministry of Justice who have joined us in 
the House today. Joining us from the deputy minister’s office is 
Anna McCashin and Michelle Heintz. Can you give us a wave? 
Oh there they are. From our corporate services division, we 
have James Njeri and Carter Carson. Darryl Ward, Diane 
Fraser, and Danielle Neisz are here from court services. 
 
We also, Mr. Speaker, have two law students joining us today. 
Alexander Buchan is working in our civil law division, and 
Derek Gianoli is working for us this summer in our innovation 
division, and I’d like to wish them all the best in their future 
studies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to thank all of the officials for all 
their very hard work that they do. And I would ask all the 
members of the legislature to welcome these dedicated officials 
from the Ministry of Justice to their legislature. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again to present a petition to improve PTSD [post-traumatic 
stress disorder] coverage for Saskatchewan workers. Mr. 
Speaker, the petitioners point out that post-traumatic stress 
disorder can severely impact the lives of Saskatchewan workers 
and that delaying both diagnosis and treatment for PTSD can be 
detrimental to recover. The petitioners basically are asking the 
government to make PTSD a presumptive illness for all workers 
under workers’ compensation, which means if you experienced 
a traumatic event, Mr. Speaker, and then had a subsequent 
diagnosis of PTSD, you would be presumed, or the traumatic 
event would be presumed to be the cause of the PTSD, Mr. 
Speaker, unless proven otherwise. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 
[13:45] 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Saskatchewan government to 

make the necessary changes to ensure that if Saskatchewan 
workers are exposed to traumatic events on the job and are 
then diagnosed with PTSD, it is presumed to be caused by 
the worker’s employment and the worker will subsequently 
be covered under workers’ compensation and receive the 
same benefits as others with work-related injuries. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have petitions from all across Saskatchewan, and 
today this petition is signed by citizens of Grandora, Hague, 
Warman, Rosthern, Tisdale, Wakaw, Strasbourg, Meyronne, 
and Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
proud to stand in my place today to present a petition as 
referenced to housing. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly cause the Saskatchewan 
Party government to restore the RPO rent-to-own option 
for responsible renters in northern Saskatchewan, and these 
involve all the communities including La Ronge, Air 
Ronge, Creighton, and Denare Beach, allowing these 
families the dignity of owning their own homes and 
building communities in the province’s beautiful North. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, many people have signed this petition. On 
this particular page, they’re primarily from the Saskatoon area. 
And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition on 
wetlands. Wetlands serve a very vital function in our 
ecosystem. Home to wildlife, including waterfowl, they protect 
us from flooding and drought. In the worst cases, as much as 90 
per cent of our wetlands have disappeared. And as they 
continue to disappear, so too do the many benefits they provide. 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the Government of Saskatchewan to: 
 
Increase funding to do the proper inventory work, putting 
Saskatchewan in a better position to manage the water 
resource; 
 
Speed up the evaluation of high-risk watersheds where 
there’s significant damage annually from flooding; and 
 
Create a sound and transparent mitigation process that 
adequately addresses sustainable development. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people who’ve signed this particular petition 
are from Moose Jaw and Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 



622 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 2016 

a petition in support of funding for heritage languages here in 
Saskatchewan. And we know that after 25 years, the 
Government of Saskatchewan is discontinuing all support for 
heritage language learning in Saskatchewan. 
 
Since 1991, heritage language schools have depended on this 
modest funding from the Ministry of Education to help sustain 
their programs. But as a result of the announcement by the 
Ministry of Education, many of these non-profit heritage 
language schools will be faced with the difficult decision of 
whether they can continue to operate. And we know, in addition 
to providing language and cultural classes, these schools offer a 
welcoming environment and crucial support for newcomers 
who are searching for a way to feel at home in their new 
surroundings here in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to reconsider this decision and restore funding for heritage 
language education in Saskatchewan heritage language 
schools. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
Saskatoon, Regina, and various communities throughout the 
province of Saskatchewan. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Regina Pasqua on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — [Inaudible] . . . introduction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from Regina 
Pasqua. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you, through you, 
and to all the members of the Assembly, I would like to 
introduce some constituents of Regina Pasqua, Mr. Christopher 
Kutarna and his father, Emil Kutarna. Mr. Christopher Kutarna 
is author of the book, Age of Discovery: Navigating the Risks 
and Rewards of Our New Renaissance. Christopher grew up in 
Regina and currently resides in Oxford, England where he’s 
attending the University of Oxford. He has come back in 
Canada to launch his book on Monday, June 27th. 
 
Mr. Speaker, columnist Tom Friedman from New York wrote 
about his book in today’s New York Times. I’d like to ask all 
members of the Assembly to join me welcoming Christopher 
and his father to their own Legislative Assembly. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Saskatoon Students Learn About Their Community 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to tell this House about a wonderful project at St. 
Dominic School. The school in historic Montgomery Place 
received a Saskatchewan Arts Board ArtsSmarts grant this past 
spring. The school used the grant to help students learn more 
about their community, a community rich in heritage and 
history. To learn about the infrastructure, significance, and 
history of Montgomery Place, students worked with members 
of the community association, local veterans, community 
members, and artist Karly King. Montgomery Place veteran Bill 
Schmidt talked with the students about his wartime experiences. 
 
Montgomery Place Community Association members Barb 
Biddle and Leslee Newman shared artifacts and stories with 
kindergarten and grade 1 and 2 students. Students had the 
opportunity to learn things like why they have streets named 
Dieppe, Merritt, and Ortona, and for whom some of their parks 
are named, like Lieutenant General G.G. Simonds or Lieutenant 
Colonel D. Walker. 
 
Each class had a different learning outcome based on 
Saskatchewan curricula and, in order to represent their 
learnings, the students worked together to create four beautiful 
tile mosaic pieces that now hang in the school. The students 
unveiled their work earlier this spring and invited the 
community to a tea, which I had a chance to attend. 
 
I want to congratulate teacher Jennifer Meikle, who led this 
project; students for diving into it and working so hard on the 
mosaics; veterans like Bill Schmidt and Don Leier who helped 
bring history to life; and community members Leslee Newman 
and Barb Biddle who are committed to ensuring current 
residents of Montgomery Place are connected to its past. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 
 

Lloydminster Celebrates National Aboriginal Day 
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I had the 
privilege of attending the National Aboriginal Day celebrations 
in Lloydminster hosted by the Lloydminster Native Friendship 
Centre on Treaty 6 territory. The festivities kicked off with a 
pancake breakfast followed by a teepee raising with crafts and 
traditional games and activities for the children. 
 
For lunch the Lloydminster Native Friendship Centre held a 
small fundraiser in which attendees could buy a delicious 
bannock taco. Following lunch, Mr. Speaker, both Chief 
Wallace Fox of Onion Lake Cree Nation, Mayor Rob Saunders, 
along with myself, brought greetings to the people gathered for 
this celebrational event. The event concluded with a 
performance from the Onion Lake Cree Nation dancers, a 
barbecue, a jamboree, and a closing round dance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday National Aboriginal Day was an 



June 22, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 623 

opportunity for all indigenous people across Canada to 
showcase and share the diversity of their cultures and traditions. 
It’s also an opportunity for everyone to learn more about 
Canada’s Aboriginal peoples, their history, and their 
contributions to our great country, province, and our 
communities. I was very honoured to be able to attend this 
event and share in the celebration of the community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking the board 
of directors and staff of the Lloydminster Native Friendship 
Centre for hosting this wonderful celebration and educational 
event. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

North Central Regina Citizens Launch  
Community Patrol 

 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to salute the 
great work that is being done by the White Pony Lodge in 
North Central Regina to promote community safety and to take 
on violence. Drawing inspiration from Winnipeg’s Bear Clan 
Patrol, the White Pony Lodge launched its first community 
patrol this past Friday evening. The lodge was established as a 
community response to violence and as a way for neighbours to 
speak out and stand up for safety in North Central. 
 
I want to especially recognize the work and determination of 
White Pony Lodge founders, Shawna Oochoo, Jennet McGillis, 
Spurgeon Root, and Beatrice Wallace Littlechief. I also want to 
commend the work of Tara Amyotte and Tory McGregor in 
making the White Pony Lodge a reality. These are individuals 
that we are proud to call our friends and neighbours in North 
Central. 
 
They first came together to memorialize those who have been 
tragically murdered and to speak out about gang violence and 
community safety. I should also point out, Mr. Speaker, that 
these are individuals that have experienced loss to senseless 
violence, too often gang violence, personally. That they’re 
responding to that loss in a way that helps the community as a 
whole I think makes their work and their courage all the more 
commendable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the inaugural patrol set off with ceremony and 
song. It is fully supported by the Regina Police Service. And 
Friday’s group of about 20 folks included the Yorkton family of 
Mikayla Bali, a 16-year-old who went missing in Yorkton in 
April. The family of Kelly Goforth was also there in memory of 
this young woman who was killed in 2013. The White Pony 
Lodge will be patrolling in the neighbourhood on Friday and 
Saturday evenings throughout the summer. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, as a neighbour in North Central and as the 
MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] for Elphinstone, I 
want to say thank you, meegweech hay hay to the White Pony 
Lodge for their valuable work towards increasing the peace and 
working towards an end to violence in North Central. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Gardiner 
Park. 
 
 

Key Ceremony for Habitat for Humanity  
Homes in Regina 

 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thanks a lot, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 
House today to inform the members about another Habitat for 
Humanity success story in Regina. Last week I attended, along 
with the member from Pasqua and Walsh Acres, a key 
ceremony for four Habitat partner families. These families were 
officially presented with keys to their brand new homes located 
at Haultain Crossing in the Eastview neighbourhood of our city. 
Upon completion of this multi-unit housing development, a 
total of 62 Regina families will call Haultain Crossing home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, owning a home is a dream that many people aspire 
to. Habitat, along with other community partners, ensure 
aspiring families have the opportunity to purchase a home of 
their own. Our government shares that goal, and that’s why 
we’ve provided $260,000 to help build these four homes. It’s 
also why we’ve dedicated nearly $8 million in funding since 
2009 to support 13 Habitat chapters across Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this investment supports those Saskatchewan 
families in greatest housing need and the neighbourhoods and 
communities in which they live. I ask all members to join me in 
thanking Habitat for Humanity for their commitment and for 
creating more housing options for Saskatchewan families. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 

Writer Recognized by Saskatchewan  
Weekly Newspaper Association 

 
Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to recognize the success of Helena Long, a constituent of 
mine from Cut Knife-Turtleford constituency. Mr. Speaker, 
Helena is a writer for the Unity Wilkie Press-Herald. She was 
recently recognized by the Saskatchewan Weekly Newspapers 
Association for her outstanding writing. 
 
Articles written by Helena and published: the Press-Herald 
won awards for best agricultural coverage, single story; and 
best business writing. Mr. Speaker, Helena’s article headlined 
“Co-operatives continuing to contribute to communities” from 
the October 2nd, 2015 issue of the Press-Herald received 
especially high praise. This is an article that won best business 
writing. It scored 99 out of a possible 100 points, with 25 out of 
25 points awarded for quality of writing, content, and impact on 
the community, and 24 out of 25 points awarded for her clarity. 
 
Helena’s first-place article in the category of agricultural 
coverage, single story was headlined, “Hay yields less than 50 
per cent of normal in the Press-Herald areas,” and was 
published on July 13th, 2015. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in congratulating 
Helena Long and the Unity Wilkie Press-Herald on being 
recognized by the Saskatchewan Weekly Newspapers 
Association for their outstanding work in reporting the news in 
the Cut Knife-Turtleford constituency. And on a personal note, 
Helena is fighting some health issues, and I wish her all the 
best. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



624 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 2016 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

Zoogala Supports Saskatoon Zoo Foundation 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There 
were bears and owls, bats and parrots, cougars and pandas. No, 
this wasn’t an NDP [New Democratic Party] caucus meeting. It 
was Zoogala. Last Friday the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin and I had the honour of attending the 2016 Zoogala 
in support of the Saskatoon Zoo Foundation. Dignitaries 
including Her Honour the Honourable Vaughn Solomon 
Schofield, Lieutenant Governor, along with Mayor Don 
Atchison and many others from across the city and province 
were there to “hang out.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s theme was Meeting the Amazing 
Animals of Latin America, where attendees were able to get up 
close and personal with some incredible animals in the zoo 
from Central and South America. In addition to seeing the 
animals, attendees had the opportunity to taste Saskatoon’s best 
cuisine. Chefs from around the city brought their best dishes, 
and I can personally attest to the calibre of the food. To top off 
the evening there was some great entertainment provided by 
Wayne Bargen, Corey Morgan, and Elly Thorn. The MC 
[master of ceremonies] was Jeff Rogstad from CTV [Canadian 
Television Network Ltd.]. 
 
There is no question that this event, their 19th annual, was a 
resounding success. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this 
Assembly to join me in thanking Saskatoon Willowgrove 
resident Dawn Woroniuk and her committee along with the 
attendees and sponsors in making 2016 Zoogala a resounding 
success. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 
[14:00] 
 

Moose Jaw Sidewalk Days Festival 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past 
weekend, the city of Moose Jaw held its annual downtown 
festival, the Moose Jaw Sidewalk Days. This festival acts as a 
showcase for Moose Jaw’s downtown as 165 booths were set 
up on Main Street. Local groups entertained festivalgoers and 
over 25 food vendors sold their best. Because this year’s 
festival fell in June, Mr. Speaker, we also got to enjoy local 
dance and school groups before they disband for their summer 
holidays. 
 
Sidewalk Days is also a great platform for local artists, 
musicians, and entertainers to showcase their talents. This year 
the Scotiabank Songwriter Showcase saw local musicians 
compete in front of local judges. And we even had High Impact 
Wrestling in the Hochelaga Street intersection. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Sidewalk Days isn’t just for the citizens of the 
friendly city. People from all over the province and Canada 
came to enjoy themselves, perform, and spread the messages 
about their businesses. In fact, SaskPower used this festival to 
kick off their 2016 Power to Grow tour, which will promote 
their goal of achieving 50 per cent of renewable energy in 

Saskatchewan’s power generation mix by 2030. 
 
It was truly an amazing weekend, and I would ask all members 
to join me in congratulating all Sidewalk Days volunteers, 
participants, and organizers on their hard work and dedication 
to the city of Moose Jaw. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Provincial Economy and Education 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier just isn’t 
getting the job done when it comes to creating good, 
mortgage-paying jobs for Saskatchewan families. In fact, he’s 
losing them — 9,500 fewer jobs than just a year ago. Over 
1,000 Saskatchewan workers in the resource sector out of work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on about the Premier’s past and 
present failings, but let’s talk about how he’s failing our future. 
Under his government, young workers are falling further and 
further behind. New numbers from StatsCan show that youth 
unemployment today is 38 per cent higher than 10 years ago. 
For those with a college or trade school education, it’s up 47 per 
cent. 
 
After a decade of record revenues and a booming economy, this 
government failed to diversify our economy. And young people 
are paying the price for that government’s choices. What does 
the Premier have to say to the young people in Saskatchewan 
who can’t find a job because he refused to do anything but talk 
about diversifying our economy? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again, 
there’s much in the preamble for my hon. friend’s question 
which needs some correction. I would point out for all members 
of the House that, notwithstanding some very significant 
economic pressures owing to commodity prices which of course 
are not under the control of anybody in this particular Assembly 
today or the Government of Saskatchewan, notwithstanding, 
Mr. Speaker, the last job numbers were out and the province of 
Saskatchewan, even in that environment, posted the second-best 
employment numbers in the country, the second-lowest 
unemployment rate in all of Canada. 
 
Since members on this side of the House had the good fortune 
to form the Government of Saskatchewan, between 45 and 
50,000 new jobs have been created right across this province. 
And with respect to young . . . Mr. Speaker, by the way, in the 
years just preceding that change in government in 2007, 
Saskatchewan was posting the worst job creation record in the 
country. And in the time of the Saskatchewan Party in office, 
we now have the second-best job creation record in the country, 
even though we are going through some commodity price 
challenges right now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also point out for members opposite, he 
asked a question with respect to young people. We do need to 
do more in terms of diversifying the economy, and I expect 
we’ll debate this a little further in subsequent questions. But 



June 22, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 625 

think about this: 50,000-plus people have applied for the 
graduate retention program, young people who have graduated 
and are staying here in the province of Saskatchewan. There’s 
more work to be done, but this province has never been 
stronger. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s awfully 
disrespectful for the Premier to boast and brag and to dismiss a 
harsh reality for young people all across Saskatchewan. That’s a 
40 per cent increase in unemployment for young people in just 
10 years. That’s a disrespectful approach. 
 
The fact is, the Sask Party is letting young people down. The 
Education minister has shamefully refused to back down on his 
indefensible decision to bargain in bad faith, even though the 
minister has admitted, “Each and every . . . year until this year, 
we have fully funded the cost of the collective bargaining 
agreement . . . ” 
 
But not this year, Mr. Speaker. He outright admitted to 
shortchanging school boards, teachers, and our kids. It’s 
unacceptable and it’s inexcusable. Will the Premier stand in his 
place, admit that his minister and his government bargained in 
bad faith, admit that his government is shortchanging our kids? 
And will he ensure finally that his government holds up their 
end of the bargain with its negotiated contracts so that our kids’ 
already-strained classrooms aren’t further damaged by his 
broken promise? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the record of the government 
with respect to education funding was debated during the 
provincial election campaign which ended on the 4th of April. 
And we put our record of education funding up against what the 
education system used to get when the NDP were in power. 
And we have seen record increases in operating funding, record 
capital investments, new schools being built across the 
province, Mr. Speaker, while members on the opposite side of 
the House, when they were in government, were closing 
schools. 
 
I would also point out to my hon. friend in terms of the direct 
question that he asked is that the collective bargaining 
agreement will be honoured. The Minister of Education has 
been very clear about that. The Minister of Education, the 
Minister of Finance have been meeting with SSBA 
[Saskatchewan School Boards Association], Mr. Speaker, and 
that collective bargaining agreement will be maintained. 
 
But again, the preamble to his question referenced the economy, 
Mr. Speaker. The facts of the matter is that there were 2,200 
new jobs, new jobs created in May in this province compared to 
April, notwithstanding commodity price challenges. That’s 
month to month 2,200 new jobs, even in this circumstance. One 
of the ways we can ensure the economy diversifies and that 
we’re creating jobs in Saskatchewan is to open up new markets 
to support trade. 
 
One of the most important trade deals ever to come before 
Canada in terms of our province, especially our agricultural 

sector, is the TPP [Trans-Pacific Partnership]. That trade deal 
was debated on the floor of this House and members opposite 
refused to even bring it to a vote, to send the most basic signal 
to our agricultural sector, to our manufacturing sector, that they 
would fight for their interests by supporting a trade deal that 
makes sense for the province. We’ll put our record against 
theirs any day of the week, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that Premier was anything 
but clear with Saskatchewan people in the election as it relates 
to bargaining in bad faith, breaking his promise to students. 
Ultimately that government holds the purse strings for 
education. When they choose to break their promise to fund 
their agreement, it has a cost for students and school boards all 
across this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister says that the teachers deserve to be paid and that 
they will, but of course he’s not coughing up the dollars. So the 
dollars are being pulled directly out of classrooms and it’s 
students that are paying the price. It’s not fair. It’s not right. It’s 
not acceptable. 
 
Even the minister has admitted that the Sask Party has now 
refused to honour their own commitment. The Premier should 
review this record. That’s what the minister has now shared. 
Will the Premier do the same? More importantly — a second 
chance here — will the Premier do the right thing and, at the 
bare minimum, commit to funding the agreement that they 
negotiated? Will he honour their signature? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this government has been 
there for the education sector of this province for the last eight 
years — frankly, like few other governments before, Mr. 
Speaker. The record of the government includes record 
investments on the operating-side support for school divisions. 
The record includes massive investments in infrastructure and 
capital, Mr. Speaker. And with respect to the collective 
bargaining agreement, as I said in an earlier answer, that is 
going to be honoured. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the school boards themselves are reacting to the 
recent budget, and I have a couple of quotes I could share with 
members across the way. “We know that administration is 
working hard to ensure that we’re staying away from the 
classroom and what we’re doing is making sure that our 
students and our staff will be well looked after.” That’s Diane 
Boyko, Greater Saskatoon Catholic School Board Chair, in the 
context of funding, and the teachers’ agreement would be a part 
of that. 
 
Here’s another one: Saskatoon Public School Board Chair Ray 
Morrison said staff cuts are not on the table. The division is 
looking hard to find efficiencies. And I think it was just 
yesterday the Regina Catholic Board has indicated that as a 
result of the budget, including the well-known . . . the issue that 
we’re debating now with respect to collective bargaining, they 
have said this as a result of their budgeting: no staff will be laid 
off; 17 new, new full-time equivalent instructional staff will be 
hired. And their budget will be balanced. 



626 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 2016 

Mr. Speaker, we’re going to work with school boards to ensure 
that that is a story replicated across the province, and the 
collective bargaining agreement with teachers will be honoured. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Educational Assistants 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier is being selective with 
the quotes that he’s using today in this Assembly. And certainly 
there have, school boards have done their bits to try to protect 
the classroom. But the fact is that this government has put 
undue pressure on the classrooms and on school boards, and 
those pressures will have impacts in the classroom. 
 
The truth is that the Sask Party took away the ability for school 
boards to actually run our schools and to control their own 
revenue, so now they are at the whim of the Sask Party and the 
minister. And as we know, the whim was to cut and run, and 
even more cuts are following. 
 
At the Prairie Spirit School Division for example, they’ve been 
forced to cut 75 positions. Mr. Speaker, Trina Miller is worried 
about the effects that these cuts will have on her daughter who 
is looking forward to grade 10. Trina says, “The government 
has whittled away the ability for our school division [and I’m 
sure that Trina wants her words to be heard] to give our 
children the basics that they need for meaningful education 
under the ruse of an increase.” 
 
Will the minister meet with Trina and explain to her why, after 
close to a decade-long boom, the Sask Party is asking for cuts to 
her daughter’s classroom? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m assuming that the 
member opposite has got a consent and authorization from Mrs. 
Miller, and we’d ask that, we’d ask . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . And, you know, the members opposite want to chirp from 
their seats. Mr. Speaker, this is something that deals with the 
privacy of a child. And, Mr. Speaker, were not going to take 
lessons from the people opposite on how to treat parents and 
how to treat children with respect when they’re in our system. If 
the Leader of the Opposition wants to stand up and apologize 
for that, and withdraw that, we’ll pass that on to Mrs. Miller. 
 
But in the interim, Mr. Speaker, I can advise the members 
opposite and I can advise the people in this House the 
following: I spoke with the director of Prairie Spirit yesterday. 
He advises me that they have 220 EAs [educational assistant] 
working in their system; 100 of those will be assigned to 
specific high-needs children. The other 120 will be allocated as 
appropriate throughout the system and, Mr. Speaker, they’re 
working on that allocation now. We have officials within the 
system that are working with them. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s the 
commitment that we’re going to make to the people in our 
province, unlike the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, that kind of spin is barely 
acceptable when talking to me, although I’m used to it. But the 
question was for a concerned mother, and the answer was 
concerning. Trina’s . . . And of course we have authorization. 
Trina’s daughter has developmental delays, but with support 
brings a lot to and gets a lot from her classroom. 
 
After years of record revenue, the Sask Party should have 
money in reserves. The fact that they’ve failed to properly 
invest in our children’s future during this province’s sunniest 
days is frankly shameful. So is the fact that education is one of 
the first places that this government went to cut. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this mom should be able to trust that her daughter 
is receiving the best education possible. Instead she’s worried, 
saying, “I’m tired of cuts happening year after year with more 
and more supports gone for my daughter.” How can the 
minister justify making cuts that affect our children’s 
classrooms across the province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, in our province each and 
every child and each and every parent deserves to be treated 
with respect. Each and every child deserves to have the best 
education possible. 
 
I’ve arranged to meet with Mrs. Miller, and I’m going to be 
doing that soon. I’m going to have the officials work with them 
to try and find the best possible solution for her daughter. Mr. 
Speaker, nothing could be more important than doing exactly 
that. Unlike the members opposite who choose to politicize 
things, we’re not going down that road. 
 
And Mr. Speaker, another road that we’re not going down is the 
things that they’re recommending that would involve actual 
budget cuts, Mr. Speaker. This is a budget that increased 
funding. Mr. Speaker, the member opposite said in February of 
2016, endorsed the report by David McGrane tying education 
funding to a percentage of GDP [gross domestic product]. Mr. 
Speaker, in the past year, education . . . or GDP dropped 1.4 per 
cent. We aren’t doing that to education, Mr. Speaker. I’d ask the 
member opposite to withdraw her position on that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, the minister can dismiss this case all 
he wants, but it isn’t the only, it isn’t the only parent that we’ve 
been hearing from. Just a few days ago, I received an email 
from another mom. She is worried about her son and her son’s 
teachers because she’s been told that next year he will lose his 
educational assistant that has been helping him for the past six 
years. Her son has needs that require some additional 
one-on-one attention and that his teachers simply can’t provide 
on their own. She says, “This news has been very upsetting and 
frustrating for our family. We are now very uncertain as to the 
future of our son’s education.” 
 
[14:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister said time and time again that his 
government’s cuts would not affect our children’s classrooms. 



June 22, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 627 

We know that this is not the case for many schools across the 
province. Will the minister stop blaming school divisions and 
accept responsibility for the effects that his government’s cuts 
have had on our classrooms? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s the goal of this 
government to work with each and every parent and each and 
every child and the school divisions to make sure that supports 
continue for children. Mr. Speaker, since we’ve been in 
government, we have never cut funding to a school division. In 
fact, Mr. Speaker, I can advise the following: provincial 
funding to school divisions in 2007-2008 was $694 million. In 
2016-17, that number increased to $1.2 billion. Mr. Speaker, 
during that time, education property tax went down as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will continue to work with the divisions. 
We’ve asked them to work to find economies. We’ve asked 
them to work to find efficiencies. We’ll never apologize for 
asking people to do their job. Part of their job, Mr. Speaker, is 
to be responsible, to find efficiencies, but above all else, Mr. 
Speaker, is to make sure that the resources remain committed to 
the front lines, to the students of our province, because that’s 
where they belong. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Management of Health Care System 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, despite almost a decade in 
power, one of this government’s favourite lines is, more work 
needs to be done. In fact, we just heard the Premier say that just 
a few moments ago, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in health care they often tell us they are working using a 
lean process. The Sask Party government paid $40 million to 
John Black to learn about lean and how it is used in places like 
the Virginia Mason Medical Center in Seattle. The minister has 
spoken time and time again about his fondness for Virginia 
Mason and what a great example Virginia Mason is for 
Saskatchewan hospitals. 
 
Well the minister’s model medical centre just flatly failed in 
almost 30 separate areas during a surprise accreditation visit. It 
failed accreditation, Mr. Speaker. What does the minister who 
loves lean a lot and likes Virginia Mason very much have to say 
about his trusted training centre? 
 
The Speaker: — We’ll hear the oral answer from the Health 
minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, using continuous improvement methods, we have 
saved over $140 million since 2008 as a government. Mr. 
Speaker, as well I can say that we have had no accreditation 
problems at Saskatchewan hospitals, and certainly there is no 
concerns with respect to the use of continuous improvement as 
it relates to accreditation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What I would note is that in the last campaign, the members 
opposite said that they, as a part of their platform, would 

remove the continuous improvement offices in the Ministry of 
Health and in our regional health authorities, Mr. Speaker. 
Those continuous improvement offices, one of the things that 
they do do is work with organizations like Accreditation 
Canada to ensure that we do have accreditation for our 
facilities, Mr. Speaker. The members opposite would have cut 
that role of the regional health authorities. We’re not going to 
cut that role. We’ll continue to work hard to ensure, not only 
that our facilities are accredited but that we are providing a 
high-quality service for Saskatchewan residents. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, it is shocking that this minister 
still continues to defend lean. Let’s talk about some of the areas 
where lean failed at the Virginia Mason centre: providing care, 
treatment, and services safely and effectively; infection 
prevention; testing and maintaining medical equipment; the 
availability of resuscitation services throughout the hospital; 
and providing care in accordance with law and regulations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve spent millions of dollars to send our health 
care providers to learn at this hospital, this hospital where lean 
has been a failure at “providing care.” Is the minister finally 
willing to admit what a huge mistake all of this was, or does he 
still stand by this colossal waste of time and money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, using continuous improvement methods, a 
paramedicine pilot project in Saskatoon is helping to ensure that 
long-term care residents avoid trips to the hospital. Since that 
pilot was put in place, 80 per cent of patients have been 
assessed and treated at their residence, including long-term care, 
without having a transport to the emergency department, Mr. 
Speaker. I wonder if the member opposite thinks that that is a 
colossal waste of time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Prince Albert’s Victoria Hospital has reduced the 
time surgical patients wait for their medication by 57 per cent 
using continuous improvement methods. I wonder if the 
member opposite thinks that that is a colossal waste of time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, mental health patients in Sun Country Health 
Region wait 78 per cent less time for a referral and an 
assessment. I certainly don’t think that that is a colossal waste 
of time. I hope the member opposite agrees with me on that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, they continue to brag about 
their progress, but it’s not based in reality. Mr. Speaker, if this 
minister put as much effort into standing up for Saskatchewan 
patients as he has for John Black and lean, health care in this 
province would be in much better shape. 
 
The minister has also bragged about how they, along with the 
UK [United Kingdom], have implemented the stop-the-line 
program. Of course, that’s something they learned from the 
no-longer-certified Virginia Mason. Stop-the-line is supposed to 
ensure safe care, Mr. Speaker. The UK has moved away from 
lean. Now these grave revelations about safety at Virginia 



628 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 2016 

Mason. Mr. Speaker, what will it take for this minister to move 
beyond lean and implement a sincere and gimmick-free strategy 
for addressing concerns in Saskatchewan health care? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, there is so much wrong 
with the premise of the member’s question I do not even know 
where to begin. Prior to stop-the-line safety alert system being 
piloted in St. Paul’s Hospital in Saskatoon, there were dozens of 
different phone numbers and contacts that patients and family 
members and staff members could call in the event that they 
saw a problem. And what, through continuous improvement, 
we’ve done is we’ve moved to one line for people to call so that 
it is simplified. It is easier and it in fact is a better way to do 
business. It is more common sense. The members opposite 
apparently are opposed to that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, here’s another example. Mr. Speaker, 
Sunrise Regional Health Authority’s mental health and 
addiction staff have increased unit capacity by 41 per cent 
without adding a single dime of additional resources, Mr. 
Speaker. This is meaning better care for people. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, we used lean, continuous improvement, even in 
surgical, the surgical initiative, Mr. Speaker. Where the 
members opposite resided over the longest wait times in Canada 
for surgery, we now have the shortest. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, they paid millions and millions 
of dollars for the failure that is lean. Prior to terminating John 
Black’s contract, the Minister of Health decided he had to grant 
him four final requests, requests for which the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan are on the hook. 
 
Mr. Speaker, would you believe one of those was a demand that 
the Health minister himself tour Virginia Mason. Not only did 
the Sask Party cough up millions of dollars for hundreds of 
health care providers to travel to Seattle to see this quote 
unquote hospital, but on top of it all, at the demand of the 
American consultant, the Health minister jetted down there too. 
If the goal was to learn what not to do, that may have been 
worthwhile, but we all know that’s not what’s happening. At 
the very least, can the minister tell us how much his trip to the 
former hospital, along with his entourage, cost Saskatchewan 
taxpayers? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I had a little 
bit of trouble hearing the full extent of the question by the 
member opposite. But what I did hear, I just want to be able to 
clarify, Mr. Speaker. Virginia Mason Hospital — I’ve never 
been to Virginia Mason Hospital, Mr. Speaker. I have been to 
the Mayo Clinic though. I did a tour of the Mayo Clinic that 
does employ continuous improvement methods, Mr. Speaker, 
and I think that the Mayo Clinic has a pretty high reputation 
when it comes to delivering health care to people not only from 
the United States but from around the world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll give you another example that I think the 

members opposite would, I think, find interesting. Regina 
Qu’Appelle Health Region, using continuous improvement, 
have achieved a 95 per cent reduction in the amount of time that 
it takes a patient that arrives either by STARS [Shock Trauma 
Air Rescue Society] or EMS [emergency medical services] to 
receive their first diagnostic procedure in the cardiac care unit. 
So people that are attending to the tertiary hospital here in 
southern Saskatchewan for perhaps a heart attack, a 95 per cent 
reduction in the first time they get a diagnostic procedure. I 
wonder if the members opposite think that that is a waste of 
time or a waste of money, Mr. Speaker. I certainly don’t think 
so, and we’ll certainly continue to look for efforts to improve 
the health care system in this province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Food Services in Correctional Facilities 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve known for a long time 
that this government’s prison food contract only means one 
thing — more money going from taxpayers to yet another Sask 
Party private contractor. Last week in committee, I asked the 
Corrections minister what has been done to make sure Compass 
is meeting the terms of its lucrative contract for prison food 
services. This is what she said: “The ministry has also put 
several processes in place to monitor the compliance of the 
contract. A contract manager has been hired to establish a 
formal reporting structure.” 
 
Another manager, Mr. Speaker, to manage the manager? When 
a company they hired, because the Sask Party said they’d be 
experts, better than the ones we had in-house, can’t put food on 
the table, their answer is to hire another manager? Why is the 
minister hiring another manager instead of actually enforcing 
the contract with Compass? And has she perhaps considered 
combining two Sask Party deals and getting the prison to skip 
the dishes? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have 
contracted out food services within all our eight correctional 
facilities across the province to ensure consistency across the 
province, to provide healthy meals in accordance with Health 
Canada’s food guide, and save taxpayers in Saskatchewan 
nearly $12 million over a five-year term in the contract. 
 
I don’t know that the member opposite was . . . I don’t know 
where she has been, but this issue is done and over with. We 
have signed a contract with Compass. It is Compass’s 
responsibility to ensure that the terms and conditions of the 
contract are adhered to, Mr. Speaker. We have ministry people 
in-house that also address and make sure that the terms and 
conditions of the contract are met, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The taxpayers of this province are saving $12 million over five 
years, Mr. Speaker. The quality of food has dramatically 
increased. The number of meals, or what’s included in the 
meals has improved, Mr. Speaker. We’ll continually monitor 
what’s going on with Compass, with the ministry staff, and with 
the people that are designed or in charge of administering the 



June 22, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 629 

contract. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. In order to facilitate the work of committees later this 
day, I move that this Assembly do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The House Leader has moved adjournment of 
the debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned until 10 
a.m. tomorrow. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:28.] 



 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Stewart ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 619 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 619 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 619 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 619 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 620 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 620 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 620 
  Ross ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 620 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 620 
  Cox ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 620 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 621 
  Fiaz ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 622 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 621 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 621 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 621 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 621 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatoon Students Learn About Their Community 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 622 
 Lloydminster Celebrates National Aboriginal Day 
  Young ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 622 
 North Central Regina Citizens Launch Community Patrol 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 623 
 Key Ceremony for Habitat for Humanity Homes in Regina 
  Makowsky.................................................................................................................................................................................. 623 
 Writer Recognized by Saskatchewan Weekly Newspaper Association 
  Doke ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 623 
 Zoogala Supports Saskatoon Zoo Foundation 
  Cheveldayoff .............................................................................................................................................................................. 624 
 Moose Jaw Sidewalk Days Festival 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................... 624 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Provincial Economy and Education 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 624 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 624 
 Funding for Educational Assistants 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 626 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 626 
 Management of Health Care System 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 627 
  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 627 
 Food Services in Correctional Facilities 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 628 
  Tell ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 628 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


