






















































Hansard: June 06, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 11A  MONDAY, JUNE 6, 2016, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Hon. Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Hon. Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Merriman, Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 51; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Maurice Riou http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 289 
 June 6, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm River. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask leave for an extended 
introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave’s granted. I recognize the member. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce two men 
who are seated today on the floor of this Assembly. They are 
here today. They are the reason why we are free to stand and 
debate in this Assembly. First I would like to introduce Ken 
Duffield from the Raymore-Semans area, a World War II 
veteran and one of the bravest men I’ve ever met, who for his 
bravery on D-Day the French recently paid tribute with their 
highest national honour, the Legion of Honour. 
 
Also while I’m on my feet, I would also like to introduce 
Warrant Officer Tom Anderson, retired, from Semans — also a 
decorated veteran of the Bosnia and Cyprus wars. 
 
And also while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I would also like 
to introduce Ken Duffield’s nephew and former constituent of 
mine, JR Richardson. 
 
I would ask all members to show our eternal gratitude to these 
two veterans for the service that we will never be able to repay. 
Thank you from the bottom of our hearts, and thank you for our 
freedom. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to, to you and through you, join with the member opposite to 
welcome these veterans to their Assembly, two individuals that 
have certainly served and sacrificed. Thank you for providing a 
bit of the context and the distinguished recognition of the 
service of both Mr. Ken Duffield and Mr. Tom Anderson. 
Thank you for your service. Thank you for your sacrifice. And I 
ask all members to offer that same thanks. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you I 
request leave to make an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, colleagues, and thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure for me to be able to 
introduce a couple of distinguished guests that are seated in 
your gallery. They are representatives from Raging River 
Exploration. In your gallery are Neil Roszell, the company’s 
president and CEO [chief executive officer]. Also joining us 
today the executive vice-president, Bruce Robertson, who is 
enjoying a homecoming of sorts today because he grew up in 
the Regina south area and attended Campbell Collegiate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Neil and Bruce are visiting the province to 
highlight Raging River’s capital plan for this year, and it is a 
capital plan of some significance and importance for our 
province and for people working in the energy sector in 
Saskatchewan. I had the pleasure of chatting with them about 
this and a number of other things over lunch, and there’s a 
certain amount of excitement, notwithstanding oil prices, 
notwithstanding what’s going on with respect to the industry. 
 
Raging River was the second most active driller in the province 
of Saskatchewan — 225 new wells. And this year the company 
plans to drill between 215 and 220 new wells, Mr. Speaker, in 
Saskatchewan. They’re going to invest about $175 million. 
Importantly, Mr. Speaker, I would point out to members, 85 per 
cent of their spending is targeted for the Kindersley area, 85 per 
cent targeted for the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Over the next decade they’re going to be active in the province 
of Saskatchewan. Their plans are to invest $3 billion here, 
drilling 2,500 new wells. And so, Mr. Speaker, sometimes in 
politics we forget to thank those who are creating opportunities 
for Saskatchewan families. I hope that we’ll take the 
opportunity today to thank Raging River and to thank the 
executive team and all those who work at the company for what 
they’re doing in Saskatchewan and what they plan on doing, 
and that we would welcome them as well to the Legislative 
Assembly here today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I wish to join with the 
Leader of the Opposition and the member for Arm River 
Watrous in welcoming a hero, heroes, and specifically Mr. 
Duffield, a hero, to his Legislative Assembly today. If we can 
consider this reality: 72 years ago about right now he was 
storming the beaches. And Ken was a corporal leading 12 other 
men. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had a chance to visit with him today and he told 
me that their objective was to take out a certain German pillbox. 
That was the objective they had been given them by command, 
and so they made their way up the beaches, Mr. Speaker, up the 
beach, and they were able to achieve that objective. And as I 
found out this morning, they didn’t lose a single person. All 12 
survived, at least that battle. Three were lost I think the next day 
due to some tank mine work that they were doing, Mr. Speaker. 
But all survived on that day. 
 
And Mr. Duffield said there must have been Saint Christopher 
with him as the reason for the fact that they would have all 
survived this. I suggested that maybe Saint Christopher was 
helping that day, but I think they probably also had a very good 
corporal. And we shared some other stories. 
 



290 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2016 

And there’s just not enough, there’s not enough words in the 
language to adequately express how grateful we are to this 
generation, the greatest generation. I’d like to think that our 
generation would do exactly as theirs did, but boy, it’s hard to 
fathom that sometimes, given what was happening on that day, 
on the 6th of June. 
 
And so it is a great, great honour for us to be able to have a hero 
in the Legislative Assembly today who, as the member for Arm 
River quite adequately and elegantly said, helped give us the 
freedoms that allow us to do the debate in this Legislative 
Assembly that we do every day and that we’ll do later this day. 
So I just want to join with all members in welcoming him and 
our other guests to the Legislative Assembly as well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you I’d like to join with the Premier to welcome the 
representatives of Raging River Exploration that have joined us 
here today. Their commitment to the province is notable. That’s 
an ambitious and important drilling program that the Premier 
described, and certainly this is important not just to our energy 
sector but to our entire province. So I join with the Premier in 
welcoming these representatives and this company, Raging 
River Exploration, to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
request leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to you and through you I would like to introduce and recognize 
this year’s Saskatchewan Agriculture Student Scholarship 
recipients. 
 
The Saskatchewan Agriculture Student Scholarship is an 
important part of the Ministry of Agriculture’s initiative for 
youth to thinkAG. Through this initiative we are able to 
promote the diversity of careers and opportunities in 
agriculture. 
 
Each year the Government of Saskatchewan identifies four 
young people who are passionate and dedicated to agriculture. I 
ask that members look to the Speaker’s gallery where this 
year’s scholarship winners are seated. These four individuals 
see the endless opportunities available to them through the 
agriculture industry. They represent a new generation of young 
people across the province seeing a bright future in agriculture. 
It’s inspiring to see the pride and passion these youth already 
have for the industry, and they will play a large role in 
continuing our stewardship and sustainability story for future 
generations. 
 
I ask the scholarship winners to please give a wave as I 

introduce their names. Sheldon Daniel of Avonlea has been 
awarded the grand prize scholarship of $4,000. Sheldon 
submitted a video that explained how creative and innovative 
technological advancements can help the agriculture industry 
feed a growing population. Sheldon will begin studies at the 
College of Agriculture and Bioresources at the University of 
Saskatchewan in the fall. Congratulations, Sheldon. 
 
Our three runner-up winners were each awarded $2,000 for 
their studies, and they are Autumn Lawson of Rose Valley, 
Kaitlyn Kitzan of Theodore, and Hailey Harms of Prince 
Albert. Each of them will also be joining Sheldon at the College 
of Agriculture and Bioresources at the University of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Autumn wants to go into agribusiness and someday have her 
own sheep operation. Her essay explained how the environment 
is vital to agriculture, and caring for the land and resources is 
everyone’s responsibility. Kaitlyn has a passion for working 
toward global food security and promoting agriculture 
awareness. Her video submission described her farm’s 
environmental success story by highlighting their sustainable 
farming methods. Hailey hopes to open her own clinic for large 
animals once she becomes a veterinarian. Her video explains 
that, in order for the agriculture industry to be sustainable, 
young people need to consider the vast opportunities available 
to them. 
 
I want to congratulate these winners and thank them for their 
hard work and dedication to the industry. I wish you all the best 
as you continue your education and enter Saskatchewan’s 
growing agriculture industry. I look forward to seeing what all 
of you do in the future. And I ask all members to join me as I 
congratulate and welcome this year’s Saskatchewan Agriculture 
Student Scholarship winners. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And on behalf of the 
official opposition and to you and through you, I would also 
like to take the opportunity to welcome these four students to 
their Legislative Assembly and to congratulate you on your 
success in obtaining those scholarships. 
 
What’s really impressed me is your emphasis on the future of 
agriculture in Saskatchewan, food security, sustainability, 
environmental challenges. So obviously, you know, you are 
concerned about the future and you’re going to take that with 
you as you begin your studies here in Saskatchewan. So that’s 
great news. 
 
So again, Sheldon, Autumn, Kaitlyn, and Hailey, 
congratulations to you all. Welcome to your Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, I’d like to join colleagues in this legislature in first 
welcoming our veterans that are with us today, and thanking 
them for their heroic efforts in years past that not only allow us 



June 6, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 291 

to debate on the floor of this Legislative Assembly but allow me 
to stand here and join with colleagues in congratulating four 
young future leaders in our agricultural industry. 
 
To Sheldon, Autumn, Kaitlyn, and Hailey, first of all to 
congratulate them on their scholarship, to join with the Minister 
of Agriculture and the opposition critic, but also to congratulate 
them on their selection of attending the College of Agriculture 
and Bioresources at the University of Saskatchewan, an 
institution that enhances research not just in Saskatchewan but 
across Canada and around the world. And I would like to 
congratulate you on that selection as well as remind you of the 
opportunities that you will have upon the completion of your 
studies to participate in the Western Canadian, the Canadian, 
the North American agricultural economy that, just here in 
Saskatchewan, I think has aggressively increased in value, not 
just economically, Mr. Speaker, with $15 billion in exports last 
year, but in research and innovation and in technology. 
 
I want to make just a quick special mention of Hailey Harms 
from just east of Shellbrook, a friend of my daughter’s, and her 
mother, Leeta, that’s with her here today, Hailey and Leeta and 
Leeta’s husband, Don. Hailey is the same age as my daughter 
Taryn, and we’ve spent years travelling around the province at 
different dance competitions and following their brothers, my 
son Carter and Hailey’s brother Kyle, to different hockey 
tournaments over the years. And they’ve become just the 
closest friends of ours over the last couple of decades. So 
congratulations to each of you as you enter your studies and 
ultimately your careers upon graduation. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Stonebridge-Dakota. 
 
Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through you 
and to all members of this Assembly, I have the honour of 
introducing three members of the Dundurn volunteer fire 
service. 
 
[13:45] 
 
In your gallery, Mr. Speaker, we have — if you could each give 
a wave — Chief Laura Friesen, one of two female fire chiefs in 
the Province of Saskatchewan; Captain Terry Benson; and first 
responder Reaschelle Higginbotham. Mr. Speaker, I will be 
sharing a little bit more information about them in a member’s 
statement shortly. In the meantime, I ask all members to please 
join me in welcoming these fine people to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Carlton. 
 
Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, and to all the members of the Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce my beautiful daughter, Jillian Bulych, seated in your 
gallery. Jill is the youngest of my four children, and we’re 
fortunate to have her live only blocks away from us. She has 
worked in the family car business for the past 12 years, from a 
part-time receptionist to a business manager. However, she has 
recently decided to leave the business to pursue other interests. 
 
During the recent campaign, and for months prior to the 

campaign, she was one of my most diligent door knockers. And 
for a girl who really had very little interest in politics before I 
started my run for office, she’s now very keenly interested in it. 
She’s joining us today to watch the proceedings live and to 
watch her dad at work. I ask all members to join me in 
welcoming her to her Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you, through 
you, and to all the members of this Legislative Assembly, I 
would like to welcome the Dundurn volunteer fire services 
personnel here as well. We depend on emergency services when 
we are at our most vulnerable, and these extremely 
professionally trained individuals are available whenever 
needed. And especially being volunteers, that’s extremely 
important as well. So I would like to thank them for their hard 
work and dedication and welcome them to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
University. 
 
Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through 
you and to all members of this Assembly, I would like to 
introduce you to Jodi Kazeil. Jodi is one of my closest friends 
and, unlike a certain minister in our caucus, she’s actually real. 
She’s seated up in the west gallery. Would you give us a wave, 
Jodi? 
 
We’ve been friends for nearly 20 years because we met when 
we were 10. And we’ve gotten each other through some early 
days in the hospital and at home with newborns and many other 
situations with close family and friends that have been thrown 
our way. She’s always been on my team, and I couldn’t be 
happier to have her on my team in the constituency office as 
well. Would you all please join me in welcoming Jodi Kazeil to 
her Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, it’s my pleasure to rise today and introduce a class seated 
in our east gallery. Joining us today are teacher Ms. Michelle 
McKillop and her 40 grade 10 students from Sheldon-Williams 
Collegiate here in Regina. They’re also accompanied today by 
Ms. Lorrie-Lynn Oleynik. 
 
These students go to Sheldon-Williams, which is a school in 
Regina, in the southwest part of Regina Lakeview, a school 
with not only a strong academic tradition but a really 
exceptional tradition of performing arts and the arts as well as 
sports, and a very well-known high school here in Regina. I can 
see at least two students in this class . . . I had the chance to go 
on an extended trip to Eastern Canada a couple of years ago, 
and I can report that they were most well behaved, as I’m sure, 
Ms. McKillop, they all are. So thank you all and welcome you 
all here today. And I would ask all members to join me in 
welcoming this class to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 



292 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2016 

Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to welcome A.E. Peacock Collegiate students to the 
Assembly, in the west gallery, along with Mrs. Kiefer, their 
teacher. Mr. Speaker, I met with the students and Mrs. Kiefer a 
little earlier. We had our picture taken, and I was pleased to 
present them with a Saskatchewan flag. And the unique part of 
the Saskatchewan flag was that it was actually one that was 
signed by Tony Drake. Anthony Drake, as you will recall, was 
in the province a short while later, and he actually autographed, 
signed for me. And I wanted to extend it to the students who are 
visiting us today. 
 
Peacock Collegiate is Moose Jaw’s comprehensive school with 
strong academics and a strong sports program, as well as 
extracurricular activities like drama and track. And I’d ask all 
members to welcome Mrs. Kiefer and the class to their 
Legislative Assembly, and enjoy the proceedings. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, June is Scleroderma Awareness Month in the province 
of Saskatchewan. And joining us in the west gallery, we have 
with us the president of the Scleroderma Association of 
Saskatchewan, Louise Goulet. As well, joining her, Richard 
Douglas, who is now becoming an advocate for people all 
across this province who, like he, face every day of their life 
with scleroderma. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to meet with them earlier 
today and I’ve had actually an opportunity to meet with Louise 
on a couple of occasions. They do a great job of ensuring that 
there’s a network in the province for people all across this 
province, and they raise awareness of scleroderma and the 
challenges that people with scleroderma face. 
 
And as well, Mr. Speaker, I do want to offer my congratulations 
to the association as yesterday was Walk, Run or Ride for 
Scleroderma, which held an event here in Regina. There was, I 
believe, over a hundred people that took part. But, Mr. Speaker, 
more importantly than that there was a network of people 
stretching all across Western Canada associated with people 
that took part in the walk here in Regina, as far away as the 
west coast of British Columbia. And so I want to welcome these 
guests and ask members to join with me in welcoming these 
two guests to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to join 
with the Minister of Health in welcoming Louise and Richard 
here today. I had an opportunity a few months ago to sit down 
with Richard and hear some of the challenges that citizens of 
Saskatchewan who have scleroderma face. I appreciate their 
advocacy, their willingness to share information to help us 
better understand this illness, Mr. Speaker, and what needs to be 
done to better support individuals living with this condition. So 
thank you and welcome to your legislature here today. And I 
look forward down the road to hearing how the minister’s going 

to address some of their concerns. So with that I ask all 
members to join with me as well in welcoming these guests to 
their legislature. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition to improve PTSD 
[post-traumatic stress disorder] coverage for Saskatchewan 
workers. As you can see, Mr. Speaker, the petitions continue to 
mount. I have more than 500 signatures here today. I’ll only 
table a few. I’d like to keep this on the government’s radar 
every day, reminding them of the importance of improving 
coverage for those with PTSD. 
 
The petitioners point out that although PTSD is covered under 
workers’ compensation, making it a presumptive illness would 
mean that workers would not have to jump through the many, 
many hoops involved. If you’re exposed to a traumatic event on 
the job and you later have a diagnosis of PTSD, Mr. Speaker, 
they ask that this be covered. And that makes perfect sense. 
 
I would like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Saskatchewan government to 
make the necessary changes to ensure that if Saskatchewan 
workers are exposed to traumatic events on the job and are 
then diagnosed with PTSD, it is presumed to be caused by 
the worker’s employment, and the worker will 
subsequently be covered under workers’ compensation and 
receive the same benefits as others with work-related 
injuries. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens of Moose 
Jaw, Dalmeny, Vanscoy, and Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition on behalf of some citizens regarding surface rights laws 
here in Saskatchewan. These individuals would like to bring to 
our attention the following: The Surface Rights Acquisition and 
Compensation Act is an old and outdated piece of legislation 
that remains largely unchanged despite amendments over the 
years. It is in desperate need of modernization to reflect the 
current challenges that farmers and ranchers are facing today. 
So I’d like to read this prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the Government of Saskatchewan to introduce legislation 
that would modernize The Surface Rights Acquisition and 
Compensation Act, classify land valued as industrial rather 
than agricultural when oil and gas development takes 
place, removing pipelines and flow lines from the surface 
rights Act, and establish a new maximum in compensation 
be paid for damages. 

 



June 6, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 293 

And, Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed from 
individuals who live in the great city of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Relay for Life Held in Prince Albert 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Each year the 
Relay for Life is held at Harry Jerome track in Prince Albert to 
raise money to continue to fight against cancer. I was pleased to 
attend the opening ceremonies last Friday and watch the very 
emotional cancer survivors’ lap around the track. Mr. Speaker, 
each team walks, jogs, or runs for 12 hours from evening until 
morning. This year 35 teams participated, which included 367 
participants and 215 survivors. This year’s Relay for Life raised 
more than $130,000 for cancer research and awareness. 
 
We have all been touched by cancer in some way, and almost 
every family has lost a member to this disease. The Relay for 
Life is an opportunity for survivors and families of those who 
lost their battle to come together to heal and to raise money. 
This event is always an emotional time for those who have 
battled cancer and those who remember their lost loved ones. 
The most poignant tradition is the lighting of the luminaries at 
dusk in memory of those who are gone and in celebration of 
those who have survived. The flickering candles are beautiful in 
the dark and represent the hope that someday a cure will be 
found. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in 
congratulating the organizers of the Prince Albert Relay for 
Life, acknowledging the survivors who walked the opening lap 
and to the many participants who gave up their night for this 
cause. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 

D-Day Veteran Recognized 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand in this 
Assembly today to acknowledge a milestone in our nation’s 
history. It was 72 years ago today that the Allied invasion of 
Normandy took place. The invasion known as D-Day, 
code-named Operation Overlord, where some 156,000 
Canadian, British, and American forces landed on the beaches 
of Normandy to begin the liberation of France — at the front of 
this assault was a group of young men from Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is a tremendous honour to have one of those 
men who was part of D-Day with us here today. I would like to 
join the member from Arm River and the Premier in welcoming 
a former corporal of “B” Company of the Royal Regina Rifles 
regiment — and his fellow veteran, Tom Anderson — Ken 
Duffield, who is 96 this year but was 24 when he led his men 
forward in 1944 to take out German positions. Mr. Duffield is 
committed to sharing his experience to young Canadians in 
order to ensure that the memories of war are never forgotten. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members of this Assembly to 

join with me in welcoming Ken Duffield and to thank Ken and 
all the men and women, past and present, who don our 
uniforms, our nation’s uniform, to protect our freedoms and 
rights. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

YWCA Regina Women of Distinction Awards Gala 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On April 28th I had 
the pleasure to attend the YWCA [Young Women’s Christian 
Association] of Regina’s 2016 Women of Distinction gala. The 
gala is an annual event hosted by the YWCA to recognize 
women whose outstanding achievements contribute to the 
health and future of our province. Many nominees were 
recognized in their respective fields for making an inspiring 
contribution, and the award recipients were all truly incredible 
women. 
 
One award winner and resident of Regina Douglas Park, Dr. 
Tanya Dahms, won the category of science, technology, and 
environment. She has been an advocate of the environment 
through her work in the department of chemistry and 
biochemistry at the University of Regina. She was also the 
co-founder of the Saskatchewan Regional Centre of Expertise 
on Education for Sustainable Development. 
 
She is also a new mom to baby Ayden who was born on March 
28th. It was her first night away from her new baby boy and she 
tugged a lot of heartstrings when she spoke about her new son 
at the gala. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing all of 
the YWCA award recipients and in thanking them for 
everything they do to make Regina and Saskatchewan a better 
place for everyone. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 

Holy Month of Ramadan Begins 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand in 
this Assembly today to acknowledge an important time of the 
year for all Muslims. With the new moon yesterday it marks the 
start of the holy month of Ramadan. Over the next month 
Muslims from around the world practise fasting from dawn to 
the sunset for their spiritual gain. Understanding and 
experiencing hunger, even though they have enough to eat — it 
gives you an idea as to how it will feel for you and for your 
family in the poverty when you do not have anything to eat. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the key teachings during the month are to sacrifice 
selflessly, donate generously, and pray at midnight. Mr. 
Speaker, my family, myself, and my faith community have 
joined more than one and a half billion Muslims that have 
begun Ramadan and are looking forward to the time spending 
with all the communities. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also look forward to celebrate Eid al-Fitr for 
the breaking of Ramadan, which is celebration after collecting 



294 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2016 

blessings from God. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask that all members of the 
Assembly join me in acknowledging the beginning of Ramadan. 
Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Stonebridge-Dakota. 
 

Dundurn Volunteer Emergency Services Team 
 
Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The volunteer Dundurn 
emergency response team was refounded in 1974. It’s come a 
long way since the days when its equipment consisted of some 
hard hats, canvas raincoats, a few pairs of rubber boots, and a 
used 1947 Chevrolet fire truck. 
 
Today the team provides valuable fire services to the RM [rural 
municipality] of Dundurn, the town of Dundurn, the resort 
villages of Thode and Shields, and surrounding communities. 
Its current membership comprises 24 members including three 
members from the nearby Hutterite colony, one junior member, 
and three recent new recruits. And some members are here with 
us today. The department has a fleet that includes one pumper 
truck, one rapid-response vehicle with a compressed air foam 
system, one tanker truck, one medical rescue vehicle, and a 
command vehicle. The team is dispatched for fire and vehicle 
incidents by Prince Albert 911 provincial dispatch, and for 
medical emergencies by MD dispatch of Saskatoon. 
 
The fire service also provides medical and safety standbys for 
community events free of charge, and is proud to have an active 
fire prevention program. Each member of the department is on 
call 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, and their own personal 
phones are used for notification. 
 
Due to the expansion of population within the Dundurn service 
area, the volume of calls for the department has increased 
dramatically in the past few years. Last year the team received a 
total of 89 service calls. It is not to be overstated, Mr. Speaker, 
how laudable it is that these members give of their own time, 
voluntarily, to serve their community. 
 
I ask all members in joining me to thank the Dundurn 
Emergency Services Team and the many other volunteer teams 
across our province for helping to keep Saskatchewan 
communities safe. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

Saskatchewan Rush Win Champion’s Cup 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, it was an epic battle on 
Saskatchewan turf. The good guys wore green; the bad guys 
wore orange. You might think that I’ve been talking about the 
last election, but no, I’m talking about the Saskatchewan Rush 
winning the National Lacrosse League championships. 
 
The professional lacrosse team moved from Edmonton to 
Saskatoon in the 2016 season. Since the announcement of the 
move, sports fans in Saskatoon and across the province have 
rallied around the team, selling out SaskTel Centre with 15,182 

fans in attendance. Mr. Speaker, the Edmonton Rush won the 
Champion’s Cup in 2015 and the Saskatchewan Rush set out to 
defend the championship again this year. 
 
Before Saturday’s game the Rush travelled to Buffalo to play 
the Bandits in the first game of the best-of-three series. The 
Rush won that game 11-9, giving them a chance to win the cup 
at home on Saturday. The game and the Rush’s storybook first 
season in Saskatoon ended with an exciting game-winning goal 
scored by Jeff Cornwall with just 12 seconds left in regulation 
time, giving the Rush an 11 to 10 victory. 
 
Congratulations to owner Bruce Urban, governor Al Ryz, and 
president Lee Genier, and all the players and staff. I ask all 
members to join me in welcoming the Rush to Saskatchewan 
and congratulating them on winning the 2016 championship 
cup. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 
 

Completion of Swift Current Health Care Facility 
 
Mr. Steele: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Friday we 
celebrated the completion of The Meadows, a new long-term 
regional health care facility in Swift Current. Mr. Speaker, this 
new facility replaces three aging facilities in the area, features 
210 long-term care beds, an increase over the previous facility 
of 198, and provides an additional 15 beds of respite and 
palliative care. 
 
The Meadows was designed based on input from residents, 
families, and staff, creating home-like accommodations with a 
community feel. This innovative new facility will better meet 
the needs of the residents and their families. Mr. Speaker, we 
are also proud to say that the completion of this facility makes 
the first completion of the provincial’s first P3 [public-private 
partnership] project. The P3 model not only cut costs but was 
essential to ensure the project completed on time and on budget. 
This project’s also created an estimated 500 jobs and 32 
Saskatchewan businesses were involved, making 72 per cent of 
all business involved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is proud to support worthy 
projects like this. Since 2007 our government has invested 1.2 
billion in health infrastructure in our province. We are 
delivering on our promise to put patients first and remain 
committed to improving health infrastructure in the province. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Regina Bypass Project and Funding for Urban Parks 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s been nearly a decade 
since the members opposite were elected, when they formed 
government. I say this because it’s past time that they start 
taking responsibility for their mismanagement, their waste, and 
their scandals — a decade, Mr. Speaker, where oil prices were 
high and, for the members opposite, living was easy. Money 
flowed to mismanaged project after mismanaged project. 
 



June 6, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 295 

But they aren’t cutting back now as times are tighter on their 
own mismanagement. In fact they’re adding $500 million more 
to their $2 billion so-called bypass and its $1 billion overrun. 
Important bypass? Well of course, Mr. Speaker. Has the Sask 
Party mismanaged it every step of the way though? Absolutely. 
 
There’s no silver lining in this failure, Mr. Speaker. As you 
know, instead of supporting Saskatchewan businesses, the Sask 
Party handed the massive contract to a company from France. 
Will the Premier now admit it was a mistake to bypass local 
companies and to hand this massive contract to a company from 
France? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there is just so much wrong 
and inaccurate about what my hon. friend just said in this 
House, Mr. Speaker, including his depiction of the last . . . well 
it’s actually been about eight years, but they like to use the term 
10 years. Maybe it seems like 10 years for them. I’m not sure, 
Mr. Speaker. But the truth of the last eight years, the truth of the 
last eight years is there has been a $2.7 billion reduction in the 
operating debt. There’s been $6 billion in tax relief for 
Saskatchewan families, businesses and farmers, and $8 billion 
more in infrastructure spent in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And with respect to the bypass, Mr. Speaker, the number the 
NDP [New Democratic Party] always like to use in terms of 
alleging some sort of increase in cost is when the project itself 
was much, much smaller in scale, when engineers and the city 
of Regina and stakeholders said you have to . . . for it to be a 
bypass, you need to broaden its scope. And so therefore the 
price went up. 
 
Their other narrative they’ve been trying — well they’ve been 
trying desperately, the Deputy Premier is right — for a long 
time, even before and during the election campaign, is this 
nature of who’s making up the work force, the people that are 
providing resources, employees, to the bypass. Broda 
Construction, a family-owned company from Prince Albert, 
Saskatchewan, along with a number of Saskatchewan 
companies, are involved. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if the hon. member likes, we can take him 
for a drive and introduce him to all the Saskatchewan people 
and Saskatchewan companies working on that project, Mr. 
Speaker. It is part of our infrastructure build-out — up $8 
billion from when they were in office, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, here we go again — the 
Premier not letting the facts stand in the way. Some sort of 
claim about debt, meanwhile his own budget books shows that 
it’s increased $6.5 billion since 2011. Claims about all these 
Saskatchewan companies who are getting pieces of a contract 
from the bloated contract that’s going to the big company from 
France, Mr. Speaker. His story just doesn’t add up. 
 
So I guess the reality is, if you’re a conglomerate from France, 
if you’re an American consultant, if you’re a consultant from 
BC [British Columbia] or a company from the UK [United 
Kingdom], you know, this Premier’s been pretty good to you. 

But meanwhile Saskatchewan families, job creators, have been 
left behind. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, even though their so-called bypass is well 
over $1 billion over budget, he’s writing another cheque, Mr. 
Speaker, out of this budget, this year, of $500 million. You 
know, that’s, actually let’s put this in context, that’s 1,000 times 
more than the Sask Party is getting back by eliminating the 
funding to parks — parks in Moose Jaw, Swift Current, Prince 
Albert, the Battlefords, and Weyburn. These parks are the heart 
of communities. They matter to quality of life. They’re 
economic drivers. Tourists flock to them. They bring dollars to 
these communities, small and large businesses, and create jobs. 
So my question, Mr. Speaker, is why is the Sask Party cutting 
our parks instead of his mismanagement? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, during the election campaign, 
the NDP actually put out one of their reality checks — because 
they’re always a little short on reality, we found, and frankly the 
voters found that as well — accusing Broda of really not being 
a Saskatchewan company. This Prince Albert-based company 
apparently had Alberta investors, and so they didn’t count. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the businesses involved in that 
project, how about PSI Technologies, Mr. Speaker, of 
Esterhazy and Saskatoon? Do they count to the NDP? What 
about Dart Services in Estevan? Do they count to the NDP? 
They’re working on the project as well. How about Inland 
Concrete Moose Jaw and Regina? They’re working on the 
bypass. Do they count to the NDP, those families and those 
employers? How about A&B Rail out of Regina, Access out of 
Regina, Acuren out of Regina, Armada Homes out of Regina, 
Alliance Energy out of Regina? Knight group of companies 
sold the vehicles that are providing transportation for those 
working on it. How about Clifton Associates out of Regina? 
Mr. Speaker, the list is, well the list is long. We’ll share it with 
the hon. member. 
 
The bottom line is we need that project for the province of 
Saskatchewan. The city of Regina needs that project. It will, as 
the P3 project in Swift Current came in, it’ll be on time and on 
budget. it will put Saskatchewan people to work and it will be a 
benefit to Saskatchewan businesses small, medium, and large, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, chat with Saskatchewan 
companies, chat with the companies across this province who 
could be doing this work. 
 
The fact is this Premier has mismanaged this from $400 million 
to over $2 billion. He’s sending the big cheque and the profits 
to France. Meanwhile, some of that work is being subbed back 
to Saskatchewan companies. Companies deserve better, Mr. 
Speaker. So much money is being left in France, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, the question was putting in context the cut to parks. 
So $500 million again for this bypass and the $1 billion 
overrun. But a cut to parks, Mr. Speaker, all across the province 
— at the same time as we have over 9,000 fewer jobs this year, 



296 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2016 

as average wages are down, as bankruptcies are on the rise — 
You know, a responsible government would be doing all it can 
to support communities. Cutting parks is the opposite. 
 
And the Minister of Finance is heckling that he should cut the 
bypass. We’re saying cut your waste, manage your project . . . 
[inaudible] . . . From the government that hid a budget. 
 
You know, I know the Premier might think that folks in Swift 
Current . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Now, Mr. Speaker, the Premier might 
think that folks in Swift Current want this cut. I don’t think that 
they do. But I can assure him that these parks are incredibly 
important to the people of communities all across our province. 
They host cultural events and festivities and they are a big 
attraction. They attract tourists, tourists who stay in hotels, who 
frequent restaurants and local shops. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this isn’t complicated. So what about the 
importance of these parks does this Premier not understand? 
Why is he eliminating funding while continuing to spend wildly 
on his mismanaged projects? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I remember sitting on that side 
of the House when the government of the day said no to the 
cities of this province every single year when all they were 
asking for was meaningful revenue sharing. The cities of this 
province had borne a lot, a lot of the deficit fighting of the 
previous government. And when that was handled, then they 
said, all right, we now want to share in the growth and revenue. 
And the NDP said no. They didn’t just say no to an urban park 
funding; they said no to revenue sharing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when this party on this side of the House took 
office, one of the first things we did is we sat down and began 
negotiating earnestly with municipalities. And we delivered on 
revenue sharing, historic revenue sharing now up over 120 per 
cent province-wide, hundreds of millions of dollars including 
for those cities that have urban parks. 
 
When it comes down to a choice in a budget, Mr. Speaker, 
choices between infrastructure, choices between cancer drugs, 
choices between more surgeries for Saskatchewan people, or 
funding urban parks when municipalities have received huge 
increases in the revenue sharing, Mr. Speaker, we are going to 
chose to focus on health care and things that are of clear and 
obvious obligations of the provincial government. And that’s 
what this budget did. 
 
[14:15] 
 
But the list goes on. On the bypass, you know, he just dismissed 
the fact that we must have listed off about 30 companies from 
Saskatchewan that are involved in the bypass. There’s many, 
many more. Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the Leader of the 
Opposition will stand in his place and explain to all of these 
companies and all of these Saskatchewan workers why they 
don’t count for the NDP? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Revenue Sharing and Funding for Urban Parks 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, no real answer there, but I can 
tell you that many people came up to me this weekend and 
asked that very question. What does the Sask Party not 
understand about the importance of our park? Pehonan Park is 
not only good for community spirit but for local economy. 
Tourism dollars and the spinoff jobs are very important to 
smaller cities and communities especially when the government 
cuts in other ways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s look at Prince Albert and Moose Jaw, 
Saskatchewan’s third- and fourth-largest cities. Both cities are 
facing other Sask Party cuts. The funding for Wakamow Valley 
in Moose Jaw and Pehonan Parkway in Prince Albert is gone. 
Meanwhile people in Prince Albert are left wondering if we will 
ever get a second bridge or if Victoria Hospital will ever get the 
much needed upgrades. Moose Jaw is left with no more support 
to deal with the crumbling infrastructure. When will this 
government stop ignoring the needs of Moose Jaw and Prince 
Albert? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank 
the member opposite for the question. Mr. Speaker, this was a 
challenging budget, and we had to make some tough choices. 
And I think the members opposite understand the choices that 
we had to make. Maybe they do; maybe they don’t. I’m not 
sure. But we had to make choices. That’s what government 
does, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, urban parks are, they continue to be assets to 
municipalities. We recognize that, and I understand what the 
member opposite is saying in terms of their value. Mr. Speaker, 
this year there will be unprecedented funding that . . . it’s going 
to be going in terms of municipal revenue sharing to all the 
municipalities, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, municipalities would 
be in a better position, we think, to absorb funding, given record 
revenue sharing, Mr. Speaker. And I look forward to the next 
question, Mr. Speaker, so I can actually itemize exactly what 
these cities have received in revenue sharing. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Closure of Correctional Facility 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, unfortunately after years of 
speaking out about northern issues, it doesn’t surprise me 
anymore that the members opposite ignore our communities' 
needs. Most of the time it’s like they forget that northern 
Saskatchewan even exists. But, Mr. Speaker, this year in their 
budget, they remembered. They remembered where northern 
Saskatchewan is, just long enough to coldly and callously tell 
18 workers that the jobs that they have been committed to for 
years were no longer needed. 
 
Why the Minister of Finance would single out the closure of the 



June 6, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 297 

Buffalo Narrows correctional centre as a corner piece of his 
finance address defies decency and empathy for these families 
and workers. And, Mr. Speaker, now even more northern 
people will be left without a job. 
 
Throughout the years of record revenues, they ignored the 
North. So how, Mr. Speaker, how, now that revenues are down, 
can they justify finding the North long enough to make cuts in 
the region that desperately needs to keep jobs? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As has been voiced 
by my colleagues, is that these decisions, and this decision that 
we had to make with respect to Buffalo Narrows facility, was 
not an easy one. Closing this facility was about how to achieve 
the best results in service delivery and the most efficient use of 
our existing correctional facilities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I do want to say, and I do want to express my thank you to the 
employees, the 15 employees that worked at Buffalo Narrows 
facility for their work throughout in very trying circumstances, 
Mr. Speaker. There were no easy decisions, I’ll reiterate again. 
We had to weigh against the 96-bed correctional facility, mental 
health facility, the funding for that. We had to weigh up against 
the Prince Albert Correctional Centre with the opening of a new 
unit. There were no easy decisions to be made here, Mr. 
Speaker, but we did have to make a decision. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about 18 families 
who have had their world shaken. One of the employees told 
The StarPhoenix, and I quote, “I can’t sleep. I wake up in the 
middle of the night and I can’t go back to bed because I’m 
thinking, what am I going to do?” Well, Mr. Speaker, this is a 
devastating cut to workers who have dedicated years of service 
to this government as employees of the correctional centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party is telling the workers they can 
either lose their jobs or they can leave their home community 
for work. Mr. Speaker, by saying that, what the Sask Party is 
saying that they don’t care about the importance of this 
community or community overall. They don’t care about the 
northern economy, and they certainly don’t care about the 
North, period. Will this government recognize that their cut was 
short sighted and reverse their decision to close the Buffalo 
Narrows Correctional Centre? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With respect to the 
employees, they do have the provisions of their collective 
bargaining agreement to work from. Our staff in Buffalo 
Narrows is working with the employees as we speak, Mr. 
Speaker.  
 
We have capacity throughout the province to house these 
currently 18 offenders, Mr. Speaker; unfortunately it’s the 
employees that we feel most bad about, Mr. Speaker. But 
however, we had to make a tough decision with respect to our 

finances up against many other very, very good and valuable 
programs, Mr. Speaker, and we will continue with our decision, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, this weekend I was speaking 
with community members in the area. They are understandably 
worried and they are very upset. The Buffalo Narrows 
correctional facility is more than just an important employer in 
the community. It’s important to the local economy in many 
ways as well. Families come to visit inmates to support their 
rehab, and the absence of the centre and their staff will be 
deeply felt by community groups and elders who benefit from 
the work of the inmates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Buffalo Narrows are upset. They see 
that the Sask Party is not listening to northern people. The 
northern people, however, are strong and resilient, but this Sask 
Party cut runs deep. My colleagues and I will stand with these 
employees and the community of Buffalo Narrows, especially 
while they’re under attack by this government. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, if the minister won’t answer the question and 
change her mind, I’m going to ask the Premier. What does the 
Premier have to say to the people of Buffalo Narrows whose 
lives are affected by this incredibly short-sighted cut? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said earlier, 
the decision to close Buffalo Narrows was indeed a difficult 
one. We weighed them up against many other projects, 
including the Saskatchewan Hospital North Battleford 96-bed 
correctional mental health facility, Mr. Speaker, the continued 
funding for the Prince Albert Correctional Centre, for the 
opening of the new unit. We had to weigh against funding for 
municipal police grants throughout the province to deal with 
our targeted initiatives throughout the province, Mr. Speaker. It 
is indeed a tough decision, Mr. Speaker, but it is one that we are 
entrusted by the people of Saskatchewan to make. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, there is no question that jobs are 
too rare in the North, and it is tragic the way the Sask Party’s 
ripping good, family-supporting, mortgage-paying jobs out of 
this community. But the damage they are causing goes even 
deeper. Mr. Speaker, the inmates come from the area, and since 
it is minimum security, they continue to work in the area and in 
fact serve their community. They are close to their families, to 
their communities, and to their elders. All of this has been 
proven to help with reducing recidivism. Mr. Speaker, that 
means it makes it less likely that they’ll reoffend once they’re 
out or, as the minister likes to put it, more likely that they’ll 
become productive taxpayers.  
 
So to the Minister of Corrections: can she explain why they 
would eliminate a unique facility that is working well and in 
fact serving a community, only to add to the overcrowding in 
the facilities further south and make the whole system even less 



298 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2016 

effective? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, we have opened a facility 
which is very, very close to . . . reopened a facility called 
Besnard which is very, very close to Buffalo Narrows, Mr. 
Speaker. This government has added 380 beds since 2007 to our 
inmate bed space throughout the province of Saskatchewan. 
We’ve invested over $60 million in our correctional facilities 
since 2007, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our staff, the ministry will work with the facility to ensure that 
the inmates or the offenders are placed as close to their home 
quarters as possible, Mr. Speaker. There is a strategy. It is not 
done willy-nilly, Mr. Speaker. There is a plan. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, closing the Buffalo Narrows 
facility doesn’t make a lot of sense when you consider just how 
full our jails are. We know that in the past several years inmates 
have been housed in chapels and gymnasiums.  
 
Just last week, however, the Minister of Corrections said, “As 
of today, there are no offenders in gymnasiums.” And that 
might be true, Mr. Speaker, depending on your definition of 
gymnasium, because in Regina the ministry took the gym and 
divided it into sleeping quarters for inmates. Not technically a 
gymnasium anymore I guess, but, Mr. Speaker, certainly not a 
place where inmates were ever intended to sleep. And 
apparently this government doesn’t have a problem with that 
because instead of looking for a solution for overcrowding, 
they’re closing a facility and moving those inmates to other 
already crowded facilities. 
 
Will the Minister of Corrections and Policing admit that our 
jails suffer from overcrowding and that inmates are in fact 
sleeping in places where inmates were never intended to sleep? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have the space 
available to house all of our offenders in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. This government has added over 
380 bed spaces, invested over $60 million in our correctional 
facilities.  
 
Now interestingly enough, the NDP did not add a single cell. 
They denied Saskatoon expansion twice. In 2006-07, they 
denied 40 cells for the Pine Grove correctional facility, Mr. 
Speaker. So that’s the record of the members opposite, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This ministry and our government is focusing on demand 
reduction, if we look at Whitespruce in Yorkton, Mr. Speaker, 
where we’re looking at training our offenders so that they 
actually can access the jobs that are available to them, Mr. 
Speaker. We are on a pathway, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that 
people receive the training that is necessary to access jobs, and 

our record speaks for itself. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, the budget isn’t providing enough 
money to hire more teachers and educational assistants either, 
and it won’t be enough for additional student supports. Mr. 
Speaker, the teachers in this province are already 
under-resourced and they’re understaffed, and many teachers 
pay out of their own pockets for much needed classroom 
supplies because the money simply isn’t there. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Education minister says that it’s the 
teachers who need to start looking for more savings. He said 
that school divisions should “sit down with a blank piece of 
paper” and then listed off all of the things that they could do 
without. The minister asked school divisions to look at making 
serious cuts to management and to look at pushing more work 
onto school principals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s the Sask Party who’s been underfunding 
schools, but it is our children who will be experiencing the 
impact of these cuts. When will this government properly invest 
in our education system? 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, in 2007 the education 
budget in our province was $944 million. In 2016, $2.2 billion, 
an increase of some 133 per cent. Mr. Speaker, we’ve also 
invested record capital in our province. 
 
We want to work with all of our stakeholder partners to try and 
ensure that we maximize the resources, that we maximize the 
commitment that we make to the students in our province. We 
want to make sure that we give them every opportunity to 
perform up to their very maximum potential. Mr. Speaker, this 
budget includes an increase of 7.8 per cent to $2.2 billion. 
School division operating has got an increase of $16 million. 
We are now at $288 million for supports for learning, $5.4 
million additional for Syrian refugees. Mr. Speaker, we’re 
working hard, and we’re going to continue to do that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, once again, I asked a question about 
the conditions in our classrooms today. Mr. Speaker, since the 
budget I have spoken with many in the educational sector, and 
this is what I’m told: this budget will mean increased class sizes 
and reduced supports in the classroom. And in addition to that, 
Mr. Speaker, the teachers are buying that blank piece of paper 
that the minister spoke about, as well as the pencils, out of their 
own pockets already. So how much deeper can they dig? This is 
a government that enjoyed record revenues for nearly a decade 
but failed to invest in education. And now that times are tight, 
they’re making cuts. Teachers can’t be expected to make cuts 
when the scissors aren’t being supplied. 
 
[14:30] 



June 6, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 299 

Mr. Speaker, providing our children with the highest quality of 
education is vital to the future of this province. Instead teachers 
are consistently being asked to do more with less. And it’s not 
just in our elementary and high schools. Universities are also 
feeling the pinch from this government. The University of 
Saskatchewan is being asked once again to dig into their reserve 
funds. That money is supposed to be set aside for the future. 
Another rainy day fund, Mr. Speaker, being drained by the Sask 
Party. Mr. Speaker, years of cuts and underfunding have finally 
caught up with them. Why is the minister refusing to accept 
responsibility for his government’s cuts? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we want to remain 
committed as much as we possibly can to front-line supports for 
our classrooms. We won’t take any lessons from the folks 
opposite that drove people out of here.  
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say this. We have, during our 
time in government, we have increased the number of our 
teachers by 750 more teachers than there were when we formed 
government. We’ve added student support teachers by 164 
more, psychologists up 44 per cent, speech language 
pathologists up 39 per cent, occupational therapists up 64 per 
cent, social workers up by 6 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue to support our 
classrooms. Our students deserve a good education. We’re 
going to see that they get a good education, unlike the members 
opposite that drove them out of the province, Mr. Speaker. We 
want our province to have the best students, the best teachers, 
and we will see to it that that happens. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 21 — The Growth and Financial Security 
Repeal Act 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 21, The Growth and Financial Security Repeal Act 
2016 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 21, The Growth and Financial Security Repeal Act 
2016 be now introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 22 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2016 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 22, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2016 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 22, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2016 be now 
introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read the second time? 
Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 23 — The Liquor Retail Modernization Act/Loi de 
modernisation du commerce des boissons alcoolisées 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I move that Bill No. 23, The Liquor Retail 
Modernization Act be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Liquor 
and Gaming Authority that Bill No. 23, The Liquor Retail 
Modernization Act be introduced and read the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 24 — The Liquor Retail Modernization 
Consequential Amendments Act, 2016 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 24, 



300 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2016 

The Liquor Retail Modernization Consequential Amendments 
Act, 2016 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 
Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority that Bill No. 24, The Liquor Retail Modernization 
Consequential Amendments Act, 2016 be introduced and read a 
first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 25 — The Wakamow Valley Authority 
Amendment Act, 2016 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 25, The Wakamow Valley Authority Amendment Act, 
2016 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Parks, 
Culture and Sport that Bill No. 25, The Wakamow Valley 
Authority Amendment Act, 2016 be now introduced and read a 
first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Before orders of the day, I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
request leave to withdraw Bill No. 20, The Justices of the Peace 
Amendment Act, 2016 from the order paper. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the minister. 
 

BILL WITHDRAWN 
 

Bill No. 20 — The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 
2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur les juges de paix 

 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, pursuant to rule 15(3) I 
move to withdraw Bill No. 20, The Justices of the Peace 
Amendment Act, 2016 from the order paper. 
 
The Speaker: — Unanimous consent has been granted. The 
minister may proceed to move his motion. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that, pursuant to rule 
15(3), I move to withdraw Bill No. 20, The Justices of the 
Peace Amendment Act from the order paper. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved to withdraw Bill No. 
20, The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2016 from the 
order paper. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Pursuant to rule no. 15(3), it is in 
order that Bill No. 20, The Justices of the Peace Amendment 
Act, 2016 is withdrawn from the order paper. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that the Assembly approves in 
general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Ms. 
Sproule.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 
 
Mr. Marit: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
start off, Mr. Speaker, by first saying I’m in full support of the 
budget that was presented by our colleague, the Finance 
minister, here last week. And before I could, Minister, with 
your indulgence, I would like to introduce my family who is 
sitting in the west gallery, and have the opportunity to do that. 
 
First of all our daughter Katelyn is here with her two children, 
our granddaughter Lily who is four, and our newest addition 
who is two months old. Katie works here in the city of Regina 
for Ranch Ehrlo and I just . . . We’re very proud of her. She just 
got accepted for her master’s degree at the U of R [University 
of Regina] for social working, so we’re very proud of her. And 
with her is our son Dr. Jordan Marit from Calgary. He’s doing 
his fourth-year residency at Calgary where he’s specializing in 
internal medicine. So I ask all members to welcome them to 
their Legislative Assembly. 



June 6, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 301 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to take this opportunity, Mr. 
Speaker, to thank the Finance minister firstly for his hard work 
in bringing forth a very sound budget that controlled spending 
and invested in the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And I 
also want to take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to thank the 
minister’s entire team and for all their hard work and for what 
they’ve done to bring this budget forward, Mr. Speaker. The 
deputy minister and her team, I just want to say thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also want to take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to thank our 
colleagues that sit on treasury board who had to make some 
very difficult decisions in this budget and have spent many 
hours preparing this budget for the Minister of Finance to 
finalize and making sure the priorities of this government were 
maintained, Mr. Speaker — no new tax increases, control 
spending, investing in the people of Saskatchewan, and 
investing in infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to start off in talking of something that I, in my previous 
life, was very involved with, and that of course is the revenue 
sharing. Approximately 272 million, an increase of 6.4 million, 
is an increase of 144 million more than . . . 113 per cent since 
2007, Mr. Speaker. This sustainable funding helps our 
municipalities meet the needs of the people living in their 
communities and shows our government’s commitment to 
provide the equivalent of 1 per cent of the PST [provincial sales 
tax] to Saskatchewan’s municipalities. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this money is given unconditionally, and that 
is very important. We recognize that our municipal leaders 
know where the money is needed and where they need to put it. 
And, Mr. Speaker, our municipalities are the envy of 
municipalities across this country in recognizing the revenue 
sharing that they receive. 
 
This budget shows our government is strongly committed to 
continuing the support on the revenue sharing. If I could give 
some examples, Mr. Speaker, urban revenue sharing for all 
cities, towns, villages, and resort villages will amount to 174.6 
million in 2016-17. Revenue sharing for rural municipalities, 
which includes organized hamlets, will total 76.7 million, and 
northern communities, Mr. Speaker, will receive just over $20 
million this fiscal year, Mr. Speaker. It is very important to 
recognize, Mr. Speaker, this is unconditional money. This is 
money that the municipal leaders can decide where their 
priorities are and where they need that money to go. That is 
important. 
 
Saskatoon, the province’s largest city, will receive more than 
$48.5 million and Regina will receive just under 42.2 million in 
municipal revenue sharing, Mr. Speaker, unconditional money. 
The budget also provides 83.8 million in provincial support to 
municipal infrastructure through various programs, 21.4 million 
from the Ministry of Government Relations provincial support 
under the new Building Canada Fund, 23.7 million from the 
Ministry of Highways and Infrastructure for rural roads through 
the municipal road strategy and the urban connector program of 
7.7 million. 
 
And I just want to speak a little bit about what we call the 
municipal roads for the economy program, which is 
administered through SARM [Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities] and Ministry of Highways, of 16 million. 
This money goes for what we call our Clearing the Path 
corridors, bridge maintenance, road construction. Mr. Speaker, 
what this does, it takes the pressure off our TMS [thin 
membrane surface] highways and puts it on the municipal 
system, and our municipal colleagues are compensated for the 
work they do. Mr. Speaker, and I have to say that the signs we 
see along the highway that says Clearing the Path Corridor was 
actually designed by one of the own staff at SARM, Laurel 
Feltin, who designed that sign. 
 
And $10 million for the Ministry of Government Relations for 
the Saskatoon north commuter bridge; 25 million for the 
Ministry of Parks, Culture and Sport for the Regina stadium, 
Mr. Speaker. The budget also provides 50.8 million in other 
funding to municipalities, Mr. Speaker, for ministries including 
grants such as services and facilities as libraries, policing, urban 
parks, and transit assistance. Mr. Speaker, this is a good budget 
for municipalities. 
 
I want to talk about something near and dear to me, of course, is 
agriculture. And, Mr. Speaker, I have to talk about the previous 
Ag ministers that we . . . Minister Bjornerud and also Minister 
Stewart, how they went to all the sectors in the ag industry and 
asked, Mr. Speaker, what do you need to grow your industry? 
Researchers asked, we need more money for research. Mr. 
Speaker, they got more money. Manufacturers wanted global 
access. These men and women wanted the government to help 
them. Guess what? The government helped them, Mr. Speaker. 
Farmers and ranchers asked for better support programs. They 
got it, increased coverages in all ag programs including crop 
insurance and AgStability, and long-term programs. 
 
There’s another program that’s near and dear to my heart, Mr. 
Speaker, that was designed through the Ministry of Agriculture. 
It was called the farm and ranch water infrastructure program 
that really helped farmers and ranchers sustain and get 
long-term sustainable water for their livestock and farming 
operations. 
 
And look what the farm machinery manufacturing has done in 
this province, Mr. Speaker. We have world-class companies 
with the best technology in the world, Mr. Speaker. There’s 
countries coming here, Mr. Speaker, to Saskatchewan to do 
business with the likes of Bourgault Industries, Flexi-Coil, Seed 
Hawk, SeedMaster, Morris Industries, Degelman Industries, 
Brandt Industries, Harmon Industries, Honey Bee 
Manufacturing, Mr. Speaker. This is a multi-billion dollar 
business for the province of Saskatchewan, creating thousands 
of excellent jobs, Mr. Speaker. The world wants our products 
and they will all be showcased here in the next week or so with 
the largest farm machinery show in Canada in the Western 
Farm Progress Show, Mr. Speaker. And now with the addition 
of the patent box, Mr. Speaker, that only gives these and other 
companies or individuals opportunities to develop even better 
technology right here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s those kinds of things that our government is 
doing to keep Saskatchewan strong. It’s that kind of leadership, 
Mr. Speaker, that gives the Zak family, members in my 
constituency in my statement last week, the opportunity to 



302 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2016 

value add their farming operation and have another successful 
company in this great province — once again, Mr. Speaker, 
investing in the people. 
 
And if I can, I do want to give some numbers about agriculture 
and what is done in this province, Mr. Speaker. Record 15.3 
billion in ag exports in 2015, fifth consecutive year of record 
exports, Mr. Speaker. We’re leading the nation. 
 
Strong cattle prices. In 2014, livestock farm cash receipts were 
$2.7 billion, highest on record, 64 per cent above the five-year 
average. Growth plan goal was to increase livestock farm 
receipts over 2 billion. We’ve hit that mark and passed it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Crop production in 2015, second largest crop ever at 32 million 
tonnes, 13 per cent above 10-year average. Growth plan goal of 
36.6 million tonnes. Record crop production in 2013 of 38.4 
million tonnes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Realized net farm income 2015 was $4.2 billion, 75 per cent 
above the five-year average from 2010 to 2014. Trade 
agreements that will benefit Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker: 
Trans-Pacific Partnership agreement, comprehensive economic 
trade agreement, and the Canadian Canada-Korea Free Trade 
Agreement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And western livestock price insurance program, this is 
important. Sixty-four per cent of producers that produce the calf 
option through livestock price insurance received a payment in 
2015, Mr. Speaker. Total payout was 4.4 million for the 
cow-calf operation. 
 
And if I can, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about companies that 
are investing in what’s happening in this province. In July of 
2015, Limagrains Cereals Research Canada announces a new 
cereal breeding and development partnership to be located right 
here in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. In July of 2015, 
Cargill opens canola oil refinery at Clavet, Saskatchewan. 
 
In July 2015, the federal provincial government announced $10 
million for Livestock and Forage Centre of Excellence for 
Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. And in July of 2015, the federal 
government announced 22 million for International Trade 
Centre at Evraz Place, which will benefit Agribition and the 
Farm Progress Show, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in February 2015, the federal government announced 13 
million for a new food centre right here in Saskatoon. That’s a 
joint deal between the feds and the provincial government. 
 
In September 2014, Bayer Crop Science announced they are 
building a wheat breeding facility near Saskatoon. And in 2014, 
New-Life Mills, a division of Parrish and Heimbecker, opened a 
new feed mill to produce feed for chickens, turkey, beef, dairy, 
lamb, and swine. 
 
And in August 2013, Agricore established a high-speed pulse 
loading and cleaning facility in Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker. And 
in August 2013, CLAAS of America opened its parts and 
logistics centre in Regina and it will service all of Canada from 
here, Mr. Speaker. And in May of 2013, DuPont Pioneer 
opened its Western Canada headquarters in Saskatoon, Mr. 

Speaker. 
 
The work that we have done has been amazing in what’s going 
on in agriculture. And if I could, Mr. Speaker, I do want to 
touch on countries that have been receiving our products and 
benefiting from the farming community here in Saskatchewan. 
Saskatchewan’s top five agri-food export markets in 2015: 
United States, $4 billion; China, $2.4 billion; India, $1.5 billion; 
Japan, $882 million; Mexico, $626 million, Mr. Speaker. And 
what are the main exports that we are exporting, Mr. Speaker? 
Canola seed at $2.6 billion; lentils, Mr. Speaker, $2.5 billion; 
non-durum wheat, $2.4 billion; durum wheat, 1.8 billion; canola 
oil, 1.4 billion; peas, 1.2 billion — Mr. Speaker, I love saying 
billion — canola meal, 742 million; and live cattle, $499 
million. 
 
And what were ag food exports worth in the last couple of 
years? Mr. Speaker, we have just been going up and up. In 2010 
it was $8.3 billion, and in 2015 were $15.3 billion, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ve almost doubled in five years. It’s amazing the 
agricultural products that this province is exporting and what 
the farming community has adapted to globally. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d be very remiss if I didn’t talk about 
education property tax on farm land, Mr. Speaker, and 
particularly farm land. When my colleague at the time, the 
minister . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . It was lots. The minister 
from Rosetown-Elrose was asked by the government of the day 
to find a solution for education tax on property, Mr. Speaker. 
Guess what, Mr. Speaker? He did it. And, Mr. Speaker, since 
this government has introduced the new education tax property 
model in 2008, Mr. Speaker, no new tax increases for education 
on all classes of property in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if I could, I want to give you just a small 
example of what that means to the agriculture community in 
Saskatchewan. On my own farm, Mr. Speaker, I calculated the 
cost savings since the education property tax formula came into 
being. And I have saved approximately $250 per year, per 
quarter, which is approximately $2,000 per quarter in my 
pocket, Mr. Speaker. To that I say thank you to this government 
and to my colleagues, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much. 
That’s where the money went, Mr. Speaker, into the pockets of 
farmers and ranchers in Saskatchewan. That’s where the money 
went. 
 
If I can now, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk about infrastructure. 
Over 3.5 billion in capital investment for ’16-17, the largest 
single-year budget for infrastructure in the province’s history, 
Mr. Speaker, this will create thousands of new jobs for the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And the Crown corp 
capital is one I’d like to talk about. SaskPower, 1.1 billion to 
meet Saskatchewan’s growing needs and renewal infrastructure. 
And, Mr. Speaker, there is a lot of private contractors in rural 
Saskatchewan that will be doing work for SaskPower. I have 
one that’s in our constituency. They employ well over 50 
people. They live in the community. All of them live in the 
community. And the big thing, Mr. Speaker, is that company 
supports minor sports and minor recreation in the community, 
and they are stellar businesses in communities, Mr. Speaker, 
and that has to be recognized. 
 
SaskTel, 331 million to increase and upgrade its wireless and 



June 6, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 303 

wireline systems, Mr. Speaker. And SaskEnergy, 292 million to 
renew and expand its natural gas system to meet the growing 
needs of customer base. Mr. Speaker, all this says one thing: 
that this province is growing and the economy is growing and 
we’ve got to meet the needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over four years Saskatchewan Builds’s capital 
plan establishes a commitment of over 5.5 billion in executive 
government capital. We are committed to keeping our economy 
moving and our province strong, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On highways and infrastructure, for the first time in 
Saskatchewan’s history the Highways and Infrastructure budget 
tops $1 billion. This marks another record investment in 
provincial roads and infrastructure. The 1.15 billion 2016-17 
Highways and Infrastructure budget includes 355 million for 
capital construction, 30 million new funding for the first year of 
the highways 2020 plan, a three-year $70 million surge in 
highway repair and maintenance, and 500 million for the 
Regina bypass. 
 
More than 1300 kilometres of provincial highways will be 
repaired or upgraded this year, Mr. Speaker, continuing work 
on major projects like the Regina bypass; the twinning of 
Highway 7 and 16 near Saskatoon and Highway 39 near 
Estevan and Bienfait; starting construction on new overpasses 
at Warman and Martensville, Mr. Speaker; upgrading more than 
100 kilometres of rural highways to improve safety and access 
including Highways 322 north of Silton and 354 near Dilke, 
Mr. Speaker; 200 kilometres of repaving, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As part of the highways 2020 plan, 20 million will be invested 
in repairs to many highways throughout the province including 
Highways 220 and 322 in the Silton-Strasbourg area, Highway 
924 at Dore Lake, Highway 340 near Radisson, Highway 376 
near Maymont and Asquith, and Highway 45 south of Outlook, 
and Highway 58 between Chaplin and Shamrock in my 
constituency. And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been informed there will 
be tenders going out this week on No. 36 Highway from 
Highway 13 south towards the town of Willow Bunch, 15 
kilometres, a stretch of highway that is very important to the 
southeast part of my constituency, Mr. Speaker. And to the 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure, those communities 
say thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I’d like to quote something that I . . . when the budget 
came out, if I can, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to quote President Orb 
of SARM, Mr. Speaker: “The funding commitments made to 
highways and infrastructure and the agriculture sector 
demonstrates that the Government of Saskatchewan 
understands the importance that highways and agriculture play 
in supporting the province’s economy,” Mr. Speaker. And so 
right he is. 
 
If I can, Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk . . . give some issues 
on education now. The Government of Saskatchewan has put 
student success and safety at the top of its priority list by 
increasing its overall investment in education by 7.8 per cent to 
a total of $2.2 billion. This includes 391.4 million for capital 
investment, Mr. Speaker. The government’s investment in 
infrastructure includes 310 million, an increase of 153.1 million 
for the 18 joint-use schools being built on nine sites; 33.4 
million, an increase of 6.4 million or 24 per cent for preventive 

maintenance and renewal; 4.6 million for emergency building 
repairs; 41.9 million for ongoing capital projects including 
schools at St. Brieux, Langenburg, Gravelbourg, and 
Martensville, as well as École Connaught, Sacred Heart, and the 
new centre replacing Scott Collegiate in Regina; and 1 million 
for school facility assessments. 
 
The government remains committed to supporting early 
education and child care across the province, including the 
creation of 810 new child care spaces that are being developed 
as part of the 18 new elementary schools currently under 
construction on nine joint-use sites in Saskatoon, Regina, 
Warman, and Martensville. In order to meet the needs of a 
growing and diverse province, the ministry’s 2016-17 budget 
increases funding for classroom supports by 4 million. 
 
The government is providing 288 million to school divisions for 
supports for learning funding in the 2016-17 school year. This 
funding includes supports for students with intensive needs, 
students in vulnerable circumstances, and students who require 
English as an additional language support. In addition, 5.4 
million, Mr. Speaker, of school operating funding is being 
targeted to support Syrian refugee students. Funding for youth 
at high-risk facilities is also increasing by $600,000 over last 
year to help address salary and enrolment pressures, for a total 
investment of $5.8 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If I could, Mr. Speaker, I do also want to talk a little bit about 
no tax increases, Mr. Speaker, no new tax increases in this 
budget for the people of Saskatchewan. Since 2007, Mr. 
Speaker, $6 billion in tax reductions to Saskatchewan families, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s 6 billion with a “b”, Mr. Speaker, for 
families, individuals, homeowners, business, and farms, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we in government are going to look at 
all aspects of our spending by looking at ways we can do things 
better and deliver services to the people of this province in a 
more efficient manner, we will look at transformational change 
in all aspects of the services we provide, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and I look forward to this process. 
 
If I could, Mr. Speaker, I do want to touch a little bit about the 
past history of the previous government, if I could. And I just 
want to share this with my colleague from Lumsden-Morse who 
made reference to these failures in his response to the Throne 
Speech, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And a great speech it was too. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Mr. Marit: — It was. Twenty-six million lost in Big Sky 
Farms, Mr. Speaker; 90.8 lost in Navigata Communications; 35 
million lost in SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company]; 15 million lost in Channel Lake; 2 
million lost in Guyana; 16 million lost in NST Chicago; 9.4 
million lost in Persona Inc.; 24.7 million lost in Retx.com; 6.7 
million lost in tappedinto.com; 3 million lost in Clickabid.com; 
5.6 million lost in Soft Tracks Enterprises; and it goes on and 
on, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know how my colleague got through 
that list. But it adds up to about $330 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 



304 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2016 

And if you look at their budgets, their budget in 2005-2006 for 
highways, Mr. Speaker, was 308 million. They could have 
doubled their budget and had a return on investment to the 
people of this province. They chose not to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to stand here and say that we also have 
a plan to return to balanced budgets, Mr. Speaker, unlike many 
other provinces in this country that have no plan to return to a 
balanced budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And just before I close, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m sure you can 
tell that agriculture and the importance of it to the economy of 
this great province is very important to me and my family, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. I’ve been a farmer all my life, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. In fact I wasn’t even old enough to legally sign the 
contract when I bought my farm, Mr. Speaker. We had to wait 
six months until I turned 18 years old to legally sign the 
contract, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And if I could, I found this poem that I thought I would like to 
read before closing and I think it really describes a farmer, Mr. 
Speaker. And it’s called “Just a Farmer”: 
 

“Just a farmer,” you said, 
 
And I laughed ’cause I knew 
All the things that farmers 
Must be able to do. 
 
They must study the land, 
Then watch the sky 
And figure just when 
Is the right time and why- 
 
To sow and to plant 
To buy and to sell 
To go to the market 
With cattle and well - 
 
You know the books 
That farmers must keep 
To pay all those taxes 
And be able to sleep. 
 
And you know the fixin’ 
That farmers must do 
When machines like mad monsters 
Blow a gasket or two 
 
I guess when God needed 
Folks to care for His earth 
He chose “just farmers” 
’Cause he knew their true worth 

 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is dedicated to the continued 
investment of people of this great province, Mr. Speaker, so that 
they have quality of life, quality health, and quality education, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. This government is doing all it can to 
make Saskatchewan the best place to live, to work, and to raise 
a family, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m very proud to be part of this 
government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a government dedicated to 

keeping Saskatchewan strong, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
In closing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be supporting the motion 
put forward by the hon. member for Regina Northeast, 
seconded by my colleague, the member from Regina 
University, and I will not be supporting the amendment, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Thank you very much. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Members, I’d like to take this 
opportunity to introduce someone who has joined us and is 
seated in the seats at the back of the Assembly: former Deputy 
Speaker, Mr. Graham Addley from Saskatoon. 
 
Graham was the Deputy Speaker back in the first term or two 
when I was first a member of this House, and he is here today 
as part of the team interviewing young people, prospective 
candidates for the Legislative Intern Program. 
 
So I’d ask all members to welcome Mr. Addley to his 
Assembly.  
 
I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that the Assembly approves in 
general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Ms. 
Sproule.] 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is my 
first opportunity to rise in this House since the election, so I’d 
like to take the opportunity to thank folks as we all do when we 
have a chance to stand on our feet. 
 
As most of you in the House know, my mom moved to BC two 
years ago. And although she’s not here physically with me and 
the kids, she certainly is here in spirit and I know that she 
continues to cheer me on from the many miles away that she is. 
And I certainly want to thank her for all she did to enable me to 
be here standing in this place. 
 
I want to once again recognize my girls. Sharmaine is currently 
away on a medical missions trip. She’s been gone since 
January. She gets back next Sunday, so she’s been gone for just 
over five months and we miss her terribly. Although my house 
is very quiet and very clean, I would much rather have it loud 
and dirty and have my girl home. She’s been doing front-line 
medical care on the islands of Vanuatu and I couldn’t be more 
proud of her. 
 
She wants to get into nursing. She’s currently on a waiting list 
to get into Sask Poly in Saskatoon for nursing for the fall, so 
I’m certainly hoping that she has the opportunity to go this fall. 
She’ll be an awesome nurse. She’s got a great personality and 
loves people and people love her. They’re just drawn to her. 



June 6, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 305 

She’s a really neat kid. 
 
And to Jasmine, who because her sister and I are both away 
from home, she’s at home looking after things all by herself, so 
I want to thank her. She’s a talented and creative girl and so she 
uses a different part of her brain than I do, and I don’t always 
understand where she’s coming from, because I am not 
necessarily creative and talented but slightly more analytical 
than she is. But she’s just . . . she’s turning into such a neat 
young woman and I just want to congratulate her in all that she 
does. She’s turned her basement suite into a workshop. She 
sews and designs and draws and paints and creates, and I’m so 
very proud of her. 
 
And I do want to thank John for his love and support and most 
importantly for his understanding with me being gone so much. 
It’s a lot for our family and friends and loved ones to be gone 
away from home, and it takes a village to allow us to be here, 
people looking after things at home for us. 
 
And as always to Whitney Friesen. He has fought eight 
different campaigns in his 22 years as a constituency assistant. 
He had three general elections for my dad, a contested 
nomination for me, and four elections for me. He’s very good at 
what he does. But more that that, he loves what he does. And 
that makes such a huge difference when you’ve had a job for as 
long as he has, that he still enjoys it. And I want to thank him 
for everything that he’s done for me and for my dad before me. 
 
And I want to congratulate all the new MLAs [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] on both sides of the House. I was new 
about nine years ago, so not quite so shiny and new anymore, 
and I know that so many of my colleagues were so welcoming 
and helpful when I was first elected, and made sure that we 
figured out where things were and how things operate. And I 
hope that the new MLAs are experiencing that from those of us 
who have been here for a while as well. So congratulations to 
them and I hope that they feel welcome. 
 
This last election saw a change in boundaries for my 
constituency. I used to represent seven communities. I lost four 
of those. They have a very capable MLA in the member for 
Biggar, so they’re in good hands. But to the communities and 
mayors and leadership of Hepburn and Hague and Dalmeny and 
Waldheim, I want to say thank you. It’s been such an absolute 
joy to work with them over the last nine years and the regional 
approach that they take in getting along with their neighbours. I 
have Warman, Martensville, and Osler, which I’m quite proud 
to represent. Warman and Martensville are amongst the 
fastest-growing cities in all of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want to thank my government and my colleagues for 
recognizing that growth. We’ve seen the investment in 
communities that I represent, whether it’s additions to schools 
or portables onto schools or the joint-use schools that we see in 
Warman and Martensville. I drive past them every weekend 
when I go home and just watch the construction going on, and 
it’s going to be so exciting to be there for the ribbon cutting in a 
year, as those schools will be open for the fall of 2017. And in 
this budget, Mr. Speaker, as you know, we also have continued 
money for the interchanges at Warman and Martensville. I have 
vehicle counts — about 18,000 vehicles a day — and it’s going 
to be great to have those interchanges up. 

I’ve been on treasury board for seven years. It’s like “Hotel 
California” — you get on but you can’t ever get out. And so I 
can assure the members opposite that the budget was not done 
before the election. We put in a lot of hours after the election to 
fine-tune things and make sure our election promises were 
accounted for and to make those very difficult decisions. Mr. 
Speaker, every budget year is a difficult year. Regardless of 
revenues, there’s still decisions to make, allocations to make. 
But this year was different. It was quite trying with almost $1 
billion lost in resource revenue. Obviously there were some 
very difficult decisions to make. 
 
But the one thing that I’m very proud of, Mr. Speaker, is that 
we have committed to continuing to build our province, literally 
build our province. Whether it comes to schools or hospitals or 
highways, we’re not shortchanging those projects, Mr. Speaker, 
and making sure that we’ve got the things that we need in place 
as our province continues to grow. And, Mr. Speaker, as I am 
the Minister of Highways, I know a lot of my colleagues will 
highlight the things that we put out in the budget. 
 
I want to take this opportunity to correct the record on a few 
things. We know, Mr. Speaker, time and time and time again, 
that we have to do our own reality checks from what the NDP 
have brought into this House to make sure that the people of 
this province have the correct information, and have to do some 
of that work on Highways as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this budget we allocated $1.15 billion for 
transportation infrastructure, and included in that was the first 
year of our $70 million surge to make sure that we can fix even 
more roads. There’s $30 million in this budget, and I . . . It was 
the beginning of May and the NDP put out a reality check. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I use the word reality when it comes to their 
reality checks pretty loosely because there’s not a lot of reality 
in them. And they said, Mr. Speaker, that the $70 million 
campaign promise for Highways, the additional $70 million 
wouldn’t result in even a hundred kilometres of roads being 
fixed. Mr. Speaker, the member from Athabasca stood here — I 
think it was during his budget speech — and said that the $30 
million in this year’s budget wouldn’t pave 25 kilometres of 
highway. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they couldn’t be more wrong. The $30 
million in this budget alone will address 460 kilometres of 
highways and roads across this province, Mr. Speaker, which is 
a far cry from the 25 kilometres that they say is included in this 
budget. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we know that a few years ago the member for 
Rosemont, the now interim Leader of the Opposition, 
completely threw the member from Athabasca under the bus, 
saying that he failed high school accounting. He said, Mr. 
Speaker, and I quote, “he has many strengths, but that aspect 
isn’t the one [that] we rely on.” And, Mr. Speaker, I have to 
agree with the Leader of the Opposition, although they seem to 
be taking the member from Athabasca’s advice when it comes 
to math and accounting because they’re all using the wrong 
numbers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and this from a party who ran in the last election 
wanting to form government again, and they actually ran on a 
platform of reducing highway spending, both on the capital side 



306 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2016 

and on the expenses side, Mr. Speaker. And somehow they 
decided that they could pave way more with less money. And 
I’m not quite sure how you account for that when we have a 
tendering process that is an open, fair, and transparent process. 
We don’t dictate to contractors what they’re going to come in as 
a tender. There’s inflation; there’s labour costs. Mr. Speaker, I 
don’t know how the NDP would propose to control all of that 
unless they somehow think that you’re going to bring it all back 
into government and put all of our contractors out of work. I’m 
not quite sure how they’re going to be spending less money and 
somehow be paving more roads, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s right in their costing of their platform. They were going to 
reduce . . . Currently we, out of our total infrastructure spend 
across government, Highways accounts for about 50 per cent of 
that spend which we need. We’ve all driven on our highways. 
We know that that money is necessary. They were going to 
reduce that to 35 per cent of total government spend, which is a 
pretty big reduction. I think I did the math on their numbers. It’s 
about $2.1 billion over the next four years, Mr. Speaker. In this 
budget alone we have $855 million in capital spend in 
Highways, which is almost half of what their total four-year 
projection is. So again, I’m not quite sure how they propose to 
be paving more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a few things I’d like to point out. I listened 
very intently to the Leader of the Opposition’s speech when he 
was responding to the Throne Speech, and there is again, Mr. 
Speaker, just some things that we absolutely need to correct the 
record on. 
 
And one of them is . . . The Premier alluded to this in his 
answers in question period today. The interim Leader of the 
Opposition said, and I quote, when it comes to the bypass, and I 
quote, “ballooned from the originally estimated cost of $400 
million to an outrageous $2 billion.” Well, Mr. Speaker, we 
know that that is absolutely factually incorrect. And the 
member opposite knows that because I’ve told him that. We 
were at a highways debate during the last campaign and he used 
the same line there, and I told him very directly that those were 
two completely different projects. He knows that. And even 
knowing all of that correct information, Mr. Speaker, he still 
comes here, stands, gets to his feet, and still comes in here with 
information that is not correct. And he knows it’s not correct. 
 
And that is, Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to have a debate about the 
bypass. I’m happy to have a debate about our government’s 
transportation infrastructure plans but, Mr. Speaker, I think that 
we all need to be bringing the right information to the table in 
order to have that debate. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would expect more from the interim Leader 
of the Opposition. He’s the leader. He’s supposed to be leading 
by example. But, Mr. Speaker, as we have seen from other 
members of his caucus who’ve come into this House with not 
always accurate information, apparently his leading, and that’s 
the kind of approach that he wants his members to take which, 
Mr. Speaker, isn’t helpful to the debate in this House at all. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . well the member 
from Athabasca says I should stop whining. He stood in the 

House today and he said that we have forgotten the North, that 
we have purposefully walked away from the North. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, for the edification of the member from Athabasca who 
thinks that me wanting to have a factual debate is whining, 
that’s pretty shameful behaviour from him, Mr. Speaker. But 
when it comes to the North, I’m happy to tell the member from 
Athabasca that in this budget the capital allocation for northern 
roads — not airports — for northern roads is 100 per cent 
increase over our record budget from last year. And I’m sure 
he’ll show up at budget estimates and we can have that 
discussion, Mr. Speaker, but wanting a factual debate is not 
whining. Shameful behaviour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also would like to point out in the interim 
leader’s speech to the Throne Speech, and it comes up in their 
questions in question period as well, they keep talking about 
mortgage-paying jobs of Saskatchewan workers. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m happy to take the opportunity to talk about 
mortgage-paying jobs for the people of our province. Because, 
Mr. Speaker, in their platform, in black and white it says that 
they want to cut back on the use of expensive external 
contractors. And then it goes on to say, Saskatchewan Party’s 
increased spending on external contractors by 82 per cent. Not 
consultants; that’s a different category. Contractors. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in the Ministry of Highways, guess who 
those contractors are? They are Saskatchewan-based, 
family-run road builders and they want to take their jobs away, 
Mr. Speaker, mortgage-paying jobs for the people of this 
province. They want to take away road builders’ jobs. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, perhaps they would understand the industry 
better if they actually met with the Saskatchewan Heavy 
Construction Association. They’ve been in opposition for over 
eight years. Let’s round it up to a decade because they like 
using that number. They’ve been in opposition for almost 10 
years. They have yet to meet with the Saskatchewan Heavy 
Construction Association. They have no idea how this industry 
even works, Mr. Speaker. They haven’t met these people. They 
have no idea of the family connections. There are 
third-generation companies in this province, Mr. Speaker. I’ve 
mentioned one in the House before. George Wilson started his 
business 60-some years ago. He’s 92 years old and he still goes 
to work every day. These are the people whose jobs the NDP 
want to take away, Mr. Speaker, and again that is absolutely 
shameful. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the new NDP member from Prince Albert 
likes to tell us, well I’m here. There’s representation now. I’m 
going to defend Prince Albert. Well good for you. Where’s the 
defence of Broda? Mr. Speaker, we did an event before the 
election at Broda’s headquarters because they’re moving dirt for 
the bypass — and are they moving dirt. It is amazing the work 
that they’ve done. Broda was established in Prince Albert in 
1957. If there’s a Saskatchewan company, that’s them. It’s 
Broda. 
 
And what was the NDP’s response to that, Mr. Speaker? To 
send out another reality check — again loose on the reality — 
saying well they don’t count because they’re not really 
Saskatchewan enough because they might have some 
investment money coming in from Alberta. Mr. Speaker, 
completely denigrating. But they didn’t actually say Broda’s 



June 6, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 307 

name in the press release because they didn’t think they wanted 
to go that far. But that was exactly what their intent was, Mr. 
Speaker, was to throw Broda under the bus, saying somehow 
they weren’t Saskatchewan enough. Well I would challenge the 
new NDP member from Prince Albert to stand up for Prince 
Albert and take her leader to task for his comments in that 
reality check, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said at the outset, this budget was challenging. 
There were some very difficult decisions to be made. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the NDP know the financial reality of this government. 
We don’t really have a spending problem. We have worked 
really hard . . . again, been on treasury board for seven years. 
We’ve worked really hard on controlling the spending that we 
have oversight on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have about a billion-dollar hole in resource revenue in this 
budget, Mr. Speaker, and knowing that, knowing the numbers, 
seeing the numbers, the day after the budget was announced in 
this House by our Finance minister, I went back over question 
period. Every single member from the NDP stood up and asked 
for more, more, more for Health, more for Education. 
 
Granted, Mr. Speaker, in our present financial reality, obviously 
we did the best that we could. But, Mr. Speaker, every single 
one of them stood up and asked for more. And even today 
they’re asking for more. But not once did they put a dollar 
figure on that, Mr. Speaker. The member from Riversdale, the 
critic for Health, she wants more. How much? How much more 
money? What’s the dollar? The Education critic keeps asking 
for more. Well how much is that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, time and again they come into this House and say 
that yes, they’re the opposition and their job is to oppose. But 
their job is also to propose. Well, Mr. Speaker, I would 
challenge them to do exactly that. Propose something. How 
much more money do you want? The member from Nutana, to 
her credit — although I don’t know why she’s the Finance 
critic, but that aside — Mr. Speaker, to her credit she actually 
put a number on it: a 6 per cent increase each and every year for 
health and education. That’s hundreds of millions of dollars. 
How do they propose to pay for that, Mr. Speaker? They 
haven’t said. 
 
They’re not proposing anything. They just sit there and oppose 
everything that we do. I would love to see a proposal on 
education funding and on health funding from the critics 
opposite, Mr. Speaker. I think that would be refreshing because, 
Mr. Speaker, if they are actually requesting hundreds of 
millions of dollars more every year, there are only three ways in 
our present situation to pay for that: you go into deficit; you cut 
a whole bunch of other programming, and they’re going to have 
to tell us what they’re going to cut; or you raise taxes. And, Mr. 
Speaker, knowing the NDP’s history — they raised taxes 21 
times in 16 years — I think we know exactly where they would 
go. They would pay for it on the backs of the hard-working men 
and women of this province, Mr. Speaker, and that is not 
acceptable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing I just want to say thank you to the 
Premier for being a great defender and promoter of our 
province. We have seen investment from outside of our 
province like never before, and I have to attribute that to his 

leadership. And I do want to thank my colleagues and the 
Minister of Finance, all the hard work that went into this 
budget, Mr. Speaker, in a very difficult year. I think that we’ve 
made some very wise decisions that’s going to keep our 
province strong going forward. 
 
We know this is temporary, Mr. Speaker. We will come back 
from this, and we do have a plan to get us back to balance. And 
I’m very proud that we are about the only province in the entire 
Dominion of Canada that actually has a plan to do just that. And 
I think that the people of this province understand that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am very proud to be supporting the budget of our 
government, and I will not be supporting the opposition’s 
amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Carlton. 
 
Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is my 
privilege to rise in the House today to speak of my full support 
for the budget put forth by the Minister of Finance on June 1st. 
 
Mr. Speaker, firstly I want to thank the Minister of Finance and 
his entire team for their hard work in bringing this budget 
together. Mr. Speaker, given the fact that they had to deal with a 
$1 billion shortfall in resource revenue, I’m sure it was a very 
challenging task. Everything, Mr. Speaker, must have been on 
the table and to be reviewed. Mr. Speaker, it is a testament to 
the hard work and dedication to the people of Saskatchewan 
that the minister and his team managed to bring in this budget, 
Mr. Speaker, with no tax increases and no new taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget has a very good balance, with 
controlled spending of only a 2 per cent increase in expenses 
and yet it continues to invest in the people of Saskatchewan 
with strong social programs and strong investment in 
infrastructure to maintain the economic momentum and provide 
jobs and services for the people of Saskatchewan. During the 
recent election campaign, Mr. Speaker, this government’s 
commitment was to keep Saskatchewan strong, and this budget, 
Mr. Speaker, and the plan put forward by the Minister of 
Finance, is just that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I am a new member to this House, I am a 
long-time businessman in Prince Albert and I can tell you 
change, transformational change, is something I know very 
well. Mr. Speaker, in private business, change is the only thing 
that is constant and if you don’t change, you fall behind. You 
have to continually be changing and improving your processes, 
Mr. Speaker, to ensure your services are being delivered in the 
best possible manner, at the most reasonable cost to your 
customer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in order to make your processes and service 
delivery changes successful, you have to involve all your 
stakeholders. Your managers must be involved. Your staff have 
to be involved. And your customers and suppliers also have to 
be involved, Mr. Speaker. As you’re going through 
transformation process, Mr. Speaker, you have to make sure 
that you’re asking the right questions. Is it a service or product 
we should be selling or doing? Are we duplicating our services? 
Are we delivering it in the proper manner? 



308 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2016 

Mr. Speaker, I believe government runs a lot like private 
business, Mr. Speaker, and there is a need for constant 
transformational change. Mr. Speaker, as a businessman turned 
politician, I look forward to being involved as one of those 
stakeholders in undertaking this transformational change 
process. Mr. Speaker, I firmly believe it will benefit the people 
of Saskatchewan by making sure programs and services remain 
sustainable and at the lowest possible cost to the Saskatchewan 
taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the election we campaigned on a promise 
to keep taxes low for the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 
that’s what this budget delivered — no new taxes and no tax 
increases. We know that higher taxes could hurt a fragile 
economy. Mr. Speaker, in order to keep Saskatchewan’s 
economy strong and moving forward, even though there was a 
$1 billion revenue shortfall, this Finance minister delivered a 
budget with no new taxes, no tax increases, and he should be 
commended for that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since 2008 this government has had tax reductions 
of $5.9 billion and yes, because so many members have a 
problem spelling, that is billion with a “b”. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has amongst the lowest personal 
business tax burdens in the country. Mr. Speaker, that means a 
family of four with $100,000 combined income will see savings 
of over $2,500 in provincial tax in 2016 compared to what they 
paid in 2007 under the NDP government. Mr. Speaker, that’s 
money in their pockets. To be able to offer that to a family nine 
years later is proof of this government’s successful planning. 
That money, that savings in taxes, Mr. Speaker, will help pay 
the bills for kids, pay for kids’ sports, maybe enjoy some leisure 
time with their families at one of our incredible parks, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, under this government, families in this province 
have consistently paid the second lowest taxes and utilities in 
the country. That’s a far cry from the taxes that had to be paid 
under the previous NDP government. Mr. Speaker, easy way to 
raise revenue when revenues are down like they are today . . . 
[inaudible] . . . raise taxes. The NDP would know that very 
well, Mr. Speaker, because they raised taxes 21 times. That’s 
right, 21 times. But by raising taxes, Mr. Speaker, we would 
hurt this fragile economy. We would, Mr. Speaker, be taking 
money out of the pockets of the people we serve, and that’s just 
not right. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I must go back to what it’s like in private 
business when we talk about infrastructure. In business you 
know how important it is to have a building that’s well 
maintained, safe for all staff, and has good presence. Mr. 
Speaker, as well in business, we know how essential it is to 
have the best in equipment and the latest in technology in order 
to deliver the best service to your customers. Mr. Speaker, this 
government has been and remains committed to filling in the 
major hole in infrastructure that the previous NDP government 
left behind. Mr. Speaker, this government has spent a record 
$9.6 billion on infrastructure since 2008 and has committed 
another $3.5 billion for infrastructure this year. That, Mr. 
Speaker, is the largest single-year capital investment in this 
province’s history. Mr. Speaker, investing in infrastructure 
builds Saskatchewan’s strength and establishes the framework 

to help the province’s economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all know this record infrastructure spending 
will support jobs for Saskatchewan people. Under the former 
NDP government, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan had the worst 
job creation record, but this government, Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan has the lowest unemployment rate in Canada and 
the second strongest job creation record in Canada. Mr. 
Speaker, there are 68,000 more people working right here in 
Saskatchewan today than there were just eight years ago. That 
is a trend, Mr. Speaker, that this budget and this government 
looks to continue. 
 
This budget, Mr. Speaker, creates better learning environments 
for our children in our educational system by giving them better 
schools like the new joint-use schools in Martensville, Warman, 
Saskatoon, and Regina. And this budget also provides major 
funding for major renovations on existing schools in 
Langenburg, Gravelbourg, St. Brieux, and Regina. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget also helps our sick and elderly with 
better quality health care, with continued investment in our 
hospitals and long-term care facilities. Mr. Speaker, our 
government has invested over $1.2 billion over the past eight 
years, and this budget commits another 239 million to health 
care capital this year. Mr. Speaker, instead of closing hospitals 
at a record pace, this government is continuing with record 
spending in health care, Mr. Speaker, and has increased total 
spending to $5.6 billion. 
 
The NDP, Mr. Speaker, they closed 52 hospitals in this 
province, including the Holy Family Hospital in my hometown, 
Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker, and yet they complain that we 
should do more. Maybe they don’t remember it was their 
government, Mr. Speaker, that closed the second hospital in 
Prince Albert. Mr. Speaker, when the NDP closed the Holy 
Family Hospital in Prince Albert, this put far too much pressure 
on the only remaining hospital in Prince Albert, the Victoria 
Hospital. Now as I said, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 
complain that we have more to do, yet their government closed 
that second hospital, Mr. Speaker. Maybe the members should 
have thought of that again before they closed that second 
hospital, the Holy Family Hospital in Prince Albert, along with 
the 51 other hospitals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has invested $2 million in a 
review to develop a plan for renewal of the Victoria Hospital. 
 
One should also remember, Mr. Speaker, it was this 
government that hired 650 more doctors and it was this 
government that hired 3,000 more nurses of all designations, 
Mr. Speaker. What did the NDP do when they were in power, 
Mr. Speaker? They drove doctors and nurses out of the 
province. This province lost 450 nurses and 173 doctors in just 
the last five years the NDP were in power, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Under this government, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has gone 
from the longest surgical wait times in Canada to the shortest 
surgical wait times in Canada. And in this budget, Mr. Speaker, 
there is an additional $20 million increase to the Saskatchewan 
surgical initiative which is aimed at keeping surgical wait times 



June 6, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 309 

to no longer than three months. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also in this budget, there is $9.8 million in funding 
for 15 new crucial, yet expensive, cancer-treating drugs and, 
Mr. Speaker, $15 million more for the drug plan and extended 
benefits for the treatment of hepatitis C. 
 
One should also remember, Mr. Speaker, that it’s our 
government that has built, or has under construction, 15 new 
long-term care facilities, Mr. Speaker, And again I must remind 
the members opposite, while they profess to be the only ones to 
speak for the most vulnerable but, Mr. Speaker, it was under 
their government that they closed 1,200 long-term care beds for 
those most vulnerable that they profess to speak for. 
 
Again in this budget, Mr. Speaker, we have committed to 
reducing health authority administration expenses by $7.5 
million and reinvesting those savings in that frontline staff for 
those long-term care facilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget also improves the safety for all of us 
on Saskatchewan’s highways. And we know, even though we 
have built or repaired over 10 000 kilometres of highway, there 
is still more work to do. Mr. Speaker, that is why this budget 
commits 875 million in transportation infrastructure. 
 
Additionally, Mr. Speaker, this budget includes the highways 
2020 plan which outlines a three-year $70 million surge to fix 
even more highways. For safety on our highways, Mr. Speaker, 
this budget includes significant dollars for twinning and passing 
lanes on a number of highways throughout the province, as well 
as the very much needed interchanges for Warman and 
Martensville. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, in the private sector we 
know how important it is to continually upgrade our equipment 
and to have and provide our customers with the latest in 
technology. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our Crowns continue to provide the best in 
technology and service to the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, SaskPower is investing $1.1 billion to renew the 
transmission and distribution systems that carry power 
throughout this province. SaskTel, Mr. Speaker, will invest 
$331 million to continue to improve the province by upgrading 
its wireless and wire line networks and continue to roll out the 
Infinet service. SaskEnergy, Mr. Speaker, will invest $292 
million to renew and expand its natural gas distribution. This, 
Mr. Speaker, is investing in Saskatchewan’s future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is investing in the province’s number 
one resource, our people. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan and this 
government cares for those most vulnerable. That is why, Mr. 
Speaker, in this budget $1.24 billion has been allocated for 
social services and assistance. That’s a $34 million increase 
over last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in response to complex and increasing caseloads, 
additional funding has been increased in this budget by $9.7 
million for Saskatchewan assured income for disabilities for a 
total budget of $210 million. Saskatchewan assistance plan, Mr. 
Speaker, increased 5.6 million, to $153 million. And, Mr. 
Speaker, there’s an additional 6.4 million to address foster care 

and extended family care caseloads. Also, Mr. Speaker, there’s 
an increase of $3.4 million for those with intellectual 
disabilities. This, Mr. Speaker, is commitment to assist those 
most vulnerable in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget continues to show this government’s 
commitment to the municipalities of this province. Mr. Speaker, 
we know this revenue plays an important role in assisting all the 
cities, towns, villages, and municipalities in the province to help 
provide services to help meet the needs of the people in their 
areas. Mr. Speaker, revenue to the municipalities is just under 
$272 million. This is up $144 million, or 113 per cent since 
2007 and 2008. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan voted April 4th and 
showed their confidence they have in this party and this leader. 
Mr. Speaker, they voted overwhelmingly for this government 
because they had the confidence in our leader and our party to 
maintain a strong economy in good economic times and, Mr. 
Speaker, in tough economic times as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with their vote they showed the confidence they 
have in this government and the ability to keep this province 
moving forward. Mr. Speaker, we know there’s more to do, and 
we will continue to improve. We will continue to do what is 
needed for growing this province. We know, Mr. Speaker, that 
revenues are down right now, not only in Saskatchewan, but in 
all energy-producing provinces. However, Mr. Speaker, 
revenues will improve. In a business, Mr. Speaker, when 
revenues are down it only makes sense to review where and 
how your revenues are coming in versus how your expenses are 
going out, Mr. Speaker. And if there is a concern, one needs to 
address it. This budget, Mr. Speaker, addresses those concerns. 
 
This government, Mr. Speaker, including this member from 
Prince Albert, are committed to keeping Saskatchewan strong 
and making Saskatchewan the best that it can be. And I, Mr. 
Speaker, will continue to make sure the issues of Prince Albert 
and area are a priority. While we acknowledge there’s more to 
do, Mr. Speaker, I would think our past record clearly shows 
that we are on the right track. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with this budget and our commitment to bring the 
budget back to balance in the next fiscal year, this clearly shows 
that we are going to keep Saskatchewan strong. Mr. Speaker, no 
one likes higher taxes and no one likes reduced spending on 
programs. And, Mr. Speaker, no one should like running a 
deficit. That’s why, Mr. Speaker, this minister, this Finance 
minister, should be applauded for finding that right balance 
between the three in this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is why I positively support the budget motion 
and am against the opposition’s amendment. Thank you very 
much. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, thank you 
for the opportunity to be able to respond to the budget. And I 
would like to add at the beginning of my comments that I will 
be supporting this budget. This budget is fiscally responsible 
and it takes into consideration the needs of the province of 



310 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2016 

Saskatchewan and the people who live here. This budget is 
what the people of Saskatchewan require in this time of tight 
financial constraint. This is a budget that is continuing with the 
work that has been started and, as always, there is more work to 
be done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I could summarize what I’m going to talk about 
today, this budget contains no tax increases. This was achieved 
by controlled spending. This budget ensures a better quality of 
life by investing in our people. This budget will keep 
Saskatchewan strong by investing in infrastructure, and the 
2016-17 budget will keep Saskatchewan strong. 
 
I believe with some of the responses you have heard, there is a 
clear theme that is starting to come out. This budget will keep 
Saskatchewan strong by keeping taxes low, controlling 
operational spending, and continuing to make key investments 
in infrastructure and important governmental services for 
Saskatchewan people. Over the past nine years, we have 
significantly invested in all areas of the budget while reducing 
the tax burden. As a result, this budget builds on a solid 
foundation. 
 
A couple of weeks ago we had the honour of having former 
Finance minister Ken Krawetz sit here with us during our 
session. Mr. Krawetz had the foresight all those years ago to be 
one of the founding members of the Saskatchewan Party. And I 
would like to take this time to thank him for that foresight and 
helping to build a party that I am proud to be able to stand up 
for and to talk for. 
 
And now we have a new Finance minister, and this minister has 
had big shoes to fill. I believe he is doing a fantastic job. Given 
the fact that a fragile global economy and sharp decline in oil 
and potash prices have led to challenges on our province’s 
economy and finances, and ultimately on our citizens and 
businesses, he has put a budget together that addresses these 
stressors and is based on the Throne Speech that was presented 
to us at the beginning of this session. 
 
I would also like to add a little startling fact. A decline of 
almost $1 billion in non-renewable resource revenue has made 
this budget even more challenging. Having said that, on April 
4th our government was re-elected based on a campaign that 
made few specific promises but instead made one simple yet 
significant commitment — to keep Saskatchewan strong. And 
that is exactly what this budget will do. 
 
This government ran on a platform that we would not be 
increasing taxes for the people of Saskatchewan, and that is 
what this budget delivers. And I believe that it is what the 
people of Saskatchewan have asked for, as we all saw with the 
results of the provincial election on April 4th. They spoke loud 
and clear when they put 51 seats on this side of the House. And 
we are so grateful and humbled that the people of Saskatchewan 
have put their faith in us, as we are to do everything we can to 
make them proud they made that choice. 
 
This is a year when it is so important that the money our 
residents earn should stay in their pockets. It is not going to be 
an easy year for a lot of these families in the province, and 
taxing them is not the solution; as opposed to when the NDP 
was in power, they chose to raise all different types of taxes on 

the residents of Saskatchewan. In fact, they raised taxes 21 
times during their 16 years in power, including raising the PST 
four times and the gas tax twice. This is compared to our 
government who has delivered record property tax reductions 
and record income tax reductions. 
 
And some statistical information that I think you might find 
very interesting: an individual taxpayer who earns $18,960 pays 
zero Saskatchewan tax; a family of four with $50,000 of annual 
income has now seen their provincial income tax cut by more 
than 95 per cent since 2007 from $2,302 to zero. I would just 
like to repeat that fact. A family of four with $50,000 income 
will pay zero Saskatchewan tax. Since 2007 this government 
has removed 112,000 Saskatchewan residents from the tax roll 
completely, and we have reduced education property tax on 
agriculture land by 80 per cent. Under the NDP, at the risk of 
repeating myself, they raised taxes on Saskatchewan people 21 
times. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Members across the floor want us to tell the truth. They want us 
to be honest. I can tell you right now that that is exactly what 
this government does. A member across the floor likes to talk 
about her mentor, Harry Van Mulligen. I find it quite interesting 
that during the 2003 election, the NDP said they would not raise 
PST, which is exactly what they did. And what did former 
Finance minister Harry Van Mulligen have to say when he was 
asked? And I quote from January 13th, 2004: 
 

Why don’t parties . . . [want] to talk about tax hikes during 
elections? Well I don’t know [he said]. I suspect that 
anyone who talks about tax hikes is not likely to be very 
popular during the course of an election campaign.  
 

Unbelievable. With mentors like that, it’s no wonder there are 
10 seats on the other side of the House. 
 
In fact since 2007, there have been tax reductions to families, 
individuals, homeowners, businesses, and farmers. The amount 
of these reductions totals nearly $6 billion. That’s correct. I said 
$6 billion — money that has been able to stay in the hands of 
our Saskatchewan residents. Also of note is the fact that we in 
Saskatchewan are among the lowest personal and business tax 
rates in Canada, and this is according to the Conference Board 
of Canada report. 
 
I would also like to quote what the Canadian Press had to say 
about our budget. They said, “Winners: Taxpayers. No new 
taxes on anything, not even . . . sin taxes for liquor or tobacco.” 
 
And how about John Hopkins who is the CEO of the Regina 
and District Chamber of Commerce? And I quote, “We are 
pretty pleased with the fact that this budget didn’t increase 
taxes, didn’t go overboard in terms of cuts, and didn’t go 
overboard on a whole range of things.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I stand here today as the member from the Estevan 
constituency. And as I am sure you are aware of what is 
happening in our economy right now, our constituency has been 
affected greatly. We have had a lot of people who work in the 
resource industry, and some of those people are losing their 
jobs. But those people are not the only people that have been 



June 6, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 311 

affected. This downturn in our economy has a trickle-down 
effect on our entire workforce. And I don’t really believe that 
our opposition is completely aware of the severity of what is 
going on in this province, especially in the southern part of this 
province. So I want them to listen to the true events I am about 
to tell them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a couple of weeks ago I was at my hair 
appointment. Now you’re probably thinking, what does that 
have to do with this budget? Well I’ll tell you. It has a lot to do 
with this budget and the direction this province is going. 
Usually when I’m at these appointments, it’s a rather enjoyable 
experience. But I must say this time it was very surreal for me. 
As I sat in my chair and listened to the people around me have 
their conversations, it became very apparent that we need to be 
fiscally responsible in this budget. It confirmed what I was 
hearing throughout the election on the doorsteps of what my 
constituents were telling me. 
 
I know of a family where a wife was laid off three months ago. 
She was working in a retail store in Estevan. And now a couple 
of weeks ago her husband, who has been fortunate enough to 
work at the same company for the past 15 years, he has now 
been laid off also. So as you can see, it does not just affect 
people who are at the bottom of the totem pole. It affects 
everybody. 
 
The majority of this was due to the low commodity prices that 
we have been faced with right across this province. While this 
government cannot control some of the economic factors that 
are happening around us, we can certainly help mitigate what is 
happening. More now than ever I can see the importance of 
why this government has chosen not to raise taxes on the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
In this budget there have been hard choices that have been 
made, but these decisions are made for the betterment of our 
province as a whole. Cuts need to be made so that we don’t 
have to tax our residents when they cannot afford to be taxed. 
That is why this government will continue to put money into 
this province and create jobs. 
 
Starting this year over the next three years, our government will 
fix more highways through a $70 million surge in highway 
repair and maintenance. This is part of the new highways 2020 
plan to invest $2.7 billion in highways and transportation 
capital over the next four years. In addition to making our 
highways safer for everyone, this is an important investment in 
highways and it will create economic activity in the short term 
and will strengthen our ability to move Saskatchewan goods to 
market in the long term. This is the first time in Saskatchewan 
history that the highways and infrastructure budget will top $1 
billion. This marks another record investment in provincial 
roads and infrastructure. 
 
And I’m even more excited to see the money that is being 
invested in the constituency of Estevan in this area, through 
almost $20 million that will be spent over this fiscal year in 
highways: a bridge replacement on Highway 18 over the Souris 
River, a bridge on Highway 39 east of Estevan, and the 
twinning of Highway 39 east of Estevan to near Bienfait. These 
projects will not only help address safety concerns but will help 
create much needed jobs in the southeast area of the province. 

Our government’s track record of sound fiscal management 
over the past nine years includes prudent spending, paying 
down debt, and keeping our GDP [gross domestic product] ratio 
among the lowest in the country, provides capacity to borrow in 
order to move forward in our capital plan instead of delaying 
projects which would hurt our economy at a cost to the future. 
 
The last story I would like to share from my surreal day at the 
hair salon is that of my hairstylist. She has been in her industry 
for 30 years and has a very solid base of clients. You would 
think not a worry in the world with this type of history, but this 
slump in our economy has also affected her over the past year. 
Her revenues have gone down 40 per cent. Can you imagine 
going to work one day and all of a sudden you go from earning 
$20 an hour to earning $12 an hour? That would be quite an 
adjustment. But, Mr. Speaker, that is exactly what is happening 
for some people in this province. The blessing for her is that her 
husband works at SaskPower. He has worked at Boundary dam 
power station. Yes, the same station that has the carbon capture 
sequestration technology happening. So they’ll be okay because 
his job is not going anywhere under this government. 
 
But what would happen if the NDP had their way? The 
opposition is quick to support documents like the Leap 
Manifesto that calls for the leaving of all natural resources in 
the ground. If this document is to be taken seriously, it would 
pretty much put an end to every project ever that would include 
pipelines, windmills, and solar panel farms. By supporting 
something like this, it is like an attack on the economy of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So when I think about the constituency of Estevan and the types 
of jobs that we do have left and the people that are still helping 
our economy continue, it truly scares me that we have people 
who support a document like the Leap Manifesto. If we left all 
the coal in the ground as this document would have us do, we 
would have to shut down our coal mine. That would affect 
hundreds of good-paying union jobs. Our opposition is always 
talking about getting good-paying jobs for the people of 
Saskatchewan, and by supporting this manifesto it would be 
devastating the people who work in these mines. In fact the 
mine would have to go out of business, putting hundreds of 
people out of work. 
 
And once again the trickle-down effect that I talk about, if our 
coal mines are shut down, it will affect hundreds of jobs at our 
local power stations, as these stations are coal generated. So 
once again they’ve got rid of more good-paying union jobs. I 
wish our opposition would make up their mind. Do they support 
our Saskatchewan residents and their futures or do they just 
want to roll up the streets and call it a day? Earlier I mentioned 
that my hairstylist and her husband were going to be just fine 
because he had a good job at a local power station. Under an 
NDP government, this may not be the case. 
 
In a perfect world we could leave coal in the ground. Instead we 
would rely on renewables like wind, solar, and hydro. We 
would use this to power our cities, our factories, our homes, and 
our businesses. But alas, we don’t live in a perfect world, so this 
government has made a choice to clean up the coal the best we 
can until something better comes along, something more 
reliable and cleaner. We have a lot more work to do, but this 
carbon capture sequestration project is a great start. 



312 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2016 

The interim Leader of the Opposition made a comment with 
regards to this province’s carbon capture sequestration project 
and he called it, and I quote, a “job-killing carbon capture tax.” 
I beg to differ. This project will ensure that we have viable and 
sustainable power source which will create jobs for years to 
come. This is technology that is being watched and inquired 
about around the world. This is technology that is working and 
technology that should be embraced by our opposition. It is 
technology that will continue to ensure we have jobs for our 
residents now and into the future, keeping Saskatchewan strong. 
 
In the meantime, in our budget we are working with First 
Nations Power Authority. This partnership will see First 
Nations developing 40 megawatts of clean energy generated 
from solar power and flare gas. This plan will ensure the First 
Nations in our province are active participants in economic 
benefits associated with the construction of clean energy as well 
as assisting Saskatchewan in moving forward in its target of 
having 50 per cent of electrical power needs generated by 
renewable sources by 2030. So, Mr. Speaker, as you can see, 
there is more work to be done but this government is working 
on it and it will continue to do so. 
 
We have a Premier that fights for this province, that believes in 
the people of this province. That is why his government has had 
the foresight to complete a project like the Boundary dam 
carbon capture sequestration and is working with our First 
Nations on clean energy projects which will not only help with 
the carbon footprint of this province but will also help ensure 
that there are jobs for the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the Estevan constituency where I live, we have 
agriculture. In fact my son is a farmer so the topic is dear and 
near to my heart. There is an organization in Saskatchewan 
called SARM which stands for Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities. Their vision statement is as follows: “By 
being the rural voice, SARM will effectively lead autonomous 
municipalities in creating a vibrant, diverse economy resulting 
in a strong, sustainable Saskatchewan.” 
 
This government is also a voice for rural Saskatchewan, and 
what a better way to let you know that this budget is investing 
in agriculture and being embraced by organizations that stand 
up for rural Saskatchewan than a quote on this budget from 
SARM. And they said: 
 

Agriculture continues to remain an integral component of 
Saskatchewan’s economy during these times of fiscal 
restraint, as exemplified by the $15.3 billion in agriculture 
exports in 2015. The importance of this sector has been 
recognized by the Government of Saskatchewan as it has 
increased the Agriculture budget by 7.5 per cent to a total 
of $389.8 million. 
 

And agriculture research which receives 25.8 million in 
funding. 
 

These commitments by the Government of Saskatchewan 
will assist the agriculture sector in continuing to support 
Saskatchewan’s economy and ensure that producers 
continue feeding the world. 

 
And why stop there? The Saskatchewan Cattle Feeders 

Association said, “Programs remain largely unchanged. Thank 
you, Premier, for recognizing the importance of Saskatchewan 
agriculture.” And the last quote on agriculture, from the 
Saskatchewan Stockgrowers Association, “Saskatchewan 
agriculture fared well in today’s budget and was recognized as a 
key driver for the provincial economy. This budget is investing 
in our people.” 
 
This government is putting a record $5.17 billion into the health 
budget. These monies will be invested into infrastructure, 
improving access to care, and reducing wait times for surgery 
and diagnostic services for Saskatchewan people. This is a stark 
contrast to when the NDP was in power. We had the longest 
wait times in Canada. And we have come a long way, but we 
want to ensure that we continue to keep the wait times down, so 
we are investing in that project. The $5.17 billion is a 50 per 
cent increase since 2007. That is an astonishing number. 
 
And let’s not forget about the revenue sharing that will 
continue. This is a program that will put in place . . . This is a 
program that was put in place by this government to have one 
point of PST given back to our municipalities. SUMA, 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, said, “Urban 
governments in Saskatchewan appreciate the provincial 
government support for our cities, towns, villages, and northern 
communities in today’s budget.” And the president of SUMA, 
Mayor of Weyburn Debra Button said, “This is an increase 
again, a record number again for municipalities. So we are very 
grateful for the commitment the province has made and that 
they’ve kept it.” 
 
As we continue to invest in the people of Saskatchewan, 
important investments continue to be made and commitments 
continue to be met. Investing in people ensures a continued high 
quality of life in our province. 
 
[16:00] 
 
This has been decision time. Do we want what’s best for the 
people of this province? Do we want to keep moving 
Saskatchewan forward or do we want to go back to the way 
things were under an NDP government? I think it’s clear. We 
want to keep moving forward. 
 
Health, education, and social services and assistance account for 
nearly three-quarters of all budgeted expenses. On top of the 
5.17 billion in health spending, we are putting 3.7 billion into 
educational spending, which is up point seven per cent over last 
year. And social services and assistance spending will reach 
1.24 billion in this budget, which is up 2.4 per cent over last 
year — investing in our people. 
 
The future is bright. The people of this province and my 
constituency of Estevan are a resilient bunch. We hold 
optimism for the future of this great province that we all call 
home. Saskatchewan’s economy is expected to rebound in 
2017, with the GDP growth predicted to be 2.5 per cent 
following an expected point six per cent decline in 2016. Our 
government is committed to improve the province’s financial 
picture and return the budget to balance in the 2017-18 year by 
combining the forecasted economic growth with the 
government-wide process to achieve transformational change, 
the goal of which is to ensure the sustainability of high-quality 



June 6, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 313 

programs and public services delivered in the most effective 
and efficient way possible. This transformational change 
initiative will look at both sides of the ledger, revenues and 
expenses. It will ask important questions and work with 
partners and stakeholders to answer them. By getting 
underneath the questions, government expects to make 
decisions which will achieve the stated goal while at the same 
time ensuring the actions lead to sustainable outcome. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I could summarize what I’ve talked about today, 
this budget contains no tax increases. This was achieved by 
controlled spending. This budget ensures a better quality of life 
by investing in our people. This budget will keep Saskatchewan 
strong by investing in infrastructure. And this 2016-17 budget 
will keep Saskatchewan strong. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say how humbled I am 
to be in this House today and to have the opportunity to speak 
to the budget that has been presented. I am in favour of keeping 
Saskatchewan strong and moving it forward. So I believe that 
that is exactly what this budget has done. Once again, I would 
like to say I support the budget presented to us by this 
government. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s indeed a 
pleasure for me to stand here today and be part of the debate in 
support of this government’s 2016-17 budget. It is important 
that I start out — given that this is my first time on my feet 
since the Throne Speech — thanking the constituents of Regina 
Wascana Plains by putting their trust in me this April for the 
third time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I need to thank my election team: Jackie Burchi, 
Pat Wickenhauser, Derek Maher, Nancy Martin, Gary Massier, 
Rod Sieffert, Shirley Patterson, and Adam Nelson. I wouldn’t 
be here in this House today if it wasn’t for their hard work and 
dedication. My constituency assistant, Jackie, has been 
absolutely terrific and her continuous hard work makes my job 
just a little bit easier. Lastly, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank my 
family for their ongoing support: my husband, Gary; my sons, 
Regan and Cameron; and of course my superwoman mother. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has committed to keeping 
Saskatchewan strong, to keeping the province’s finances strong, 
and to keep Saskatchewan’s position strong within Canada. 
This budget certainly delivers on these commitments. We will 
deliver on these commitments through keeping taxes low, 
controlling spending, and by continuing to make important 
infrastructure investments, and investing in essential 
government services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is no secret that a sharp decline in resource 
prices coupled with a fragile global economy has created 
challenges for the economy and the province’s finances. This is 
the same for every individual and business in this province. Mr. 
Speaker, as a result, we as government had to make some very, 
very tough decisions. The Ministry of Corrections and Policing 
was not immune to tough choices. The closing of Buffalo 
Narrows was not an easy decision. Closing this facility was 
about how to achieve the best results in service delivery, and 

the most efficient use of our existing correctional facilities. Mr. 
Speaker, the opening of the new living unit at Prince Albert 
Provincial Correctional Centre allows the opportunity to 
transfer inmates from Buffalo Narrows. 
 
Corrections and Policing is dedicated to focusing on three 
pillars of our criminal justice system: prevention, intervention, 
and suppression. But we also want to ensure that the community 
safety is done in an economically and sustainable manner, 
which is why the Ministry of Corrections and Policing has been 
at the forefront of innovation and evidence-based solutions. For 
example, the forensic psychology Ph.D. [Doctor of Philosophy] 
program will again receive $248,000 for two psychology Ph.D. 
residents each in Regina and Saskatoon to train and work with 
inmates to reduce recidivism and public risk. The assessments 
that these residents do are instrumental in having an 
understanding of the type of offenders that are entering into our 
system. 
 
This government made a campaign promise in 2007 to add 120 
police officers. We exceeded that funding by . . . to 125 through 
the municipal policing grants for targeted policing initiatives, 
and an additional 47 RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] 
positions that focus on ministry priorities.  
 
I’m very proud that this year we will invest over $14 million in 
municipal policing grants for targeted policing initiatives. Since 
2008 we have invested over $100 million in municipal policing 
grants for the following units: serious crime unit, Internet child 
exploitation, serious and habitual offenders comprehensive 
action plan, which focuses on targeting and holding repeat 
offenders under the age of 25. This is to ensure they are held 
accountable for their crimes, Mr. Speaker. Combined forces 
special enforcement unit that focuses on dismantling organized 
crime. Northern drug and gang enforcement unit was created 
under this government to combat illegal drug use and the 
related criminal activities in northern Saskatchewan.  
 
There are more, Mr. Speaker, but I want to take the time to 
highlight two additional municipal policing grants because they 
both invest in people by protecting those with mental health 
issues, and they also assist government in controlling its cost. 
 
In 2012, our government made an election promise to target 
high-risk violent offenders through a program or initiative 
called serious violent offender response. 1.227 million was 
invested for six new probation officers, two support staff, four 
additional police officers — one municipal and three RCMP — 
and one clinical psychologist to work with the police. 
 
Mr. Speaker, serious violent offender response is a program to 
increase monitoring for violent offenders in order to reduce the 
risk of reoffending. The word monitoring doesn’t truly describe 
what this program actually does. It is an intensive program with 
our most serious and violent offenders. After years in Saskatoon 
and North Battleford, we are confident that the program is 
successful in reducing the violent recidivism in offenders. 
SVOR, or serious violent offender response, has provided the 
opportunity for the ministry and the police forces to train their 
staff and officers, and to keep that knowledge within the 
province. It is estimated that for every $100 invested in SVOR, 
$300 is saved in justice costs. But more importantly $100 
invested in SVOR saves $1,300 in expenses to victims. 



314 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2016 

I want to highlight one more important targeted policing 
initiative. The police and crisis team, or PACT for short, is 
helping to change and improve the way mental illness is 
approached by police in our province. There are two police 
crisis teams that are comprised each of one in Saskatoon, a 
Saskatoon police officer and one mental health worker. They 
co-respond to stabilize persons experiencing a mental health 
crisis in the community. PACT has reduced the amount of 
arrests by referring people in crisis to more appropriate mental 
health and crisis programs. 
 
In addition, PACT has prevented over 900 instances where the 
police would have responded to calls that were not criminal 
offences, which has saved time and money. Corrections and 
Policing provides $220,000 of funding each year for the two 
units in Saskatoon. And Saskatoon Police Service estimates 
PACT saves the taxpayers of Saskatchewan over $1 million. 
Saskatoon Police Service estimates that over $50,000 has been 
saved in avoiding police court appearances. They estimate 
savings of almost $200,000 in avoiding emergency 
departments, and an estimated $830,000 in avoided hospital 
costs, resulting from assisting over 190 individuals with suicide 
risk. PACT has saved money and allowed for more efficient use 
of resources by reducing visits to emergency departments. 
PACT also reduces the demand on our correctional facilities 
which has become a key focus in the ministry. 
 
Another important tool in reducing demand on our correctional 
centres is the building partnerships to reduce crime. The 
building partnerships to reduce crime and the Hubs and CORs 
[centre of responsibility] are working to stop crime before it 
happens. The building partnerships to reduce crime is a 
cross-government approach that includes nine ministries, eight 
police services including the RCMP. The Hub is a 
made-in-Saskatchewan solution that aims to stop crime before it 
starts by getting community agencies, health and education 
providers, as well as police to sit down together. The goal is to 
address the unique needs of individuals and families facing 
acutely elevated risk and to connect individuals with services 
within 24 to 48 hours. There are 12 Hubs in 13 communities in 
this province and there is potential for more in the future. 
 
There are two centres of responsibility, also knows as CORs, in 
Prince Albert and Saskatoon. The CORs increase collaboration 
and resource support between the Hubs. They also provide 
research and analysis on trends, gaps, and reoccurring issues in 
order to better mobilize resources to the longer term systemic 
issues. 
 
Saskatchewan has created a system that is being emulated in 
other parts of the country, and elsewhere in the world. There are 
made-in-Saskatchewan Hubs in Ontario, Alberta, Manitoba, 
Nova Scotia, and there is also interest in the United States. 
 
Building partnerships to reduce crime is not the only innovation 
that reduces demand on our correctional facilities. In March of 
2015, we converted Orcadia Youth facility in Yorkton into 
Whitespruce, a 39-bed male training facility. The Whitespruce 
facility is an example of a focus on rehabilitation and education 
for the province’s inmates. Offenders can receive programming 
in an effort to reduce reoffending after they are released from 
custody. We want to turn offenders into taxpayers, Mr. Speaker, 
and the best way is to focus on skills training.  

I think that every member here can agree that there is no better 
way to ensure the success of this province than to protect our 
youth. Saskatoon Police Service, University of Saskatchewan, 
and the Ministry of Justice, and Corrections, and Policing are 
collaborating in the development of a predictive analytics lab 
that has the potential to improve community safety and prevent 
or mitigate victimization. 
 
The lab’s first project will be missing children. The lab will 
investigate how the information we currently have on missing 
children can be used to assist with current cases and in reducing 
the amount of time children or youth are missing. The chiefs of 
police in Saskatchewan have agreed to share their information 
with the lab, so all police services and therefore the children can 
benefit from the initiative. There is immense potential and 
future projects included in the predictive analytics lab that can 
be applied to gang activity, violence, and adult missing persons. 
An important factor here was that this predictive analytics lab 
was created with no additional cost to government. The costs 
associated with the development of the lab were based on 
redirection of existing funds and outside investment. 
 
[16:15] 
 
I have spoken prior about Correction and Policing’s innovation 
that both controls spending and invests in people, but now I 
want to talk about our investments in infrastructure that protect 
the community and the most vulnerable. The new Saskatchewan 
Hospital North Battleford, with 188 beds and a 96-room secure 
unit for male and female offenders living with mental health 
issues, will be a key component in our mental health strategy. 
 
The facility will be focused on clients with mental health issues 
and will operate with a patient-centred philosophy. This is a 
shift to a modern, therapeutic environment, moving away from 
custodial care to a rehabilitative approach. When the North 
Battleford hospital’s complete, our government will have added 
479 secure-custody beds for adults. When the members 
opposite were in power, they added a total of zero beds, and in 
fact denied expansions of Pine Grove and Saskatoon. 
 
The members opposite continue to question this government’s 
investments. Well, Mr. Speaker, in order to help alleviate some 
of their confusion, I have a short list of Correction and 
Policing’s investment in infrastructure. In 2009, 5.5 million was 
invested on a 90-bed dormitory at the Saskatoon Provincial 
Correctional Centre. $9.4 million worth of security 
enhancements were completed in this government’s first term. 
There were 40 cameras with no recording ability in Saskatoon 
correctional centre. Now there are over 180 with recording 
ability. 
 
13.4 million was invested in a 30-cell living unit with 60 new 
beds at Pine Grove Correctional Centre. It opened in October of 
2013. Over $7 million to convert a gym into a 32-bed dormitory 
in Regina Correctional Centre. $1.8 million was invested in 
White Birch female holding facility, a converted vacant unit at 
Regina’s Paul Dojack Youth Centre. This government invested 
24 million for an additional 72 cells or 144 beds in Prince 
Albert Provincial Correctional Centre that will open later this 
year. 
 
In 2015 Orcadia youth centre was converted into Whitespruce, a 



June 6, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 315 

39-bed adult male skills and training facility. Mr. Speaker, due 
to this government’s correctional facility expansions, we have 
created over 200 well-paying jobs in Prince Albert and area. 
 
When the members opposite were in power they ignored 
community safety. They were too busy raising taxes, closing 
schools, and closing hospitals. This government is going to be 
investing 3.5 billion in capital with 1.7 billion for the capital 
builds plan that will be dedicated for highways, schools, and 
hospitals to ensure that the province is well positioned for 
future growth and population expansion. 
 
The Crown corporations will be investing 1.8 billion in 
electrical, energy, and communication infrastructure to ensure 
that Saskatchewan can continually meet the needs of its citizens 
and businesses. 
 
This side of the House has made record investments in 
highways and infrastructure. We have repaired over 10 000 
kilometres of Saskatchewan roads. We know that there is more 
work to be done, for sure, which is why this government is 
investing over $1 billion in highways. In 2016-17 the people of 
Saskatchewan will see $30 million in new funding in the first 
year of the highways 2020 plan, which will see $70 million 
over three years invested. In addition, $355 million is being 
invested in capital construction, 500 million for the Regina 
bypass. 
 
I’ll speak about the Regina bypass, Mr. Speaker, because in my 
constituency they are directly affected, the areas of White City, 
Emerald Park, and of course southeast Regina — the largest 
infrastructure project in this province’s history. The traffic 
volumes on existing roads in the Regina area range from about 
11,500 to 25,000 vehicles per day. The bypass will improve 
safety and efficiency in the Regina region by providing a 
high-speed route around the city. It will ease traffic congestion 
and improve safety and especially commuter traffic to and from 
the communities to the east, as I mentioned — White City, 
Balgonie, and Pilot Butte. 
 
The bypass will support trade and make the Regina region, 
especially the global transportation area, a more attractive place 
to invest. Economic corridors and gateways facilitate growth in 
exports and trade and the movement of goods and services 
locally, regionally, and internationally. 
 
The project itself will also create jobs. During the construction 
phase, the project is expected to generate about 8,200 positions. 
The $1.8 billion total project cost for the Regina bypass 
includes 1.2 billion for construction costs, operation and 
maintenance for 34 years, and paving of Highway No. 1 next 
year. The P3 model will ensure that the bypass is done quicker, 
and this government will save $380 million. The Regina bypass 
will include twinning 5 kilometres of Highway 6, 12 
overpasses, 40 kilometres of four-lane highway, 55 kilometres 
of service road. Overpasses at Balgonie and White City will be 
open in two years. The entire project, including the Pilot Butte 
overpass, will be completed by 2019, far sooner than under the 
traditional build. 
 
We have seen record investment in highways by this 
government. We are seeing record-setting capital investment in 
our health care system with over $239 million being invested in 

2016 and ’17. I’m excited about the 168 million for the 
Saskatchewan Hospital, North Battleford, the integrated 
correctional facility. In addition there’s a 40 per cent increase in 
Saskatchewan’s surgical initiative from last year with a total of 
$70 million being invested, over $390 million in K to 12 
[kindergarten to grade 12] schools and other capital projects, 
127 million for municipal infrastructure, and almost 26 million 
for advanced education and training. 
 
This government made the commitment that Saskatchewan will 
make life better for those with disabilities. This budget 
addresses that, Mr. Speaker, with just over $210 million for the 
Saskatchewan assured income for disability program and an 
increase of $1.9 million over last year to 5.9 million to address 
the cognitive disability strategy caseload as well as other 
programs for the most vulnerable. 
 
We, on this side of the House, are always excited about the 
future of this province, Mr. Speaker. The transformational 
change initiative will allow us to dig deeper and ask important 
questions about the future of government so we can continue to 
ensure that Saskatchewan remains strong. 
 
When the members opposite were in power, the only questions 
they asked were, what school or hospital should we close next? 
And the solution is every tight budget was to raise taxes 21 
times, as was mentioned by my colleague. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by not raising taxes, by controlling our spending, 
by investing in people and infrastructure, this budget will keep 
Saskatchewan strong. Mr. Speaker, I want to declare my 
support for this budget and will be voting against the 
amendment. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Mr. Nerlien: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to support, without 
amendment, the budget moved by the Minister of Finance and 
seconded by the member of Regina University. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are by nature prudent, 
caring of each other, and community focused. Our government 
can and will reflect those values. The Minister of Finance, 
being from the small town of Rose Valley in my constituency, 
is well aware of the values that are the foundation of what it 
means to be from Saskatchewan. We appreciate the value of 
hard work, common sense, and an attitude of responsible and 
accountable approaches to the challenges and opportunities we 
have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on June 1, I was most interested in the 
Saskatchewan people that were in the galleries. I wanted to look 
at the budget from their perspective. As you know, many people 
will ask the question, what’s in it for me? So let’s take a few 
minutes to see the budget from their perspective. 
 
Across from the minister was a young lady of about 10 and her 
grandpa. I visited with them after the budget speech, firstly to 
congratulate her on her interest, and to chat about their 
perspectives. He, it turns out, is the mayor of a small town. I’d 
never met them before so it was interesting that I later learned 
that their town grew by 9.6 per cent from the last census 



316 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2016 

compared to a population decline of 5.6 per cent from 
2001-2006. They have health care services, a new school this 
fall, and a full slate of community services and activities. The 
community is excited about its future. As an aside, I asked the 
young lady if she might someday be the Finance minister. She 
smiled coyly and hinted that the premier’s chair might be more 
to her liking. Mr. Speaker, I think our government delivered for 
this community. 
 
In the west gallery was a 2016 high school graduate and his dad 
from Kelvington. So what was in the budget for them? Well 
let’s start with the final payment on the Kelvington integrated 
health care facility scheduled to open soon. The Kelvington 
area, including Yellow Quill First Nation, will be well served 
by this facility that was creatively designed by the users, the 
staff, the stakeholders, and the people of the area. Mr. Speaker, 
this is a facility that, at last report, will come in ahead of 
schedule and on budget. 
 
In addition, Perry will be a college student next fall and will be 
eligible for building credits towards the graduate retention 
program. Mr. Speaker, our commitment to advanced education 
of some 53 million in scholarship and student aid funding is 
impressive. More impressive, however, is the 7.3 billion we’ve 
committed to post-secondary education in the past nine years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had a number of guests involved in agriculture 
including two scholarship winners introduced earlier today. 
Let’s look at what the budget meant for them. Let’s begin with 
a seven and a half per cent increase in the Minister of 
Agriculture’s budget. Not only are we fully funding the risk 
management programs, but we are supporting strategic, 
long-term investments in agriculture, innovation, science and 
technology that will keep Saskatchewan on the leading edge of 
agriculture, not only here at home but in fact, Mr. Speaker, 
around the world. 
 
In addition, this year we will move forward to complete the sale 
of agricultural Crown land to farmers. This opportunity will 
wrap up by December 31 of this year and, Mr. Speaker, farmers 
will be well served to take advantage of this program and put 
farm land back in the hands of farmers where it belongs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if I didn’t mention the 
significant investments made by the Minister of Parks at 
Greenwater Lake Provincial Park — new full-service campsites, 
new lift stations, and from SaskPower, an investment in new 
infrastructure. The people of Saskatchewan will be very 
impressed with these new developments that support a great 
community, a fabulous golf course, and a great fishing and 
recreation area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also be remiss if I didn’t mention that I 
went out into the gallery afterwards or into the rotunda 
afterwards and spoke briefly with the Finance minister’s 
mother. And she said, I’m very proud of my little boy. I said, 
we all are, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Emphasis on little. 
 
Mr. Nerlien: — Emphasis on little, yes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when all is said and done, the people of 

Saskatchewan want us to be good stewards of the economy, but 
more importantly they want to know that we care about their 
safety and security of their families and friends. They want to 
know that we understand the stress on the health care system 
and they want to know that we can provide the social safety net 
for those in need and for long-term security of our seniors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you well know that we spend an inordinate 
amount of time and money on these concerns. Health, 
Highways, and Education represent 75 per cent of the budget. 
Reducing wait times with an $8 million in targeted investment 
in diagnostic services, and an increase of 10 million mainly to 
cover new cancer-fighting drugs, 15 million for hep C coverage, 
and a $20 million boost in the Saskatchewan surgical initiative 
will all help us stay on the leading edge of the demand curve. 
But, Mr. Speaker, we must do more and we will. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know the NDP Finance critic will not grasp 
much of this, but it’s pretty fundamental. We know it wouldn’t 
apply under the NDP Leap Manifesto because we would all be 
standing beside the cart path in our gunny sacks paying for food 
with pennies as in pre-Industrial Revolution days. My how 
times have changed beyond their comprehension. 
 
[16:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Athabasca goes on and on about 
how this government is failing the people of the North. And I 
would say to him, look carefully in the mirror each day and ask, 
as a party, what has the NDP ever done for the people of the 
North? 
 
Mr. Speaker, northern revenue sharing 2007 and ’08 was 10 
million; ours this year, 20.2 million. Their last budget, 
Highways and Transportation capital, 196 million; ours, 875 
million. Theirs, Health, 76.5 million; ours, 239.9 million. 
Theirs, Advanced Education and training, 11.9 million; ours, 
25.8 million. Theirs, Education, 23.1 million; ours, 391 million. 
Mr. Speaker, we should be asking them, where did the money 
go when they were in office? 
 
Mr. Speaker, you will be very surprised to hear this given the 
rhetoric from members opposite, but guess what I found in the 
2007-08 budget presented by the NDP government of the day 
— hopefully the last for a long, long time. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
in the numbers, their revenue, 7.87 billion; expenses, 8.35 
billion. Say what, Mr. Speaker? You’ll never guess where the 
money came from — the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. That’s right, 
$510 million to drain the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. Where did 
they spend the money? Well a small but telling example: how 
about 1,459 new government jobs while the population dropped 
by 10,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have in my hands the 2007-2008 key facts and 
figures documents released with the budget of the day. Mr. 
Speaker, the member from Athabasca rails on and on about this 
government’s lack of attention to the North. Mr. Speaker, in our 
highlights we note $211.9 million in programs for First Nations. 
In the last NDP budget, the highlights document which I have 
in my hand — nothing, nada, not a penny, zero. Mr. Speaker, I 
fear the member opposite doth protest too much given his 
party’s performance on this file. 
 



June 6, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 317 

Sadly there is more, Mr. Speaker. Under the NDP government 
the total debt-to-GDP ratio was 23.8 per cent — that at a time 
when they were closing hospitals and schools at an 
unimaginable rate. People couldn’t wait to leave as the 
ministers of the day reminded the people of Saskatchewan at 
every opportunity that we had to wait for the cheque to come 
from Ottawa to make payments. Have-not status was their 
legacy. 
 
Now despite unprecedented spending, where are we today? A 
debt-to-GDP rating of only 17.6 per cent. When you read the 
Saskatchewan Party’s 2016 budget, it is all about how well the 
people of the province are doing. Timely health care; 
investments in education and retention of some tens of 
thousands of students in the Saskatchewan economy; huge 
investments in mining, processing, agriculture; and a complete 
change in attitude in the province. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 
people are now proud of where they live, not where they came 
from, as in the past. Saskatchewan people no longer ask their 
new neighbour if they remembered to turn out the lights when 
they left Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to focus my attention to effective 
transformational change which is proposed in the budget. To do 
so, I will pull from personal experience as a consultant in 
change management but I also will draw from work done by 
Frank Ostroff in a 2006 Harvard study, as well as some work 
published by Booz & Company in 2004 around effective 
change management. 
 
Mr. Speaker, effective and meaningful change in an 
organization, and in particular in something as complex as 
government, will be a challenge for the leadership of 
government, for leadership in every ministry, for leadership in 
every stakeholder, and for every employee. In fact dealing with 
change will fundamentally affect our relationship with the 
people we are most concerned with, the citizens of 
Saskatchewan. We must put forward a compelling reason to 
change. We must be effective communicators of the process of 
change, and we must be astute listeners fully appreciating the 
implications of change on every affected person, agency, 
ministry, and affected partners which might include other 
governments in Canada and around the world. This is a process 
that cannot be taken lightly. Mr. Speaker, obviously I don’t 
have time to discuss this matter in the depth required here but 
allow me to plant some seeds for thought. 
 
Mr. Speaker, any significant transformation creates “people 
issues.” Many of those affected by change don’t pick a side. 
They instead feel estranged from their government’s strategy 
and mission. They don’t see how their individual efforts 
directly affect the ministry, agency, department, or corporate 
performance and so they start to focus on producing outputs 
which are easy to quantify rather than achieving outcomes to 
which private sector measures, like return on invested capital, 
do not apply. As employees lose sight of the overall mission, 
they may eventually come to care only about those things they 
can directly control like protecting their own turf. 
 
Mr. Speaker, external and internal stakeholders will also be part 
of the process engaged in planning, participating in the 
development, and developing concepts and ideas, and building 
next steps, plus the identification of outcomes that are 

measurable. 
 
Because change is inherently unsettling for people at all levels 
of an organization, when it is on the horizon all eyes will turn to 
the leadership team for strength, support, and direction. The 
leaders themselves must embrace the new approaches first, both 
to challenge and to motivate the rest of the organization. They 
must speak with one voice and model the desired behaviours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our Premier and our government are committed to 
working with the people of Saskatchewan to affect change to 
ensure a long-term, sustainable delivery of services that matter 
most to our citizens. 
 
As transformation programs progress from defining strategy 
and setting targets to design and implementation, they affect 
different levels of the organization. Change efforts must include 
plans for identifying leaders throughout the organization in 
pushing responsibility for design and implementation down. 
Leaders will, by their very nature, rise to the challenge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are asking all of our members of the 
Legislative Assembly, our ministries, our Crowns, and all 
agency leaders to be fully engaged and to create a road map for 
success. 
 
In the mid-1980s, M.B.A. graduates seemed to regard 
manufacturing as a black box. You put some things in and out 
pops a product at the other end. Many government reformers 
view the transformation process in similar fashion and hence 
fail to pay careful attention to the steps necessary to get from 
here, the current status, to there for improved performance. 
 
A change effort road map generally has three major phases: 
identify performance objectives, set priorities, and roll out the 
program. In any change effort, you need to start at the top and 
then quickly move to ensure participation and support of a 
broad cross-section of employees. It is the prerogative of the 
agency leader and his or her senior managers to define the 
mission. 
 
It also helps to pursue tangible results that can be achieved 
quickly, even if they are not the ones that will have the biggest 
impact. Mr. Speaker, we will seek out small steps for modest 
change and we will look at the fundamental nature of what we 
do and how we do it to ensure the people of Saskatchewan are 
well served by their government. 
 
Individuals are inherently rational and will question to what 
extent change is needed, whether their government is headed in 
the right direction, and whether they want to commit personally 
to make change happen. Mr. Speaker, we have begun to make 
the case for change by outing the fundamental challenges we 
have in this budget. Mr. Speaker, every minister and every 
MLA is asked to engage in this process to be part of the process 
in a meaningful way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are asking the people of Saskatchewan, the 
leaders in every affected part of government, to be an important 
part of effective change that will help them feel a part of a great 
place to work, a great place to live, and in fact a home to be 
proud of for generations going forward. 
 



318 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2016 

Successful change programs pick up speed and intensity as they 
cascade down, making it critically important for the leaders to 
understand and account for culture and behaviours at each level 
of the organization. Organizations often make the mistake of 
assessing culture either too late or not at all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fundamental culture of Saskatchewan is one of 
hard work, focus on being supportive neighbours, and building 
communities together. We will be well attuned to those 
principles. 
 
By now it should be clear that there is more to organizational 
redesign than moving boxes around on a chart. For 
organizations to perform at a superior level, the full range of 
factors: leadership, structure, processes, infrastructure including 
technology, people and performance management, must be 
integrated and aligned. Yet the tendency within government is 
to seize on whichever organizational element the particular 
person or group driving the change effort knows best at the 
expense of other elements. 
 
We’ve now established what it takes to lead a change 
management program, formulate a vision, be aware of present 
realities, develop a broad base of support, set a clear path, 
respect the complexity of what you’re attempting, and hold 
people accountable for both results and a commitment to the 
change effort. 
 
There are however two qualities of public sector leaders that 
make such work difficult. First, it is in the nature of 
bureaucracy to respect barriers. Change leaders don’t 
necessarily knock them over. Instead they find ways to see over 
them and around them. Mr. Speaker, we will find that often you 
have more flexibility than people believe. Many rules, as well 
as civil service limitations on what they can and can’t do, are 
good and they need to be followed, but there is a difference 
between what you can and can’t do and what has been done and 
not done in the past. 
 
The other problem many leaders face is the perception that 
because they are political appointees, their commitment to 
improving performance against mission may be questionable. 
Such leaders must convince stakeholders of their sincerity. 
Employees mostly start out believing in the agency’s mission 
which, whatever its particular focus, involves serving citizens 
and taxpayers. Over time, they see change programs come and 
go without making a dent. Meanwhile the public interest is 
neglected. If an agency head can convince the rank and file that 
this time is different, that he has committed, is willing to invest 
the personal time and energy that is required, and will commit 
the necessary people and resources, then its original dedication 
will be reawakened. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve tried to touch on some of the important 
elements of change as they might affect all of us and the 
citizens of Saskatchewan. We are committed to working with 
the people of Saskatchewan to deliver efficient services over the 
long term, and we look forward to this process, continued 
evolution. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the budget proposed 
by the Minister of Finance and seconded by the member from 
Regina University, and I will not support the amendments 

proposed by the opposition. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it is with 
humble appreciation that I stand up and give my reply to the 
budget speech. Before I get to that, I’m going to take some time 
that has been afforded to some other members to thank some 
people that have helped them out over the last little while. 
 
And of course I need to thank my wonderful wife. My wife, 
Marjorie, who is more of a political geek than I am, and she 
might even be at home watching this right now. So without my 
wife I would not be able to do the job that I do to represent the 
people of Moose Jaw Wakamow. My wife’s support is 
absolutely amazing that allows me to do my job here in Regina 
and again back at home in Moose Jaw and Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 
[16:45] 
 
The next thing I want to do is I want to reach out and thank my 
kids. My youngest son Ryan actually helped me out on my 
campaign quite a bit and through no disrespect to anybody else 
on the campaign. He actually lives in Minister Stewart’s riding, 
but he came into Moose Jaw just about everyday after work 
when he wasn’t mentoring kids at the YMCA [Young Men’s 
Christian Association]. He would come and help and knock 
doors. 
 
The other two boys, they were there in spirit. I know my middle 
son Dylan, he was out right near the end of the election with my 
two grandchildren. And they might even be watching so I’m 
going to say hi to Jordi and Jaxton. And this is why with our 
grandkids and our kids that we do what we do. It’s about 
family. We’re a big family over on this side of the House. So I 
want to say hi to my family. 
 
And my son Geoffrey, who graduated last year with a political 
science degree and is now working on a master’s degree, is 
starting a business here in the province. And once he gets all the 
equipment up and running, he’ll be starting an equipment, 
actually an ice cream making business, and he’s going to be 
travelling around to all of the festivals as a young entrepreneur 
helping grow the province. So I want to say hi to Geoffrey as 
well. On top of that my two daughter-in-laws, both Kayleigh 
and Macey, who allow their husbands to come out and support 
me. Without family and without our family supports, we are not 
able to do the job to the best of our ability, so I want to just 
thank my family. 
 
And without reservation I also want to thank my mom and dad 
who happened to be away this time. They were actually not able 
to help me celebrate. No, actually they voted for probably my 
colleague from Estevan being they’re still there, but we did help 
them through the voting process since they were going to be 
away. And without mom and dad, like everybody else here, 
without our parents we wouldn’t . . . first of all we wouldn’t be 
here. We wouldn’t be here . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The 
Minister of Health points out, we wouldn’t be here. But without 
my parents’ support and unwavering support, I wouldn’t be able 
to do this either. 



June 6, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 319 

You know, my dad’s . . . What is dad? Dad’s about 67 years old 
now, 68 years old. Still young but still managing a company in 
the oil field, still working through the tough times down there. 
They’ve been able to do it and do some work sharing and stuff 
like that, so very much I hear about what’s going on down in 
the oil field in our province and how it affects us. 
 
I also want to help reach out to a couple of people who were 
integral to my campaign, and that would be Mr. David Cooper 
who was my campaign manager. David did a fabulous job of 
keeping me on track, making sure that I had all kinds of support 
getting out there and knocking on doors, listening to what the 
people of Moose Jaw Wakamow had to say. And I think that’s a 
difference between us and the other guys is we actually listen to 
what the people have to say. We don’t tell them what they want 
to hear. We listen to what they have to say. Mr. Cooper kept me 
on the straight and narrow during the campaign and kept me 
busy. 
 
Mr. Paul Marcil was my business manager. That’s the second 
time in two elections that he’s been my business manager. I 
don’t know if I’ll be able to talk him into doing it one more 
time, but we’ll see. We’re a ways away from that. We’ve got 
until November 2020 before we have to worry about that. 
 
One last . . . With a long list of people I’m not going to mention 
is another Ryan, Ryan Dionne. Ryan’s been my constituency 
manager, constituency president for the last three or four years. 
And I actually started working at SaskTel with him, oh geez 
that’d be back in 2004, so he’s known me for a long time, and 
we go back a long ways. We have a lot of stories about working 
at SaskTel under both governments, and I may get to that. 
 
And the last one I want to thank is Trina Nicolson. Trina 
Nicolson is my CA [constituency assistant] and as we all know, 
including the opposition, our CAs are the ones that hold down 
the fort at home. They’re the ones that take the phone calls, take 
the messages, and then keep us on track so when we’re not here 
in the House, we’re taking care of business back in myself 
Moose Jaw Wakamow. And she keeps me updated daily with 
what we have to do back home to listen to what the people of 
Moose Jaw Wakamow had to say. 
 
There is such a list of people that I wanted to say thank you to 
that I’m going to stop there because the list was long. I had 
people show up helping us get re-elected that, you know, I truly 
some of . . . The first time I met them was when they walked 
through the door for the campaign and said can we help you get 
re-elected. That’s when I knew that we were doing a good job 
as government. 
 
So let’s move on to the budget. So the biggest highlight of this 
budget is no new taxes. Now I’m going to relate this back to my 
SaskTel days. I remember not waiting with anticipation for 
budget day. It was almost waiting with okay, what are they 
going to hit us with next? Which taxes are they going to raise 
next time? Back in those days, the NDP raised taxes 21 times in 
17 years. 
 
You know, since 2007 we’ve given back to the people of 
Saskatchewan six . . . well no we haven’t given back because 
we never took it in the first place. Tax cuts of $6 billion, $6 
billion. And you know the commercials on TV was, where’s the 

money gone? Well the money stayed with the people of 
Saskatchewan, stayed in their own pockets — tax reductions to 
families, individuals, homeowners, businesses, and farmers. 
 
And you know, I’m not as senior as some of the members we 
have on the government side of the House, but they talk about 
the tax revolts the farmers had back in the ’90s when our RMs 
refused to remit their taxes and our farmers refused to remit 
their taxes. And combines, instead of being in the fields, would 
roll up on the legislature. And there’d be tractors and they’d, 
you know . . . And you hear these stories. And now when we 
walk out after a budget, what do we see? We see a beautiful 
spring out there. We see nice, great trees. We don’t have the tax 
revolts of the good old days that the NDP like to talk about. 
 
It was also achieved by controlling spending. Now it’s just a 
modest spending increase of 2 per cent. Now when you take a 
look at a 14 billion-plus dollar budget, that’s 2 per cent still 
adds up, and we’ve got to spread it out a little bit. 
 
And I’m going to talk a little bit about the health care because 
that takes the majority of the budget. And there’s a reason for 
that because we don’t necessarily have as quickly an aging 
province as we did before because our kids are staying at home. 
They’re not getting their suitcases for, you know, after they’re 
done university and high school and moving to Alberta or 
moving to BC or moving to Toronto. They’re staying here, not 
unlike my family has done. You know, I’ve got kids buying 
houses in Pense, kids buying houses in Regina, and one that, 
you know, still lives in my basement, but that’s what happens 
when they go to university. But he’s going to be an 
entrepreneur, so I give him that much. 
 
An Hon. Member: — He is already. He’s got rent free. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Yes, negotiated rent free, yes. So let’s talk 
about the health care budget. We added 15 new drugs to the 
formulary for cancer. Now I’m pretty sure that even on that side 
of the House, members have had family that cancer’s touched. 
There probably isn’t a member in this House that cancer hasn’t 
touched their family. You know there’s a reason why they call 
it the big C, right? It affects everybody, and you know, although 
there isn’t a cure that helps with the cancer, those families will 
appreciate that, adding those 15 new drugs. 
 
I also want to speak specifically to the $20 million we’ve added 
to the surgical initiative push. As a person who has maybe used 
the medical system once or twice to be sewn back up and 
maybe pinned back together back in the day when I had a 
physically hard job and worked maybe not the way it should 
have been and maybe broke a toe or other body part and had to 
use that, we don’t have to wait anymore. We don’t have to wait 
near as long. We’ve gone from, under the NDP, the longest wait 
list where it was described as languishing on wait lists, to the 
shortest wait lists in Canada. 
 
Now yes, over the last couple of months, and the NDP did a 
heck of a job pointing out to us how those wait lists were 
creeping up. And we listened to the people of Saskatchewan 
and, you know, we put $20 million towards that surgical 
initiative so we could bring those wait times back to where they 
need to be in our province. Nobody wants to sit and wait. 
 



320 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2016 

We’ve also added . . . Well I’m going to talk a little bit about 
the new hospital in Moose Jaw. We have a brand new hospital 
in Moose Jaw, just in case the members didn’t know. They 
talked about it for 17 years, but two cabinet ministers that were 
from Moose Jaw and . . . You know, it was what the NDP did. 
They talked a lot and they talked a lot and they talked a lot. 
Well the MLA from Moose Jaw North got elected in ’07 and he 
talked a lot, but he talked a lot to the Minister of Health. And 
the Minister of Health has spoke many times in Moose Jaw 
where the MLA from Moose Jaw North pretty much wore a 
path between his office and the Minister of Health’s office. So 
he talked but he got it done. He got it done. That hospital was 
announced before the election in 2011 and, you know, four 
years later, it’s built on time, on budget. 
 
I don’t know if the members opposite know, but there’s an area 
outside of Regina or Saskatoon — Moose Jaw is in one of those 
areas — and they actually have the first MRI [magnetic 
resonance imaging] outside of Regina or Saskatoon. 
 
I have to put my glasses back on so I can see the clock. 
 
So we also have in that brand new hospital, we have a brand 
new CT [computerized tomography] scan. And I remember 
when the radiologist was doing the talk for the fundraising part 
of the Five Hills Health, and they talk about the MRI. And the 
way he described it and how it worked and how fast it was and 
less radiation, I thought he was actually talking about an MRI, 
not a CT scan. So we also have a brand new CT scanner out 
there. 
 
And I’m going to talk about door knocking a little bit. During 
the campaign I was standing there and I’m talking to a nurse 
from the hospital, and we’re talking about the changes in the 
hospital and some of the work that had been done up until that 
point, and up behind me somebody comes up on the step. And 
she looked and I turned around and she said, who’s that? And I 
said, well that’s an NDP supporter. And she goes, how do you 
know that? And I saw the door hanger they had in their hand, 
and what it had on there. It was a little door hanger that said, 
they just don’t listen. 
 
When the people of Moose Jaw spoke to us about, you know, 
the brand new hospital doesn’t have a hyperbaric chamber, well 
the Moose Jaw North MLA and myself, well we beat a path 
between both ministers’ doors to the point where they were 
almost sick and tired of us talking to that, working with the 
firefighters in Moose Jaw, and getting that hospital with a brand 
new hyperbaric chamber. So that’s one of the things I want to 
say where we listened to the people of Moose Jaw Wakamow. 
 
And seeing that I’m almost out of time, I’m going to be voting 
for the budget and not supporting the members opposite on their 
amendment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — It being 5 p.m., this Assembly stands recessed 
until 7 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 289 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 289 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 289 
  Stewart ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 290 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 290 
  Moe ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 290 
  Eyre ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 291 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................... 291 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 291 
  Beaudry-Mellor ......................................................................................................................................................................... 291 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 291 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 292 
  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 292 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 292 
  The Deputy Speaker ................................................................................................................................................................. 304 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 292 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 292 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Relay for Life Held in Prince Albert 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 293 
 D-Day Veteran Recognized 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................... 293 
 YWCA Regina Women of Distinction Awards Gala 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 293 
 Holy Month of Ramadan Begins 
  Fiaz ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 293 
 Dundurn Volunteer Emergency Services Team 
  Eyre ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 294 
 Saskatchewan Rush Win Champion’s Cup 
  Cheveldayoff .............................................................................................................................................................................. 294 
 Completion of Swift Current Health Care Facility 
  Steele .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 294 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Regina Bypass Project and Funding for Urban Parks 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 294 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 295 
 Revenue Sharing and Funding for Urban Parks 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 296 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 296 
 Closure of Correctional Facility 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 296 
  Tell ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 297 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 297 
 Funding for Education 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 298 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 298 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 21 — The Growth and Financial Security Repeal Act 
  Doherty ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 299 
 Bill No. 22 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2016 
  Doherty ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 299 
 Bill No. 23 — The Liquor Retail Modernization Act/Loi de modernisation du commerce des boissons alcoolisées 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 299 
 Bill No. 24 — The Liquor Retail Modernization Consequential Amendments Act, 2016 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 299 
 Bill No. 25 — The Wakamow Valley Authority Amendment Act, 2016 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 300 
BILL WITHDRAWN 
 Bill No. 20 — The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur les juges de paix 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 300 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Marit .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 300 
  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 304 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................... 307 
  Carr ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 309 
  Tell ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 313 
  Nerlien ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 315 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................... 318 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 




