






















































Hansard: May 26, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 6A  THURSDAY, MAY 26, 2016, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Hon. Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Hon. Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Merriman, Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 51; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Maurice Riou http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 161 
 May 26, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, for an 
extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has asked for extended 
introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Social 
Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
in the west gallery I have a number of guests here today. The 
first guest that I want to introduce is not a stranger to this 
Assembly. It is her 10th-year anniversary from when she was a 
topic that was debated extensively on the floor of this Chamber. 
Her name is Paige Hansen. She is a successful cancer survivor 
now for 10 years. So congratulations, Paige. 
 
Paige is an active fundraiser for a number of causes, one of 
which is the Ronald McDonald House. Many of you may have 
seen her in ads for the Wish Foundation. Paige is also a very 
accomplished Ukrainian dancer. So she is a very, very, very 
well-rounded young woman. Accompanying her is her mom, 
Michelle Hansen. 
 
Also here is someone who worked diligently on my campaign. 
He was a real little trooper. So the young man here is Wyatt 
Flory, and he’s accompanied by his mother, Sandy Flory. 
 
I also have someone that I sat on a doorstep through the 
campaign. We had a good chat and we could agree to disagree, 
but hopefully at the end of the conversation I still gained his 
vote. I’m not sure. But we have Leonard Boehm here from 
Allan, Saskatchewan. 
 
And I have my constituency assistant, last but not least by any 
means, who keeps me looking good back in Humboldt, and that 
is Susan Dunne. 
 
So could we welcome these guests to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to 
briefly join with the member and the minister to welcome a 
very inspiring young lady here who was once baby Paige, but 
now a vibrant grade 6. That’s Paige Hansen, who’s certainly 
giving back in so many ways and an inspiring survivor within 
our province. It’s also a pleasure to welcome Michelle, her 
mom, here today. So I ask all members to join with me in 

welcoming these two individuals to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you and to all 
the members of the Assembly, I’d like to introduce to you our 
former MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] from 
Canora-Pelly seated right behind me, our deputy premier, 
former Finance minister, and former Education minister, and a 
great mentor of mine. He’s not only a good friend, but he’s 
really taught me a lot along the way. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to welcome the minister, former minister of Education and 
Finance and member for Canora-Pelly to his Assembly once 
again. We miss his presence in this Assembly; it might be a 
little quieter in here on a given question period day. We’re not 
sure if he was brought in as a bit of backup to help out with the 
budget preparation here for next Wednesday. Regardless of that, 
it’s a pleasure to see a good friend. Welcome him to this 
Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
again to present a petition to improve PTSD [post-traumatic 
stress disorder] coverage for all Saskatchewan workers. The 
petitioners point out that post-traumatic stress disorder can 
severely impact the lives of Saskatchewan workers. They point 
out that the delay in diagnosis and treatment for PTSD can be 
detrimental to recovery, that PTSD isn’t one of the presumed 
. . . It’s not on the list of workers’ compensation illnesses 
presumed to be work related in Saskatchewan, and that many 
currently who suffer from work-related PTSD are burdened by 
lengthy investigations and approval processes. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Saskatchewan government to 
make the necessary changes to ensure that if Saskatchewan 
workers are exposed to traumatic events on the job and are 
then diagnosed with PTSD, it is presumed to be caused by 
the worker’s employment and the worker will subsequently 
be covered under workers’ compensation and receive the 
same benefits as others with work-related injuries. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Prince 
Albert and Swift Current. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition in support of funding heritage 
languages here in Saskatchewan. And we know that after 25 
years the Government of Saskatchewan is now discontinuing all 



162 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 2016 

support for heritage language learning in Saskatchewan. 
 
Since 1991, heritage language schools have depended on this 
modest funding from the Ministry of Education to help sustain 
their programs. And as a result from the Ministry of Education, 
many of these non-profit heritage language schools will be 
faced with a difficult decision of whether they can continue to 
operate. You know, the heritage language schools contribute to 
the retention of immigrants in Saskatchewan by helping people 
maintain their culture, identity, and traditions while at the same 
time learning about Canadian ways of life. Furthermore, 
studying additional languages offer many benefits for all 
Canadians, especially in today’s growing international markets. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to reconsider this decision and restore funding for heritage 
language education in Saskatchewan heritage language 
schools. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing the petition today are 
from the city of Regina. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask for leave to 
make an introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from Carrot 
River. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce 27 
pupils from Whitewood School in the west gallery, Mr. 
Speaker, their teacher, Mrs. Gina Kodman, and the bus driver is 
Crystal Ennis Marnier. 
 
Now there is a little catch on this. We’re glad to see the kids 
here, but Gina Kodman was Gina Bradshaw until last summer. 
So this is the first time I’ve ever been able to introduce her in 
this House and, Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure to introduce them 
to their Legislative Assembly. I ask all members to welcome 
them. Thank you. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 

Military Family Camping Program Celebrates 
Fifth Anniversary 

 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will have the 
privilege of attending the Military Family Camping Program’s 
fifth anniversary launch today. Each summer the MFCP 
[Military Family Camping Program] is a program that supports 
our men and women in uniform and their families by providing 
the opportunity for military families to go camping. These 
families are able to enjoy the beauty of Buffalo Pound 
Provincial Park with everything necessary to have a great 
camping trip. 
 
Mr. Speaker, military families face unique challenges because 
of their lifestyle which often affects family relationships in 
many ways. This program helps families overcome the stresses 
related to family separation, promotes healthy family 
relationships, and enables effective family reintegration after or 
during an operational deployment or training. We are eternally 
grateful to the Canadian Forces for their service and for the 
family time that they give up to serve our country. That is why 
we believe that programs like this are so important. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the military camping program is sponsored by the 
15 Wing Moose Jaw, Canadian Forces Morale and Welfare 
Services, along with Sask Parks in addition to other public and 
private sponsors. I would like to invite you and all members of 
this Assembly to first, thank those that serve in the Canadian 
Forces; and second, thank you organizers and sponsors of this 
great summer program. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Remembering Roy Atkinson 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House today to 
remember a man who devoted his entire life to fighting for 
farmers. Roy Atkinson died last week at the age of 92. A 
founding member of the National Farmers Union, he served for 
many years as its president, providing a voice for farmers all 
across Canada. He was adamant that farm families needed to 
organize and work together in order to get a better deal. He 
fought hard to empower local farmers and was also on the front 
lines during the battle for medicare. 
 
Roy also made important contributions to empower farmers 
through his service on the board of the Economic Council of 
Canada, the Canadian Council for Rural Development, the 
Canadian Wheat Board Advisory Committee, and the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. Roy was also an important leader in 
the co-op movement and was a founding member of the Landis 
Producer Co-op and served on the board of Federated Co-op. 
And Roy found time for all this organizing and activism while 
running his own farm operation on land that has been in the 
family since 1905. Among the well-deserved awards earned 
throughout his career, Roy was made a member of the Order of 
Canada and inducted into the Saskatchewan Agriculture Hall of 
Fame. 
 
Members will also know that Roy’s daughter, Pat Atkinson, 
served for many years in this Legislative Assembly, and I know 
that all members will join me in sending condolences to her and 



May 26, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 163 

her extended family at the loss of her dad. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing the 
significant contributions Roy Atkinson made to the people of 
Saskatchewan through his career of activism and service. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 

Unity Community Daycare Grand Opening 
 
Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m honoured to rise in 
the House today to celebrate the grand opening of the Unity 
Community Daycare on May 7. Mr. Speaker, the grand opening 
of the daycare was seven years in the making and I want to 
thank the board members and members of the community for 
their hard work on this project. 
 
It took a village to make this daycare a possibility and I’d like 
to take a moment to recognize some of the people and 
organizations who made it a reality. The local credit union and 
co-op together donated $25,000. The Town of Unity guaranteed 
the loan for the daycare, and Unity Public School donated tables 
and chairs. Marion Kelly donated a washer and dryer, and 
Randy Sander contributed accounting services. 
 
It is so important that we give our children a good head start in 
life and parents must feel comfortable leaving their children in a 
safe environment. Mr. Speaker, our government was very proud 
to grant $94,000 to this project, which currently has 20 licensed 
spots as part of our commitment to create 4,500 more daycare 
spots available in this province. 
 
Lastly I would like to thank Carmen Bowker, Crystal O’Brien, 
and Carey Baker, who were on the board for all seven years. 
Their hard work and commitment to this project did not go 
unnoticed. I ask all members to congratulate the town of Unity 
for their new daycare. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
[10:15] 
 

Cathedral Village Arts Festival Celebrates 
25th Anniversary 

 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Cathedral Village 
Arts Festival is a creative celebration of community through the 
arts, and I am proud to have it in my constituency. From May 
23rd to May 28th, Cathedral area residents invite their 
neighbours to celebrate the gifts that arts and culture bring to 
our community. The festival features visual arts, writing and 
poetry, crafts, and many impressive performances — I believe 
over 100 this year. The festival also encourages children, youth, 
and adults to create, participate, and enjoy the arts. 
 
This year they mark their 25th anniversary, and the theme of 
this year’s event is Paint the Town. From humble but spirited 
roots in 1991, the festival has grown immensely over the past 
quarter century and now attracts upwards of 45,000 audience 
members, making it one of the largest festivals in 
Saskatchewan. 
 

The CVAF [Cathedral Village Arts Festival] operates as a 
community of the Cathedral Area Community Association and 
is made possible by the efforts of over 300 volunteers from 
across the artistic, professional, and business spectrum. In the 
spirit of inclusion and due to generous support from cultural 
organizations, funders, local businesses, and corporations, 
access to all events is free. 
 
I ask all members to join me in thanking this year’s festival 
Chair, Barbara Tomporowski, and her team for their hard work 
in making this year’s festival a success, and I invite everyone to 
come by the festival this weekend and check out the arts and 
culture on display. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 
 

Lloydminster Teacher Receives Prime Minister’s 
Award for Teaching Excellence 

 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
recognize Nicole Blais, an outstanding teacher at St. Mary’s 
Elementary School in Lloydminster. Earlier this month Ms. 
Blais received the Prime Minister’s Award for Teaching 
Excellence. She teaches all subjects to her grade 6 class, and 
she serves as a technology lead at her school. Ms. Blais brings a 
positive attitude, quick wit, and a genuine care for others to her 
classroom. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in partnership with a colleague from Holy Rosary 
High School and Our Village Uganda, Ms. Blais spearheads an 
outreach group through which students in Lloydminster and 
Uganda hold joint prayer services and classroom discussions 
over Skype. Her students in Lloydminster also raise funds to 
help a Ugandan village develop and become more sustainable. 
In 2015 Ms. Blais and her colleague were recognized by the 
Canadian Education Association for their work with Our 
Village Uganda. 
 
Ms. Blais takes advantage of every opportunity to integrate 
technology into her classroom to help prepare students for the 
technology- and knowledge-driven economy of the future. She 
has also worked to improve her school by championing projects 
to install a living wall in the school’s foyer and waste-reducing 
water bottle refill stations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
Nicole Blais on receiving the Prime Minister’s teaching 
excellence award and in thanking her for her excellent work in 
the classroom. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

Celebrate Success Awards Gala 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. It is my privilege and honour to acknowledge the 2016 
Saskatoon Celebrate Success award recipients. Celebrate 
Success is a yearly awards gala that recognizes some of the top 
businesses in the Saskatoon region that have demonstrated 
excellence. 
 
This year’s gala was held last Thursday, which I had the 
privilege to attend along with the Minister of Justice. It was a 



164 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 2016 

wonderful evening where the nominees, finalists, winners, and 
the whole business community in Saskatoon was showcased. 
Doing an excellent job emceeing the event were Evan Drissner 
and Shauna Nelson. Mr. Speaker, the event truly showed how 
Saskatoon and indeed all of Saskatchewan is a world-class 
place to do business. 
 
This year’s award recipients were Reed Security, Vendasta, 
Three Farmers Products, Social Spiral Technologies, Sandbox 
in the City, Envirotec Services Incorporated, and special 
recognition to Saskatoon Willowgrove residents Mackenzie 
Firby and her dynamic business, Two Fifty Two Boutique, the 
young entrepreneur of the year — and she was a double winner 
— and Wiegers Financial & Benefits, Cliff and Debbie Wiegers 
as well. 
 
In addition to the business awards handed out, there was an 
inductee to the RBC SABEX [Saskatoon Achievement in 
Business Excellence] Hall of Fame. This year’s inductee was 
well-known Saskatoon resident Dr. Red Williams. 
 
The final award was also given to an individual, the Oslo 
international Business for Peace Award. It was awarded to 
Steve Dechka. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to help me congratulate the 
Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce on a job well done. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 

Construction Begins on Affordable  
Housing Development 

 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to inform members that on May 25th, I attended a 
sod-turning ceremony for a new housing development in my 
constituency. This development will enable 14 Saskatchewan 
families with complex needs to improve their quality of life. 
 
The project is being initiated by Silver Sage Holdings, which is 
helping to change the landscape of housing in this province so 
more people have access to safe, adequate, and affordable 
homes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government shares this vision. It is not just 
about constructing a new building, which is why Silver Sage 
Holdings has partnered with Foxvalley Counselling Services to 
ensure families have prompt access to programs and services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud that Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation, along with their federal housing partner, Canada 
Mortgage and Housing Corporation, are jointly contributing 
$1.3 million under the Canada-Saskatchewan Investment in 
Affordable Housing Agreement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, housing has been and continues to be a key 
priority of my government. Since November 2007 there have 
been 1,242 affordable rental units completed in Regina, 
including 233 for households who are hard to house. Including 
this project, an additional 36 affordable rental units are 
currently under construction. This is money well invested. Mr. 
Speaker, our goal is to keep Saskatchewan strong, and housing 
is a key pillar of that. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Carbon Capture and Storage Project 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, they say everything is 
bigger in Texas, but their tolerance for bloated boondoggles and 
wasted money on failing projects is apparently a lot smaller 
than the Sask Party’s. Mr. Speaker, the Texas clean energy 
project includes carbon capture, and something that will come 
as no surprise to anyone who’s paying attention to carbon 
capture projects, whether it’s in the UK [United Kingdom] or 
right here with the Sask Party’s fiasco, the project isn’t going 
well. They’ve had some cost overruns. After spending $116 
million and seeing a series of struggles, they’ve decided they 
can’t waste any more tax dollars. That’s $116 million. That’s 
with an “m”, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If the US [United States] is backing out after blowing $116 
million, why did the Sask Party stubbornly stand by their 
boondoggle while already burning through $1.5 — this is with a 
“b”, Mr. Speaker — billion? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Based 
on the member’s preamble, I would ask him to state 
unequivocally for the record: is he advising the government that 
we should shut down and back out of Boundary dam 3? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s about his due 
diligence. Everyone in this province knows that, when you 
shovel $1.5 billion into a project, that it’s too big to fail. So we 
need to make this thing work, Mr. Speaker. But everyone also 
knows, Mr. Speaker, that sticking Saskatchewan people with 
arguably the most expensive power possible — $1.5 billion for 
a little over 100 megawatts — is incredibly reckless. 
 
And you know, they smile over there, Mr. Speaker. But I think 
they forget who’s paying to put those smiles on their faces. 
That’s the people of Saskatchewan, the families, the businesses, 
and industry who often they pretend to stand by and support. 
 
Just last week, Mr. Speaker, we see the results of this. We see 
rate increases — not one, but two, Mr. Speaker, in just six 
months. Still SaskPower’s debt is at a critically high level, Mr. 
Speaker, and they’ve handed control and millions of dollars 
over to Cenovus. But since they still want to defend putting 
ratepayers on the hook for $1.5 billion in this boondoggle, let 
me ask three simple questions. How much exactly have they 
spent on this? How much have they paid to Cenovus? And 
when will the ratepayer tap finally be turned off? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. I just want to correct for the record some of 
what the Leader of the Opposition has said in terms of his 
characterization of the project. Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to report 
to members of the House that now for some months the project 



May 26, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 165 

is meeting, has been meeting its nameplate expectations, Mr. 
Speaker. I can inform the House that the plan for the plant was 
that this year it would capture 800 000 tonnes of CO2 and it is 
on track to do precisely that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s why the world is coming to southeastern 
Saskatchewan to find out about this technology. That’s why, in 
a world where 1,000 coal plants are being built, Mr. Speaker, 
countries from around the world, countries where those plants 
are being built are wanting to find out about SaskPower’s 
technology. It’s why the federal Minister of the Environment 
just yesterday — strange timing for these questions — just 
yesterday toured Boundary dam 3. And when you go through 
some of the quotes of what she had to say — I’m sure the 
Leader of the Opposition has read those quotes — she is very 
supportive of the project. The federal government recognizes 
the importance of this technological development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have come through a general election 
campaign where the member for Estevan campaigned on this 
project and also campaigned on the viability of coal. And what 
we have yet to hear from the NDP [New Democratic Party] is 
unqualified and full-throated support that this government and 
that they as opposition would work together with us to explore 
every way to keep those coal jobs going in the province of 
Saskatchewan, sustained in the province of Saskatchewan, 
through technology that can clean up the power that comes 
from that coal. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, these lines from this Premier 
remind me a little bit of what we heard earlier this week in the 
House. On Tuesday the member from Moosomin stood in this 
place and he said, “The Boundary dam carbon capture facility 
. . . can capture 1 million tonnes of CO2 a year . . .” No, it 
hasn’t. He said that “It would be the equivalent of taking a 
quarter of a million cars off the road.” No, that just isn’t 
happening. And he said that this is world-leading, homegrown 
Saskatchewan technology. No, we don’t own any of the 
intellectual property. So, Mr. Speaker, even if that were true, 
which again it is not, it still cost $1.5 billion. It frequently fails. 
It’s an expensive and inefficient technology that is being 
rejected in many other jurisdictions. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, how can we trust that that minister gave the 
correct information to the federal minister yesterday if his own 
colleagues can’t even get the facts straight? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, some of the quotes from the 
Environment minister I think are quite effusive — the federal 
Environment minister — about the project and the nature of the 
technology. Here’s what she had to say. She had to say, “The 
opportunity . . . ” Now she’s talking about the opportunity for 
this technology in China. She said, and I quote, “The 
opportunity is 50 trillion.” That’s with a “t”. Fifty trillion in 
China alone, in one country alone. 
 
Now I’m glad that the Finance critic for the NDP has stood up 
to ask these questions, because she endorsed at the federal NDP 

convention, Mr. Speaker, not very long ago, she endorsed full 
and favourable consideration of the Leap Manifesto. And we 
know what she would like to do to the coal industry. She wants 
to shut it down, Mr. Speaker. That’s why they’ve lost the 
support of IBEW [International Brotherhood of Electrical 
Workers] union members in the Estevan area. That’s why 
they’ve lost the support of businesses in the Estevan area. And 
it’s why they’ve lost the support of Saskatchewan people who 
realize that we need to find a way to clean up that coal, as we 
are doing at Boundary dam 3, so that it’s part of the solution 
going forward, so that Saskatchewan can continue to lead. 
 
This strategy didn’t work for them prior to the election. Will 
they now join with the government members, join with our 
approach to clean up coal, sustain those jobs, and present this 
technology as the solution that it is to climate change around the 
world? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, while they’ve been huffing and 
puffing, they have built no new pipelines, and thousands of 
resource sector workers have lost their jobs. The low price of 
oil is not their fault, but their reckless spending and lack of 
planning for a more diverse economy, while the price of oil was 
high, is entirely their fault. 
 
In his meetings with the Environment minister yesterday, did 
the minister admit that they can’t even decide if they want to 
keep using CCS [carbon capture and storage] on their other coal 
plant units? That despite all of their marketing, others around 
the world have rejected this technology, that other countries are 
cancelling their billion-dollar plans for carbon capture? Or, Mr. 
Speaker, did the minister just use the same lines that we heard 
today and on Tuesday from the member for Moosomin? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
[10:30] 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s very curious that the 
Finance critic, the Finance critic hand-picked by the leader, the 
new Leader of the Opposition, would raise the question of 
pipelines in her preamble because, Mr. Speaker, here’s what has 
happened under the new Leader of the NDP. The new Leader of 
the NDP has appointed a Finance critic who tacitly at least 
endorsed the Leap Manifesto, which would shut down all 
pipelines. He’s also, Mr. Speaker, hired for his party’s renewal 
Nicole White, a former candidate for his party who has signed 
the Leap Manifesto. And then he hand-picked his new chief of 
staff. Who’s his new chief of staff? His name is George Soule. 
He used to work for Thomas Mulcair, and there was a string of 
tweets from him opposing pipelines. 
 
It’s time for the NDP to stand up for Saskatchewan’s interests. 
It’s time for the NDP to recognize the good work of the 
SaskPower engineers to get this project working, to capture 
800 000 tonnes of CO2, Mr. Speaker, and to present to the 
world and the federal Minister of the Environment the 
technology that is being pioneered in the Estevan area. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 



166 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 2016 

Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier knows that I didn’t 
endorse that document. But the point is they have built no new 
pipelines. You have built no new pipelines, and thousands of 
resource workers have lost their jobs under his watch. Their 
reckless spending and their lack of planning for a more diverse 
economy while the price of oil was high . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, their reckless spending and lack 
of planning while the price of oil was high is entirely their fault. 
These answers are an insult to the Saskatchewan people, and 
it’s the Saskatchewan people who they are making pay the 
price. The Boundary dam carbon capture fiasco has cost $1.5 
billion. This is not a partisan point. It’s a fact. And they cling 
only to the good reports that they’ve gotten since it started. 
 
So I’m going to give them another chance to actually answer 
the questions that were asked earlier by our Leader of the 
Opposition, and the questions are simple. First of all, how much 
have you spent? How much have you made? And when will the 
taxpayer tap finally be turned off? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I know, I think it’s fair to say 
that members on this side of the House prior to the election — 
the minister, myself, and others — recognized that the first year 
for the project, its commissioning year, it wasn’t meeting 
expectations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the good news is, the good news is this: it is now. 
The good news is we have a great group of engineers at 
SaskPower, and those engineers have made the adjustments that 
are necessary for this technology to be working, Mr. Speaker, to 
take the equivalent of 200,000 cars off the road in terms of 
emissions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we fundamentally believe that coal can play a part 
in the future energy mix of our province. We know that it’s 
going to play a part in the future energy mix around the world. 
There’s 1,000 coal plants being built. Mr. Speaker, we need to 
clean up. We need to clean up that coal, those coal emissions. 
And, Mr. Speaker, this technology gives us the chance to do it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we campaigned on our intent to continue with the 
technology. The member for Estevan campaigned on the 
government’s plan for this technology, and I think she won well 
approximately 80 per cent of the support. I think the NDP got 
about 20 per cent down there because that community knows 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 9 per cent . . . that they would 
shut down coal. They’d shut down this world-leading project 
when we clearly know that would be the wrong direction for the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Funding for Recruitment of Physicians 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, since they seem unwilling to 
answer any of those questions, I’d like to give them a chance to 
correct themselves on another file. Yesterday the Premier and 
his Health ministers claimed they have added to bursaries to 
recruit doctors. Well, that is kind of true. I would suggest they 
may not want to keep using that line. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was a specialist bursary program which 
offered $25,000 to residents in return for a commitment to the 
province, but for reasons I for one would like to hear about, 
these bursaries are no longer being offered. Let me quote the 
government document: “due to a decreased number of specialist 
vacancies in the province, no further bursaries are being 
offered . . .” 
 
Mr. Speaker, could the Premier or anyone over there explain 
how a cancelled bursary program is supposed to recruit and 
retain a doctor? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Health minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I look forward to having a debate this morning in 
terms of the record of this government when it comes to 
recruiting not only family physicians, but as well specialists, 
and the plans that we have put in place and the programs that 
we have put in place. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important first of all for the 
Leader of the Opposition to clarify what he meant yesterday 
when he said, and I quote, that: 
 

. . . this government wasted . . . [and I quote, an] 
opportunity to implement the expert recommendations and 
bring meaningful and positive improvements to the health 
care that Saskatchewan people rely on? 

 
Mr. Speaker, is the NDP urging this government to implement 
the remaining recommendations of the Fyke Commission? If 
that’s the case, Mr. Speaker, the NDP is advocating that we 
close 50 of the remaining 70 acute care facilities and emergency 
facilities, leaving this province with just 20 acute care facilities. 
 
Is he advocating, Mr. Speaker, that we close 50 hospitals? Is he 
advocating that we hire more health care managers? Is he 
advocating, Mr. Speaker, that we reduce the number of acute 
care beds in this province? And is he advocating that we turn 
family physicians into employees of health regions? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, nowhere in that answer did he 
explain how a cancelled bursary program is supposed to recruit 
and retain a doctor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s be clear. The program was cut because 
they’ve said they’re doing good enough on specialists here in 
Saskatchewan. And yet almost half — 47, Mr. Speaker — of 
the current provincial postings are for doctors, for specialists, 
Mr. Speaker. 



May 26, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 167 

So let’s try another question. Maybe he can answer this one. In 
March 2015, back when they actually presented budgets before 
June, the Sask Party slashed funding for surgeries. And to no 
one’s surprise, wait times have gotten longer. When pressed for 
how long wait times would have to get before they were too 
long, the Minister of Health said, six months. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re there. Since then, the number of 
people waiting more than the minister’s stated limit of six 
months has more than doubled. Reducing surgery wait times 
was the one thing the Sask Party used to do well. Now they’ve 
more than doubled — more than doubled, Mr. Speaker — the 
number waiting more than six months. 
 
Again, even the minister has said this is too long to wait for 
surgery. Will the minister finally admit that on surgical wait 
times, they are going the wrong way? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I hope the members opposite, the Leader 
of the Opposition, perhaps the Health critic, will clarify whether 
or not yesterday the Leader of the Opposition chastised this 
government for not fully implementing the Fyke 
recommendations that would see us close an additional 50 
hospitals on top of the 52 that were closed by the NDP, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I find it ironic that the Leader of the 
Opposition would stand up and urge this government to keep 
Preeceville hospital closed at the same time when the premise 
of his question urged this government to implement Fyke that 
would close the Preeceville hospital, Mr. Speaker. He can’t 
have it both ways. 
 
In terms of, well in terms of specialists, Mr. Speaker, under the 
NDP, anesthetists, 93, Saskatchewan Party, 131. Cardiologists 
— 24, 28, Mr. Speaker. General surgery — 64, 92. Internal 
medicine — 146 under the NDP, 191 under the Saskatchewan 
Party. Psychiatrists — 87 under the NDP, 107 under this 
government. And I can go on and on and on. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Northern Health Care Services 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Getting 
and keeping doctors is very important for northern 
Saskatchewan. But so is northern control over northern health 
care. With so many remote and fly-in communities like 
Fond-du-Lac, Stony Rapids, Wollaston Lake, Mr. Speaker, it 
just doesn’t make any sense to have central control and a central 
office here in the capital city calling all the shots. 
 
I’ve been to the health care centre in Stony Rapids, and the 
people out there are doing a fantastic job. They offer culturally 
appropriate care; they hire local people, and they have Dene 
speakers on site. 
 
Communities in the North need more investment and more 
supports, not less input. So will the Health minister guarantee 
today that his transformational change won’t mean less northern 
investment and less input over northern care? 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, what I would say, what doesn’t make sense is the 
Leader of the Opposition standing up yesterday urging this 
government to keep a hospital open when at the same time in 
the premise of his question, urging this government to 
implement recommendations that were done in 2001 that would 
see that exact hospital closed, Mr. Speaker, including 40 
hospitals across this province. That’s what truly doesn’t make 
sense. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will be undergoing a process of looking at how 
do we continually make improvements in the health care 
system. We will be looking to consult with people all across 
this province during that process. Mr. Speaker, we’ll ensure that 
we have northern involvement in that, northern input, Mr. 
Speaker, as we look to see not only what is the best way that we 
govern the health care system in this province, but how do we 
best deliver services as close as home to possible, which this 
government has made a priority over the last eight years 
whether you live in urban, rural, or northern Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, once again, no answer. And the 
people of Saskatchewan are beginning to lose confidence and 
faith in this government right across the province. In northern 
Saskatchewan they saw, Mr. Speaker, northern Saskatchewan 
people saw that the Saskatchewan Party over time has turned its 
back on them, time and time again. They scrapped the 
department of Northern Saskatchewan. They scrapped the 
ministry of First Nations and Métis Relations. They scrapped 
the fish freight subsidy. They cancelled the road to Wollaston 
Lake. And I could go on, Mr. Speaker, but I won’t. 
 
Most people in the province now realize the frustration, and 
they’ll understand why northerners are getting more and more 
concerned with this government. We need a clear guarantee. So 
let me try and get an answer of John Black’s champion over 
there: will the minister’s transformational change to health care 
not mean less investment, or less control, to northern people 
over northern health care? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the record of this 
government is very clear. Keewatin Yatthé Health Region, 
under this government budget, is up 55 per cent, Mr. Speaker, 
to $26.9 million. Athabasca Health Authority budget is up 46 
per cent. Mamawetan Health Authority went from a budget 
under the NDP of $16 million to last year $28.8 million, an 80 
per cent increase, Mr. Speaker. We have made record 
investments in health care in the northern part of this province 
as we have all over this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are making transformative investments in very innovative 
projects such as remote technology, the work that Dr. Ivar 
Mendez, the leading expert when it comes to remote technology 
and robotics as it relates to health care, Mr. Speaker. Those are 
the types of investments we’re going to continue as we move 
forward. Mr. Speaker, what we’re also going to do though is 
we’re going to have a conversation with the people of this 



168 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 2016 

province to look at what is the best way to deliver services for 
1.1 million people spread out all across this province, Mr. 
Speaker. And we look forward to engaging all people, including 
northerners. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Delays to Toxicology and Coroner Reports 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Moving on to 
another topic, Mr. Speaker, Nadine Machiskinic’s death was a 
tragic one. But for the family, the pain and suffering has been 
dragged out ever since she was found last January. For nearly 
18 months, Nadine’s family has waited for a coroner’s report 
from the province. Eighteen months they’ve spent waiting, 
waiting for some insight as to how and why their daughter was 
taken from them so tragically. 
 
We’re now told the answers will be coming for the family in 
June but, Mr. Speaker, 18 months? And this is a family that was 
told by the minister that their case was a priority. The situation 
is absolutely unacceptable. To the minister: what is going on? 
Why did Nadine’s case take so long and why did his assurances 
for quicker resolution still result in an 18-month delay? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We truly are . . . 
take these issues seriously. When we have a death in custody, 
our condolences go out to the family and loved ones of the 
deceased, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We too are discouraged and frustrated with the timing of the 
toxicology reports. Of course the coroner cannot finish his or 
her work until the toxicology reports are in, Mr. Speaker. Our 
investigation in our facilities cannot be concluded either until 
we have the toxicology reports and the coroner’s report, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I think we all share on both sides of the House that deaths in 
custody are definitely cause for concern. We are always 
working to try and find ways through our investigations, the 
police and otherwise, to find ways to hopefully prevent these 
things from happening in the future. We are both frustrated as 
to the length of time that this toxicology report has taken, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[10:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s answer would be a 
little bit more believable if Nadine passed away in custody. But 
she wasn’t in custody. She was at the Delta Hotel. I think what 
the minister is speaking about is Breanna Kannick and her 
family, Mr. Speaker, who also has no answers as to why she 
died in custody. There were no clarity . . . there was no answers 
given to these families. 
 
Breanna was the one who lost her life while on remand at the 

White Birch Female Remand Unit. I think the minister, as she 
said, would agree that someone in custody is still entitled to 
protection and is the responsibility of the province. Her family 
wants answers. But both families should be getting answers, 
whether in custody or not. 
 
This has been, Breanna’s issue has been five months ongoing 
and the family still doesn’t have any answers. So does the 
minister have any explanation for this delay? And what is he 
doing to prevent this from becoming a growing trend? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the 
House are always concerned when there’s delays with regard to 
the preparation of these reports. We have had some discussions 
with the coroner’s office, Mr. Speaker, but, as the Minister of 
Corrections and Policing has stated, we’re waiting far too long 
to get the toxicology reports, which is a prerequisite to 
completing the work not only at the coroner’s office, but any 
investigation that is done by the Ministry of Justice officials. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will continue to press for those reports and 
we’ll continue to press for answers as to why those delays are 
taking place. But, Mr. Speaker, I’ll repeat the answer of the 
Minister of Corrections and Policing. This is all about the 
receipt of the toxicology reports. Coroners’ work can’t be done, 
nor can the work be done in terms of the investigation at the 
ministry, until those reports are in, Mr. Speaker. But we will 
continue to investigate the reasons for the delays and the 
preparations of those reports. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Reforestation Jobs 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, the latest Stats Canada figures 
show that unemployment in the Prince Albert region is the 
highest in the province and one of the highest rates in Western 
Canada. But that didn’t stop this government from sending 
nearly half a million dollars worth of tree planting contracts out 
of the province this year, Mr. Speaker — $160,000 to Brinkman 
& Associates Reforestation in BC [British Columbia], over 
320,000 to Outland Resources in Alberta. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government said it would stop this from 
happening with its revamping tendering process, but 
Saskatchewan workers and Saskatchewan companies are being 
left out by this government. Mr. Speaker, I know the Sask Party 
has a history of ignoring Prince Albert, but I’m here now. Why 
is the Minister of Environment shipping jobs out of the 
province when so many people in Prince Albert are looking for 
work? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And thanks for that 
question. Mr. Speaker, since early in the ’30s, 1939 I believe it 
was, we’ve reforested approximately 99 000 hectares — 
250,000 acres — of forestry in this province, and that’s part of 
our ongoing commitment. It is always done with an open and 
transparent request for proposals, and the proposal that has been 



May 26, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 169 

accepted here was the lowest qualified proposal. 
 
We also use several reforesting companies from here in 
Saskatchewan, some from the Prince Albert area. Our trees 
come through there. Several other contracts are also done from 
the North, and we employ a lot of the northern people in 
planting those trees, in preparing the site work, in tending our 
trees, and in other contracts. But in this case, this was the lowest 
on an RFP [request for proposal] process that was open and 
transparent, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 12 — The Public Health (Miscellaneous) 
Amendment Act, 2016 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 12, The Public Health (Miscellaneous) Amendment 
Act, 2016 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 12, The Public Health (Miscellaneous) Amendment 
Act, 2016 be now introduced and be read the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 13 — The Cancer Agency Amendment Act, 2016 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 13, 
The Cancer Agency Amendment Act, 2016 be now introduced 
and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 13, The Cancer Agency Amendment Act, 2016 be 
now introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
Minister of Health. 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting of the Assembly. 
 

Bill No. 14 — The Horned Cattle Purchases  
Repeal Act, 2016 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 14, The Horned Cattle Purchases Repeal Act, 2016 be 
now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Agriculture that Bill No. 14, The Horned Cattle Purchases 
Repeal Act, 2016 be now introduced and read a first time. Is it 
in the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting of the Assembly. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Buckingham, seconded by Ms. 
Carr, and the proposed amendment to the main motion moved 
by Ms. Sproule.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m honoured 
to enter debate into the Throne Speech here this afternoon. I do 
want to start with welcoming all new members to this 
Assembly, and all members on that side, on both sides of the 
Assembly, and I want to wish them well with their service. 
Certainly it’s an important responsibility and privilege. 
 
I also want to say that I’ve been incredibly impressed with so 
many of the maiden speeches that have been delivered on both 
sides. And I have to say I really valued the responses from the 
members of our caucus. I thought they engaged in this debate in 
a thoughtful, meaningful, community-focused way, one that 
focuses on what’s important to our province, and did so with a 
level of independence and critical thought that certainly 
provides strength to Saskatchewan people. 
 



170 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 2016 

Before I get into my own response, I’d like to take a moment to 
offer a few thank yous. First, I’d like to start with thanking you 
once again, Mr. Speaker, for the role that you’ll provide, the 
important role and service you provide to this Assembly. 
 
And I’d like to thank our team of MLAs in the official 
opposition. It’s an honour to serve as the Leader of the Official 
Opposition, but it’s a greater honour to work with this albeit 
small but mighty team. We’re a strong and diverse group of 
people and, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve noted before, we’re the first 
caucus in the history of our province to achieve gender parity. 
And I’m really proud to be a part of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our new MLAs in Lakeview, in Douglas Park, in Northcote, are 
incredible additions to this Assembly. They’ll be assets not just 
to their constituents but to our caucus and our province as a 
whole. 
 
Only a week and a half into this session, I’m proud of the 
strength our team has already shown. Yesterday was another 
example of how we will stand up on issues that matter to 
Saskatchewan people, as we stood shoulder to shoulder with the 
good people of Preeceville and area as they’re being mistreated 
with their hospital being closed, one that they fundraised so 
hard for. Whether they voted for us or not, people across this 
great province need to know they can count on us to stand up 
and defend their interests. 
 
When the government turns . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And 
the member from Moose Jaw says he should close it down. And 
sadly, Mr. Speaker, that’s what this government is doing, you 
know. And this kind of callous heckling from members 
opposite is so unbecoming from that big majority who should 
be focused on every solution to keep the Preeceville Hospital 
open. When the government turns its back on families, when 
the Sask Party makes damaging cuts or refuses to invest in 
necessary programs and services, we’ll be there — standing 
strong and pushing back, certainly including coal families, as 
heckled already by the Premier. It should be below and beneath 
the office of the Premier to make sure that there’s futures and 
opportunity and jobs for all of those families, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, some days it might feel that we’re in maybe a small 
canoe up against and alongside a big, old battleship, Mr. 
Speaker, a big majority, a big government. But I’m here to tell 
you, Mr. Speaker, I’m confident in the team that we have here 
as the official opposition. I know that we’re paddling with 
common purpose, guided by common sense and compassion. 
You know, and it would seem as well, Mr. Speaker, that maybe 
earlier than many of us would have ever expected, that there’s 
already signs that that big, old battleship is taking on some 
water, Mr. Speaker, and falling off track. 
 
Now we couldn’t be here without the work and votes from 
supporters and volunteers across the province. And whether 
their candidate won or lost, our democracy is strengthened 
when people get involved, whether it was those that knocked on 
doors, whether it was people that stepped up to serve. Whatever 
party they stepped up to serve for, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank 
every last person that was involved in the democratic process. 
And I want to thank the exceptional team of candidates that 
signed up, that stepped up and served as candidates for the 
Saskatchewan New Democrats. 

Earning the trust to serve is a tremendous honour and a 
responsibility. On a personal note, I want to say a big thank you 
to the good people of Regina Rosemont for offering me that 
trust once again. I certainly work for good people: hardworking, 
common sense, compassionate. And it’s an honour to do so. I’d 
also like to recognize the other candidates and good people: 
Kevin Dureau, Sara Piotrofsky, and Reid Hill for their 
involvement, meaningful involvement in the democratic 
process. 
 
Without a doubt, the greatest strength of our community, the 
communities that make up Regina Rosemont, just as it is for our 
province, is its people — people committed to bettering their 
community, focused on what matters to their families. Serving 
is a responsibility I don’t take lightly. It matters, and I know 
how hard my constituents work. And I’ve always been of the 
belief that they deserve a representative that will work as hard 
as they do, that will care as much as they do. These are basic 
things, but they’re important to me. 
 
I’m so thankful for all the ongoing care, engagement, input, and 
honestly, so much good humour as well of constituents, whether 
it’s on the doorsteps or whether it’s the countless community 
events, school activities throughout the community, Mr. 
Speaker. To all the people in our community that do all they can 
to strengthen our community — the community and cultural 
associations, the hard-working, caring families, the coaches and 
volunteers, the schools and the churches, those in public 
service, the businesses and entrepreneurs — to all these people 
and organizations, I simply say thank you. Together you help us 
fulfill the promise of our province’s motto, “from many 
peoples, strength”. 
 
Importantly, I want to say thank you to our caring and dedicated 
local campaign team. I’m so lucky to have the support and 
involvement of this local impressive team. Their level of care 
and commitment is inspiring and energizing. To each and every 
one of them, I say thank you. 
 
I also want to say thank you to my wife, Stephanie, and to our 
son, William, for sharing in public service and for their full 
support. And I have to admit it’s been really special toting 
around my sidekick to community event after community event, 
and I believe he’s gaining rich experiences and special 
relationships at an early age through this process. I also want to 
say thank you to our extended families, my mom and dad, my 
in-laws, my sisters and their families, my brother-in-laws, my 
herd of nephews. I’m so thankful for all their care and their 
support. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, to the topic at hand, the Throne Speech. Its 
length, Mr. Speaker; one of the shortest throne speeches in 
recent memory. Certainly that reflects its lack of vision and 
plan. Mr. Speaker, it’s vague, and it offered little comfort to the 
people of Saskatchewan who are already growing increasingly 
concerned with this government’s lack of transparency — from 
hiding the true state of our province’s finances from 
Saskatchewan people, from hiding and delaying our budget, to 
hiding the facts surrounding their GTH [Global Transportation 
Hub] land scandal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how can a Throne Speech ignore some of the 
things that matter most to Saskatchewan people? How, Mr. 



May 26, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 171 

Speaker, can this government fail to address health care, 
education, or job creation in a meaningful way, especially at a 
time where we’re in tighter times where the deficit is growing, 
where we’ve had some of the worst unemployment numbers in 
years, Mr. Speaker — numbers that are causing challenges for 
families across Saskatchewan, families that have been displaced 
from employment, and numbers and realities that are 
particularly harsh for Aboriginal people across Saskatchewan. 
These are the things that Saskatchewan people are concerned 
about during difficult times. The Throne Speech, sadly, didn’t 
do a thing to reassure them. 
 
[11:00] 
 
It didn’t show any commitment from this government to protect 
and enhance vital services or do all they can to create good, 
mortgage-paying jobs. Instead, Mr. Speaker, health regions and 
school divisions are left scrambling to make ends meet. At the 
same time that they’re being warned by the government about, 
quote, supposed transformational change and a tough budget, 
they’re left hanging in the lurch. 
 
Meanwhile, Mr. Speaker, our hospitals are crowded with 
patients. Our classrooms are bursting at the seams. Wait times 
for surgeries are growing, and people are sadly waiting months 
to see a specialist. Still, Mr. Speaker, there is no talk about 
making investments to improve services in either health care or 
education. That’s because instead of investing, this government 
is making cuts, dismissing the realities in classrooms all across 
Saskatchewan, and in hospitals — Preeceville as a prime 
example. 
 
The fact is classrooms all across Saskatchewan are under strain, 
and students are losing out as a result. The loss of one-on-one 
attention matters as class sizes have been forced to grow. 
Complexity of classrooms have grown, and educational 
assistants have been lost. And then in a damaging move that 
defied common sense, we’ve a government that scrapped the 
mid-year adjustment — dollars that were there to dedicate to 
support new students entering into classrooms — leaving 
classrooms shorted, students shorted, leaving our schools 
without the resources that they require. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, education is the foundation of our 
future, our future society, our future economy, and it’s past time 
this government treated it as the priority that it must be and 
made an investment in our kids and our province’s future. And 
members can heckle election outcomes across the floor if they 
choose. I think that big majority would be better focused on 
actually addressing the realities facing Saskatchewan people. 
But that’s their choice. 
 
In health care, they’ve cut budgets for surgeries, and they’ve cut 
nurses and heath care aids. Now they’re closing hospitals like 
Preeceville. And to add insult to injury, as a sad disgrace, Mr. 
Speaker, they’re closing that hospital just three weeks before 
that community pays off its mortgage that they worked so hard 
to raise $3.5 million towards, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government’s only solution to create jobs appears to be to 
allow people to sell baked goods from their kitchens. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m a big fan of baked goods, of farmers’ markets, and 
of small businesses. So on its own, this is great. But that 

promise does little for the thousands of people in our province 
who have lost jobs, who are unemployed and looking for work, 
or who are underemployed in precarious and low-paying work, 
working harder and harder but falling behind, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This Throne Speech was a clear sign that the Premier and this 
government lacks any sort of meaningful plan. They don’t have 
a plan when it comes to improving health care and education, 
and they don’t have a plan when it comes to diversifying the 
economy, creating good jobs that will help put this province 
back on track, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another thing that was noticeably missing from this Throne 
Speech was any commitment to practical and meaningful 
environmental action. Nothing to protect the air we breathe, the 
water we drink, or the land we grow our food on, the food that 
we share with the world, Mr. Speaker. Imagine, Mr. Speaker, if 
instead of spending $1.5 billion in an inefficient and expensive 
carbon capture scheme, if this government had invested in 
renewable energy and diversifying our economy. Imagine what 
that could have done to reduce emissions and simultaneously 
create jobs, all while keeping bills, power bills for 
Saskatchewan people more affordable. 
 
While the speech was of little substance as I mentioned before, 
Mr. Speaker, there were some promises made by this 
government that I find concerning. The government has 
promised to move ahead with their paying more and paving less 
highway scheme. I think anyone out on May long weekend, last 
weekend, will have recognized the state of these highways and 
the disrepair, and so many live with these highways as their 
arteries every day. But this government is plowing ahead, 
continuing to gut the Highways ministry and to outsource, Mr. 
Speaker. And as such, the cost of repaving our highways has 
skyrocketed under this government. In fact, Mr. Speaker, at this 
rate the government spends on highway repaving, their pledge 
for $70 million in additional roadwork will only pave around 
100 kilometres of highway. They’re going on and on about a 
promise that will only get us, Mr. Speaker, one hour down the 
road. Hardly visionary, Mr. Speaker. Under this government so 
many of our highways will remain in a state of disrepair, and 
that’s unacceptable. 
 
You know, they promised, Mr. Speaker, to continue plowing 
ahead with their costly P3 [public-private partnership] 
privatization schemes. Not only have these projects proven to 
cost more, but they’re sending good mortgage-paying jobs out 
of Saskatchewan by giving P3 contracts away to companies 
from out of province and out of country. The cost of these 
projects are enormous, Mr. Speaker. The Regina, well the 
so-called Regina bypass that actually doesn’t bypass the city, 
Mr. Speaker, being built by a company from France, has 
ballooned from the originally estimated cost of $400 million to 
an outrageous $2 billion. That’s the kind of mismanagement 
and obscene waste, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan people are 
being subjected to. 
 
Maintenance for the new hospital in North Battleford has been 
contracted out to a company from the United Kingdom. It’s 
costing a whopping $6 million a year for maintenance, more 
than the entire health region’s budget for maintenance, Mr. 
Speaker. In fact recently a study from the University of 
Calgary, not exactly a bastion of left wing thought, Mr. 



172 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 2016 

Speaker, noted that the people who benefit from these sort of P3 
projects are the politicians who can “. . . take the credit for new 
infrastructure while passing future maintenance and operating 
costs off onto future politicians, taxpayers and/or users.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that P3 projects are costing taxpayers 
more today. We know that they’re tying the hands of taxpayers 
into the future. And we know that they’re sending good jobs 
outside of Saskatchewan when we need that opportunity right 
here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I know this government has struggled with their finances. 
They didn’t balance the books during the best days. They piled 
on $5 billion of new debt in just one term, Mr. Speaker, and I 
know they conveniently try to hide debt and not share the true 
picture, Mr. Speaker, but Saskatchewan people are common 
sense. They know debt is debt is debt, Mr. Speaker. So they can 
. . . Mr. Speaker, they do all of this to kick the cost down the 
road, creating greater debt into the future, and ultimately, 
ultimately on to our kids, Mr. Speaker. That’s not good 
planning, and it’s not right, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They promised, Mr. Speaker to commit to privatization by 
opening the Crown protection Act, something they said for 
years they wouldn’t do. Now liquor stores will be sold off, and 
others are at risk, Mr. Speaker. You know, those stores, in the 
end, they belong to the people of Saskatchewan. They make 
money and they provide communities with good jobs. 
 
Instead of being sold off, they should be modernized, Mr. 
Speaker. Selection should be improved; beer should be 
refrigerated; and policies should be improved to better support 
our very impressive and dynamic craft brewers, distillers, and 
wineries across this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Instead this is a government that’s liquidating a valuable asset 
and making promises that they know full well they can’t keep, 
Mr. Speaker. And who knows, Mr. Speaker, with this 
government — cash-strapped, third term — what else is at risk, 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes to our Crowns? But a message to 
Saskatchewan people is that we’ll be there to fight, Mr. 
Speaker, if we see a government moving in that direction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they continue, they promise to continue 
undermining public health care by offering private CT 
[computerized tomography] scans in addition to private MRIs 
[magnetic resonance imaging]. Now this fundamentally goes 
against what the public health care system stands for, Mr. 
Speaker. It gives those with an extra buck in their pocket — 
quite a few dollars in their pocket they need — to jump the 
queue, Mr. Speaker, leaving those that can’t afford to do the 
same to be left behind. Mr. Speaker, privatization is not the 
answer to improving health care. This is Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, and here everyone should have access to health care 
with their health card, not their credit card. This government 
needs to stop undermining public health care and work to 
improve services for all, not just for those who can afford it. 
 
And we see from this government an enormous amount of 
lacking or amount of a lack of transparency — a government 
that hid the budget from Saskatchewan people and continues to 
delay it; a government that hid the true state of our finances 
from Saskatchewan people, leaving school divisions and health 

regions and families wondering, hey how big the deficit will be, 
and what the cuts are that’ll be coming. What are the 
consequences? What’s the government’s plan? 
 
They’ve continued to hide facts around their GTH land deal, 
refusing to release documents, Mr. Speaker, unwilling to put 
any sunlight on this deal, Mr. Speaker, one that’s wasted 
millions of dollars. You know, the people of Saskatchewan 
should be able to count on their government. They should be 
able to count on them for honesty, for good roads, good jobs, 
quality education for our kids, and access to health care. 
 
And if we are to be judged as a society by how we treat the 
most vulnerable, which I believe we should be, then it is clear 
this government is failing. Far too many are being let down, 
pushed to the margins, left in crisis. And of course the impacts 
are often tragic and harsh, and they impact all of us. A few 
poignant examples: we have a government that is unwilling to 
address the damaging prevalence of poverty. The fact that so 
many kids across Saskatchewan don’t have food in their bellies 
or a safe roof over their head or the fact that so many seniors are 
being forced to choose between food and medications, often 
compromising on both fronts, should trouble us all and serve as 
one enormous wake-up call. 
 
The fact that food bank usage has skyrocketed, something none 
of us should accept. The fact that Aboriginal people in our 
province are subjected to so many factors that contribute to 
poor health, inequality, whether it’s the national injustice of 
underfunding of on-reserve education, the lack of services and 
supports like mental health, addictions, and community 
supports, the alarming loss of jobs for Aboriginal people within 
the province, or whether it’s the need for partnership and 
meaningful action to address the recommendations of the truth 
and reconciliation committee. There’s so much more work to do 
to ensure that every kid has a fair shot to live up to their full 
potential in Saskatchewan and to ensure that we can live up to 
our full potential socially, culturally, and economically, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And we must do a better job when it comes to mental health 
supports, a stigma that must be overcome, and supports and 
services that must be bolstered and made accessible. The reality 
is too many suffer in silence. Too many can’t access the 
services they need. Too many are damaged in the process: 
partners and families and communities. And the damage and 
hurt caused by domestic and sexual violence is intolerable. It 
requires meaningful focus and resources. On too many fronts, 
people deserve so much better. 
 
We’ll be seeking solutions on many fronts such as water 
management, solutions that will work for agricultural producers 
and communities that have been subjected to damage and that 
respect and value wetlands. And we need to focus, ensure a 
focus on our province’s broken transportation system, including 
our rail system that’s currently not up to the task of getting our 
exports to market, leaving producers and so many other 
exporters without the certainty of performance they deserve. 
 
[11:15] 
 
The need for safe, responsible pipelines and as mentioned, 
fixing the failed highways strategy, this is critical to our 



May 26, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 173 

economy. You know, and when it comes to pipelines, Mr. 
Speaker, we need access for our product and for our market. 
We’ve advocated, will continue to ensure we have safe, 
responsible pipelines. We have a government whose approach 
has failed, not building a kilometre of pipeline, Mr. Speaker, 
not finding access for the Saskatchewan economy, and I think 
it’s the failed approach of the Premier that’s in part to blame. 
 
Let’s be clear. This is a Premier that grandstands on this issue 
time and time again. Just to be clear, we’ll choose pipelines any 
day of the week over headlines, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In closing, we are a beautiful province full of innovators, 
creative thinkers, full of hard-working and common sense 
people. I love our province and I know that we have incredible 
potential and so much more we can be. But that requires 
working with Saskatchewan people, and that requires a vision 
and a plan to ensure a bright future. 
 
Instead all we see from the government in this Throne Speech is 
boasting, big boasting and small thinking. It would seem that 
the Premier and the third term Sask Party government are 
taking a lot for granted. Instead of rolling up their sleeves and 
responding to the needs and opportunities we have as a 
province to ensure we can be as strong as we can be, seems like 
they’re just mailing it in, Mr. Speaker. That taking things for 
granted and just mailing-it-in attitude is on full display in this 
weak, short-sighted Throne Speech. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I recognize that we have a lot of work to do as the 
official opposition. I look forward to that work along with 
Saskatchewan people right across our province. The reality is 
we are a province of big ideas, tremendous opportunity, and 
have important needs, needs that must be addressed, and 
opportunities to improve the lives for Saskatchewan people. For 
all Saskatchewan people, not just those who voted for us, we 
will not only oppose but we’ll propose solutions as well. 
 
And when the government goes against what’s in the best 
interests of Saskatchewan people, we will be ready to stand 
strong and to fight on the things that matter — things like good 
jobs, strong public health care, quality education, and protecting 
and improving life for the most vulnerable all across 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This Throne Speech does not stand up for those things. And so 
for those reasons, Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting it and 
I’ll be supporting the amendment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
never lost on me, the honour that it is to stand in this Assembly 
and really participate in any debate, but it’s all the more 
poignant I think when we all, and in this case obviously for 
myself, when I get to stand in my place as the MLA for Swift 
Current and participate in the debate, the Throne Speech debate. 
 
So I want to state that for the record again, how grateful I am to 
the electors of the constituency of Swift Current, those who 
voted for me and those who didn’t. It is a great honour to serve 
them. It has ever been since 1999; it continues to be. And I’ll 
work hard to earn the support that was given on the 4th of April 

in my constituency, and I’ll work hard to also earn I guess the 
moral support for those in our constituency who voted in 
another way. 
 
I want to very quickly go through some thank yous. I note that 
members on both sides of the House have done that since the 
election, and I think it’s meet and right that we would 
acknowledge those who helped get us here. And so for me the 
list is long. 
 
I’m very grateful to the campaign committee and the volunteers 
in Swift Current. I wasn’t really much of a candidate in Swift 
Current, I’m afraid to say. I didn’t do a lot of door knocking 
there, which is to say, I didn’t do any door knocking in Swift 
Current. They did all of that hard work during and before the 
election. 
 
Trevor Moe was the campaign Chair. And I’m not going to list 
a bunch but I’ll just, through this place and on the record of 
Hansard, thank him and all of those who participated. I also 
need to thank all of those who helped with the other campaign, 
the central campaign. As I said on election night, I think they’re 
the best in the country and I want to acknowledge them. 
 
I especially want to say thank you to someone I don’t thank 
enough, and his name is Everett Hindley. And he’s been with 
me since 1999. He’s been a constituency assistant for me and 
now he’s stuck travelling the province with me. And he’s a 
great individual. And he’s become a good friend and a trusted 
source of counsel, and I want to get on the record my 
appreciation for Everett. 
 
I am blessed to be married to Tami. She has been, since I began 
this political career or journey, she’s been just an amazing 
partner and someone who’s given much, both for her own 
career but of her time over and above that, and her support to 
me has always been unqualified. And I want to thank her. 
 
We have three great kids. Our oldest is Megan. She got married 
last year in the Cypress Hills. And her and our new son-in-law 
Kyle Dase, who is of the great Dase family from Hillmond, 
Saskatchewan in the constituency of Lloydminster . . . I’m 
looking . . . There’s the MLA for Lloydminster. It’s a large 
group, and you lose track of folks. And so they’re doing well 
studying. And I’m happy to report to the House that they’ll both 
be coming back to the province of Saskatchewan here in the fall 
and can’t wait for that to occur. 
 
Our middle child is Colter, and very, very proud of what he’s 
been doing lately and the career that he’s started. I’ll just tell 
this quick story, Mr. Speaker. It was a great day just a few 
months ago when I checked into a hotel in Saskatoon and the 
young woman that was the professional at the desk asked for 
my name, and I said it. And she said, are you . . . and I thought 
she was going to say something about politics. And she said, are 
you Colter Wall’s dad? So that was one of the best days I’ve 
had on this job. I’m also known as the guy who sits beside the 
dad of Mark McMorris and Craig McMorris, so now we have 
. . . There’s another descriptor there. And I want to 
acknowledge Colter. 
 
And then our youngest is Faith and she’s in grade 12, 
graduating this year, heading off to the University of 



174 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 2016 

Saskatchewan. And she has just grown into this beautiful and 
funny and witty, intelligent, young woman, and we’re proud of 
what Faith’s doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it was interesting how the week began. The 
week of the Throne Speech of course began outside the 
sessional activities of this place when there was the swearing in 
of members of the Legislative Assembly on both sides of the 
House and when there was also later that evening the unveiling 
of the dome. And I know some people were hoping that the 
unveiling would show a little more, as it were, but we knew that 
this is going to be a long process where the scaffolding is going 
to come down, up until about . . . it’s going to take until about 
July. 
 
But the ceremony itself, I think, provided some historical 
symmetry, both for this session, but I hope it had all of us 
remembering the importance of the tradition of this place and 
the history of this place. And more to the point, I hope that it 
had us thinking about those who went before us, whose vision 
was great and worthy of this province, but who were also 
worried about the day-to-day things like getting this building 
opening and getting the education system implemented across 
the province and getting a university built and just delivering on 
the day-to-day affairs of government. And more on that in a 
moment. 
 
Shortly after that October day when the building was first 
opened — in fact it was the 14th of November 1912 — there 
was from your throne, Mr. Speaker, the very first Speech from 
the Throne, at least in this Chamber, because obviously they 
had been presented to the Assembly before they moved into the 
new digs, as it were. And on that particular day, the Lieutenant 
Governor was the Honourable George W. Brown. He was the 
Lieutenant Governor when the building opened and obviously 
then he delivered the very first Speech from the Throne. There 
have been 20 other Lieutenant Governors who’ve taken that 
seat where you sit today, Mr. Speaker, and delivered, well, 
approximating 100 speeches from the throne to the people of 
this Assembly, to the members and through them to the people 
they represent across the province. 
 
And if you think about that span of history, consider that there 
have been six monarchs in terms of the Commonwealth since 
the province really began: Edward VII; George V; Edward VIII 
for a very brief time as we all know; and then the Queen’s 
father, George VI; and then for the last six decades now, Her 
Majesty Queen Elizabeth. That’s quite a span of history. 
 
I would expect though and consider what this room would have 
been like. Frankly, it would have looked a lot like it does today 
with just a few changes. In fact the dais where you preside, Mr. 
Speaker, and from which the speech is read, is basically as it 
was the day it opened. Members will know that for a time they 
took down the centrepiece and it was just a throne, and it wasn’t 
until 1978 when they found that centrepiece up in the dome, 
ironically enough — there’s nothing like that up there now, I 
don’t think; we’ve all had a look — but that’s where it was 
stored. And in ’78 they basically wanted to restore this 
Chamber to the way it was when this place first opened for 
business with that first Speech from the Throne, middle of 
November 1912. 
 

Many of these desks are original. Most of the chairs — I think 
all of the chairs along the back — are original. And so when 
that first speech was read, there would have been a lot of things 
similar. If we could travel back in time, this place would not be 
that strange to us at all. Obviously a number of changes have 
occurred since then, and I think that’s probably a bit of 
metaphor for where I would like to go in some brief remarks I 
have today. 
 
It strikes me, Mr. Speaker, that what the Lieutenant Governor 
surveys when he or she delivers the Speech from the Throne 
from your seat there, from the throne or the Speaker’s Chair, 
they’re looking at really two things. Whether they’re thinking 
about it or not, they’re looking at the very temporal nature of 
the legislature in the faces of the members that are here as we’re 
just passing through. Some of us will be here for a little bit 
longer than others, I say to the member for Cannington. And 
some have just got here and have only been here a short time. 
But here’s the inimitable truth of it all, faces are all going to 
change. That’s the temporal perspective from that place. 
 
But as you look around this Chamber, there is much that 
commends it to endurance. This place is going to be around 
long after we’re gone. And it was here obviously for 100-plus 
years before this day, before we had this particular debate and 
this particular Speech from the Throne. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, I think a good Speech from the 
Throne would also reflect that. A Speech from the Throne 
should deal with the more temporal issues, the challenges that 
face a government, that face our jurisdiction, that face the 
people of the province. But that speech should also glance 
above the horizon and take a longer view on behalf of the 
people, have a bit of vision about what we expect for this 
province and its people for generations to come. 
 
And I’m not claiming perfection for this Speech from the 
Throne or any other that we’ve had anything to do with. But I 
think that basic test was met in the Speech from the Throne that 
was delivered just last week from where you’re sitting now. I 
think that particular Speech from the Throne dealt with a 
number of short-term issues that are important to the people of 
the province and that were campaigned on by the Saskatchewan 
Party, by our party, culminating in that election on the 4th of 
April. 
 
We did commit, and the Leader of the Opposition just mocked 
this, but we did commit to adding to historic highways 
investment in the province of Saskatchewan. He didn’t 
reference that, by the way, when he was mocking the $70 
million surge, these extra additional dollars for particularly 
problematic roads. 
 
And by the way, if I could offer some counsel to my friend — 
and I congratulate on his job — I think some circumspection 
and description of some of these things is probably advisable. 
Because he would know that the $70 million over a number of 
years is on top of about $2.7 billion dollars-plus, actually. The 
record investments that are being made in highways by this 
government that have been made — we broke our own record 
in every successive budget — those will continue. This is in 
addition to that. And we would rather it be more, but we also 
would rather to balance the budget by ’17-18, and make sure 



May 26, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 175 

that we are paying the bills as we go. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, there’s a good example in the Throne 
Speech of maybe a shorter term, but important issue that we 
should be addressing, and the Speech from the Throne should 
lay out the government’s plan to do it. 
 
Another perhaps shorter term item in the Speech from the 
Throne that I think is certainly worthy of its presence there and 
commends itself to this particular debate is the commitment on 
the part of the government in the Speech from the Throne to 
keep another campaign promise to extend the two-for-one MRI 
practice to CT scans in Saskatchewan. And I also heard the 
Leader of the Opposition sort of return in his speech to that, the 
tired, old ideology of the ’40s and ’50s and ’60s. 
 
He stood in his place and ruled out supporting the common 
sense of this two-for-one model. And do you know what’s 
ironic about that, Mr. Speaker? When they sat in government 
they implemented this very policy. Again, sometimes I wonder 
if there’s the self-awareness over on the other side or maybe 
they’re not familiar with their own history or they don’t read 
their own reports, like say the Fyke Commission, before they 
ask questions as the Leader of the Opposition did yesterday, 
fighting for a hospital that would’ve been closed by the very 
report that he was recommending the government follow. It was 
a bit bizarre. 
 
But with respect to MRIs, let’s remember the genesis of the 
model that the Minister of Health has brought to diagnostics. 
The NDP government wanted to provide the chance for 
Roughriders to jump the queue; I think that’s the word he just 
used in his debate. How could they get ahead of the line and get 
their MRIs so they could hopefully return to action on the field? 
Well they came up with a pretty innovative way to do it — the 
NDP did — which they now deny. 
 
What they said was, well the Riders can do this and workers’ 
compensation clients can also do this, but workers’ comp and 
the Riders will have to actually buy a scan on the public system 
too. So you can have yours, you can pay for yours, your MRI, 
but you have to provide one to the public system to shorten that 
list. And so the Minister of Health presented to the people of 
this province and, supported by members, and we ran on 
expanding that to CTs, expanding that good common sense to 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Why in the world would the Leader of the Opposition want to 
allow workers’ compensation clients that opportunity, or 
Roughriders that opportunity, yet deny it to Saskatchewan 
people who would like timely diagnostics? And again, may I 
just say, hopefully in a helpful way, to my friend the Leader of 
the Opposition, this is kind of . . . some of the thinking that I 
think needs to change if they’re to reconnect with Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Saskatchewan people, they’re informed by common sense. 
They’re a veritable well of common sense, if all of us would 
just listen to them a bit more. And I know all of us could do 
that, including members on this side of the House. And they 
would say it does make a lot of common sense for the 
government to say you can have your private MRI, and now 
your private CT scan, but provide one on the public system and 

reduce that list. 
 
And I can inform the members of the House — I don’t have a 
specific number — that only in the matter of weeks since we’ve 
implemented this measure for the MRIs, there have been people 
that have taken advantage of it. And so we know there are scans 
that have been provided on the public system and we will 
expand it to CTs. And it’s a good example of improved 
diagnostic wait times or shorter wait times, a short-term 
measure that’s referenced in the Speech from the Throne as 
well. 
 
[11:30] 
 
There was a commitment as well that we would reduce the 
amount of administration in health care and redirect it to the 
front lines, and specifically in long-term care — another good 
short-term measure in the Throne Speech. 
 
And then there were a number of specific items that were . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Well the Deputy Premier’s 
absolutely right. He just reminded me that the NDP called for 
this. And I remember in the debate, in the televised debate 
during the election campaign, we talked about this for a 
moment and the then leader of the opposition, the then leader of 
the NDP, Mr. Broten, said, well yours isn’t enough. You’re 
only going to save seven and a half million, and we would save 
20 million. 
 
So I hope that members opposite will remember that they 
campaigned on that because we think there is merit in exploring 
an increase to that number, and that’s not the only reason that 
we’re looking at transformational change, also referenced in the 
Speech from the Throne. But that may well be one 
manifestation, that balance between admin or board governance 
and front-line care that we’ll want to have a look at and engage 
with stakeholders on that particular subject as well. 
 
There are a number of long-term, aspirational — well more than 
aspirational — long-term, very definitive plans for the 
government that were outlined in the Speech from the Throne 
as well, and that included a reference to SaskPower’s extension 
of the net metering program for solar power and our 
commitment to hit 50 per cent renewables by 2030. That speaks 
very much to a long-term vision for this province, being very 
engaged on the climate change file and providing sustainable 
low-cost electricity for the future growth of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, the member from Moosomin dealt with this in his 
maiden speech, the campaign promise for a new patent box in 
Saskatchewan. It’s also referenced in the Speech from the 
Throne and that’s another great example of taking the long 
view, of having a vision for a continuing diversification in the 
economy especially as it relates to creating a broader innovation 
sector and a more robust IT [information technology] sector 
perhaps. Even apps that deal with food could qualify perhaps as 
that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the patent box itself was something that we 
announced during the campaign, and we’re moving to 
implement now. It’s referenced in the Speech from the Throne, 
and I’m excited about it. We’re going to be the only jurisdiction 



176 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 2016 

in North America to offer this. What it is, is some tax protection 
while inventors and creators take the time to commercialize 
their idea, creating jobs as they do it, and get a bit of a break 
from the tax man, as it were, but only if they’ll come to 
Saskatchewan. And this will be for home-grown inventors and 
creators, and it’ll also be for those who might want to come 
from outside the province and try their hand at business here 
and innovate here in Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s called a patent box, but I want members of the House to 
remember that we’re going to expand it beyond what patent 
generally connotes as manufacturing. And we want to make 
sure that trade secrets — and that’s a term that’s readily used in 
that sector — and recipes are part of that protection because 
what’s happening in this province in the food industry is 
remarkable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of food exports, we’ve seen huge 
progress. For many, many years in this country, it was taken as 
given that the province of Ontario would be the number one 
food exporter of all the provinces. That was taken as given. 
That was taken as an undeniable fact that was not likely ever to 
change. Well until Saskatchewan people decided to change that 
fact and in the last number of years — I think now three in a 
row — the number one food exporter in the Dominion of 
Canada is no longer our friends in Ontario but it is this 
province. And it’s not just the crops that we’re producing. 
Increasingly it’s the diversified sort of value-added, 
up-the-value-stream innovation around food development, and 
I’m looking forward to what the patent box idea will bring to 
that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can share the anecdote I did during the campaign 
very quickly with respect to one particular innovation at the 
food centre at the University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon. 
There is a very well-known international . . . Canadian, but an 
international presence that’s looking at a brand new investment 
in the province and came here to meet with the food 
development centre in part, certainly. And he himself is a 
vegan, and so the food development . . . as is our oldest 
daughter, Megan. 
 
So the food development centre, knowing he was visiting, said, 
when you come here is there any kind of food that you missed 
when you weren’t a vegan? And he said, yes. He said, I miss 
pulled pork. I wish I could still eat pulled pork. Some would say 
maybe Kentucky Fried Chicken but for him it was pulled pork 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The Minister of Health is 
thinking of leaving this speech right now to go enjoy some. So 
they used the extruder at the food development centre and a pea 
protein replacement and made pulled pork. And then I met with 
the individual afterwards and he said it tasted like pulled pork. 
He would order it in a restaurant. That’s an anecdote. 
 
It’s one little story but it’s the kind of innovation that’s being 
done here in Saskatchewan, and we want to promote it because 
this side of the House has a vision for this province continuing 
as an answer to the world’s food security concerns. This side of 
the House has a vision for this province continuing to build on 
its amazing export records over the last number of years, and 
we think at the core of that plan is the support for agriculture 
from the government. And that doesn’t mean sort of cash 
support but that means fighting for better access to 

transportation. It means fighting for trade access as well, 
supporting things like TPP [Trans-Pacific Partnership]. That’s 
what that means. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would point out again for members of the House 
that the new Leader of the Opposition has hired a chief of staff 
who used to work for Tom Mulcair in Ottawa, who is on the 
record as opposing TPP. We need to not send mixed signals 
from this place, not by whom we hire or the things that we say. 
TPP holds singular opportunities for us to reduce 
agriculture-related trade barriers around the world, especially in 
Asia where they exist. And so we ought not to send mixed 
signals from this place wherever we sit on something so 
fundamental to the province’s future as trade opportunities in 
agriculture. We also want to continue to support agriculture’s 
diversification through things like the patent box and 
investment in research. 
 
The bypass, that’s a long-term investment that we’re making for 
the province, and an important one, the largest infrastructure 
project in the history of the province. The project as it’s 
constituted now was never $400 million. The project has grown 
and . . . You know, it’s interesting because what we heard to 
some extent and what the Leader of the Opposition has just said 
was a bit of a rehash, a relitigation of their campaign platform. 
Well people weighed in on that campaign platform. People 
made some decisions about which aspects of the platform . . . 
And there were good ideas in their platform, certainly. But 
people weighed in on their platform and on their rhetoric and 
made a decision as to what didn’t seem quite right. And some of 
the rhetoric and some of the hyperbole didn’t sit well with 
Saskatchewan people who knew that the original price of $400 
million didn’t have all the interchanges, wasn’t anywhere near 
the scale and scope of the current bypass project, because this 
project needs to be for the long term and it needs to be 
generational. 
 
And yes, we’re using a P3 model, and the P3 model will save 
money over the conventional model as it has with the long-term 
care facility in Swift Current, as it’s doing for the school 
constructions, the new schools that are being built across the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House I think what you’ll find 
— and I hope what people supported on April the 4th — is a 
pragmatic approach to these things. There will still be 
conventional infrastructure builds as long as we have the 
honour to serve in government, whether it’s highways or 
schools. But we’ll also look at innovation like P3s, and we’re 
going to pick the best one, best value for taxpayers, what gets 
the job done as quickly as it’s needed. And in the case of 
schools, we’ve needed those quickly because of the rapid 
growth, the welcomed growth, that we’ve seen in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I may, I think the Throne Speech does one other 
thing. It should speak to some short-term, immediate needs of 
the province and how the government plans to address them, 
and it should also offer again that glimpse above the horizon to 
the excellence that we want for Saskatchewan, the plan for 
growth that we have, the vision of this place for decades to 
come. 
 



May 26, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 177 

It also does a third thing I think. It sets up the debate that we’re 
going to have. And each Speech from the Throne would do that 
I think at any particular session. This is the twenty-eighth 
session, and it’s already been marked by debate back and forth, 
whether it’s question period or this Throne Speech debate. But I 
do think that the Speech from the Throne initiates a contest of 
ideas, or at least it should. At least at its best, this place should 
kind of defer to being that contest of ideas, knowing that we’re 
also going to have some raucous debates and we’ll have some 
rhetoric back and forth. But I think the Speech from the Throne 
should initiate a contest of ideas. 
 
And I want to say early on that I’m concerned about whether or 
not the Speech from the Throne has been responded to in that 
way by everybody in the Assembly. It’s early days and so I’m 
still hopeful but . . . And what I mean by that is I’m hopeful to 
see from our friends across the way something more than what 
they have been talking about for the four years prior to the 
election. Because I do think the election changes something. I 
think the election on April 4th is a bit of a reset, much as the 
Speech from the Throne is. And so it gives us a chance to learn 
lessons from the campaign that we heard. 
 
And I know as we were door knocking, we heard very specific 
concerns from Saskatchewan people that maybe weren’t 
represented in our platform. And we know we’ve got to work 
on those. We know we have to do better. 
 
But I am betting, I think, that the members across the way who 
are elected here and those that were not elected for them also 
heard a little bit from Saskatchewan people about what they 
expect from them. And I do think we’ve heard the Leader of the 
Opposition say, they’re going to do more than oppose. They’re 
going to propose. Haven’t seen that just yet. But I’m hoping 
that’s the case because I believe that’s a mistake that’s been 
made by the opposition in the last two terms. I don’t think they 
presented early enough or often enough something more than 
criticism. And an opposition . . . We’re imperfect at this as well, 
but we genuinely try. 
 
We released an economic paper that highlighted what we 
believed in for our growth plan. By the way, the elements of 
that are included in the growth plan for the province of 
Saskatchewan even to this day. And those elements are: 
competitive taxes and competitive regulations, changes to the 
labour laws of the province so they’d be fair but they would be 
competitive, infrastructure investment, export engagement, 
innovation, diversification. That’s what our . . . Well that’s the 
name of the document. And those principles have found their 
way into the growth plan. 
 
Does anybody know what the NDP believes on any of those? 
And yet there’s been two, now, campaigns since 2007. I don’t 
know if they would increase taxes or not. They kind of ran on, it 
sounded like, increasing taxes in the last election, whether it’s a 
carbon levy or changes to income tax. 
 
I don’t know what they believe about labour legislation, labour 
legislative balance in the province. I don’t know if they would 
undo all the changes that we’ve made — remove essential 
services legislation, go back to the day when we didn’t have a 
secret ballot for certification votes — because they’re silent on 
it. And you can’t have a contest of ideas and a debate if only 

one side is saying, here’s our program; here’s our plan. 
 
And I would argue that political parties won’t find success if all 
they do is criticize and they’re silent on these major issues. 
People deserve and demand more. They demand to know what 
you’ll do in the short-term. 
 
And they demand, they should demand to know: what is your 
vision for the province of Saskatchewan? Do you really 
subscribe to growth? I don’t really know if members opposite 
honestly believe that growth is fundamentally a good thing. On 
this side of the House, we know that growth comes with 
challenges. You have more people, you need to build schools. 
You have more people, there’s greater demand for health care. 
Growth brings its challenges but on this side of the House, 
without doubt and unequivocally, we welcome the challenges of 
growth versus the challenges of waving goodbye to a generation 
of young people like we used to in this province. 
 
I have to believe that the Leader of the Opposition personally 
supports growth, acknowledging the challenges. I don’t know 
about some of the other ones. I don’t know how you would go 
to a political convention and sign on in principle for the further 
discussion of the Leap Manifesto that quite literally would 
destroy our economy, that would shut down oil, that would shut 
down pipelines, that would shut down coal, that would end 
modern agriculture. And their answer is, well I just wanted 
there to be a discussion. 
 
Well do you know what we say on this side of the House? Some 
things are not worth discussing, including the devastation of the 
Saskatchewan economy — not anywhere. It’s not worth talking 
about. On occasions like that we need NDP MLAs or any MLA, 
if there’s a convention talking about it, to line up at the 
microphone and say the Leap Manifesto has no business being 
talked about, especially in Edmonton and so close to the oil 
sands, but really anywhere in the country because it would 
devastate the nation’s economy.  
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, someone who would sign the Leap 
Manifesto I don’t think has any business doing renewal for any 
political party in the province of Saskatchewan. And yet the 
Leader of the Opposition has hand-picked someone, Nicole 
White, who ran for him and for his party and signed the Leap 
Manifesto. Signing it is an endorsement. So a good start would 
be for the NDP to come up and say unequivocally they’re 
cutting ties with people that are opposed to the things that we 
do best in the province. 
 
[11:45] 
 
The Speech from the Throne said, it says though, some people 
in this country are uncomfortable with what we do here. 
They’re uncomfortable with modern agriculture. They’re 
uncomfortable with GMOs [genetically modified organism]. 
They don’t really like oil. They don’t really like coal. They 
don’t really like mining. They don’t really like uranium. This is 
what we do. This is how we’ve been able to contribute to the 
Canadian economy over the last number of years in ways that 
we’ve never been able to in the decades previous to that. It’s 
how we’ve been able to build more roads and hospitals and 
schools and provide operating grant increases to universities 
and to those schools. We’ve done it on the strength of those 



178 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 2016 

very sectors. And there are people who are uncomfortable with 
it, Mr. Speaker, and some of them oppose it, and they just . . . I 
don’t think that argument should be countenanced at all in this 
place. And there shouldn’t be even tacit support for a discussion 
of that in this place, and there shouldn’t be someone appointed 
to do renewal of a political party in this province in this place. 
And so I’m looking forward to the contest of ideas that should 
be enabled, and the Throne Speech should be the conveyance 
for that contest.  
 
I will just say this in closing: there were three themes to the 
Speech from the Throne. People would say, well they’re pretty 
general themes, but I think they say a lot. They were the themes 
of our campaign, that we would keep Saskatchewan strong by 
keeping our economy strong. And for us that means keeping 
taxes low and not hitting the economy now with any kind of a 
tax hike. It means keeping our finances strong in the province 
of Saskatchewan, and that means dealing with the challenges of 
this fiscal year and then moving towards a balanced budget, 
getting to a balanced budget by ’17-18. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’d be novel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, well the Leader of the 
Opposition says that would be novel. Since we were elected in 
2007, this government has earned two AAA credit ratings. This 
government has retired just below 40 per cent of the operating 
debt of the province of Saskatchewan. His counterparts in 
Alberta have been downgraded, I don’t know . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Twice. Twice in a week. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Twice in the last couple of weeks. And so, 
Mr. Speaker, we will stand on our fiscal record. We will stand 
on our fiscal record as the credit rating agencies are in terms of 
how they’ve weighed in, and we’ll move to strengthen even 
further in the months ahead. 
 
And then finally the other theme, the third theme of how you 
keep Saskatchewan strong is that we would continue to stand up 
for Saskatchewan’s interests. And, Mr. Speaker, this isn’t just 
our duty. It is an honour. It is an honour for each of us to be 
able to stand up for the interests of our constituents, their jobs, 
whether they’re in the cities or in the country, whether they’re 
in agriculture or oil or mining or whether they’re on Broadway 
or the Cathedral area, whatever those jobs are, it is our 
unqualified honour to be able to stand up for their interests. 
 
What does that mean exactly? Well it means when our 
economic interests are threatened externally, perhaps by 
policies from the federal government or trade actions of another 
country like country of origin labelling, our resolve is that we 
are going to stand up and speak in a clarion way on behalf of 
the people of this province, on behalf of their economic 
interests. We’re not going to worry too much perhaps about 
being too polite sometimes because we need to be able to make 
the case for Saskatchewan people. 
 
I noted again in the member for Moosomin’s maiden speech, he 
told a great story actually about I think a 15-year-old girl in his 
constituency whose dad was a financial planner and I think a 
supporter or he was. There’s a pretty good chance if you’re in 
the Moosomin constituency, he’s probably supported the 

member. But she was uninterested in politics, I think is how it 
went, didn’t see how it really would impact her life. And so the 
member quite I think in an elegant way connected some of the 
dots as to why politics might be important for that young 
person. He pointed out that there was a manufacturer down the 
road and if that manufacturer was doing well because there 
weren’t international duties holding them back and because the 
government was not taking more than its share of taxes and that 
it was ensuring there was a competitive environment, if that was 
happening, the people would be working at that plant, and there 
would be a greater customer base for the father who is a 
financial planner. And that father, who is a financial planner, 
wouldn’t have to make some drastic household budget 
decisions up to and including possibly getting rid of her horse 
which I though was pretty graphic. I’m glad to hear they’re still 
supporting you. 
 
That’s a pretty graphic description but a connection between 
why politics is important, why things like the Speech from the 
Throne and its contents are important, how it can impact the 
daily lives of Saskatchewan people. But more importantly, how 
it can set the right environment, how it can set the right tone for 
an entire province so that manufacturer in that constituency and 
entrepreneurs across this province can grow and thrive and 
create jobs that are the basis for every quality of life that we 
want for our electors, regardless of where we sit in the House. 
 
And the Speech from the Throne is an adjunct to the growth 
plan of this province that we have implemented since 2007, that 
we’ve updated in 2011, that is precisely all about that. And 
more important than just the daily enjoyment of that horse by 
that young woman, our vision is that she will be able to go to 
school perhaps, in this province, post-secondary education. 
She’ll be able to graduate. Or maybe she wants to start her own 
business. She’ll be able to do that. 
 
If it is post-secondary school, that she could use the graduate 
retention plan to stay and maybe use the graduate retention plan 
to build or to buy her first home. And it’s our vision that 
beyond the temple that she would be able to stay in this 
province, create a life in this province, have the choice to stay, 
to build her future here so that she could raise her own horses 
for her own kids and not have to worry about her dad’s 
household finances. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what a Throne Speech should be about the 
short term but also the long term, a vision that’s worthy of the 
people that sent us here, worthy of a province as blessed as this 
one with all of the resources that we have. We’re going through 
a time of economic challenge today. But make no mistake, 
make no mistake, we’re coming out stronger on the other side. 
And we will be stronger for the contents of the Speech from the 
Throne, stronger for the growth plan that this party has 
implemented and will stand with and stick to for as long as we 
have the humbling opportunity to serve on this side of the 
House. 
 
And I am honoured to vote for a Speech from the Throne that 
was moved by the member for Saskatoon Westview. And if our 
government works as hard as he did, we’ll be okay. And the 
same is true for the seconder, the MLA from Estevan. I will be 
supporting the Speech from the Throne. 
 



May 26, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 179 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
proposed amendment. Order. The question before the Assembly 
is the proposed amendment to the address in reply to the Throne 
Speech moved by the member from Saskatoon Nutana, 
seconded by the member from Athabasca: 
 

That this Assembly does not support the government’s 
refusal to properly address issues in health care, education, 
adequately protect Saskatchewan jobs, and ensure 
transparency and accountability for Saskatchewan people. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the amendment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Those in favour of the motion please say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion please say no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — I think the nos have it. On division. Call in the 
members. 
 
[The division bells rang from 11:53 until 11:56.] 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
proposed amendment to the address in reply to the Throne 
Speech moved by the member from Saskatoon Nutana, 
seconded by the member from Athabasca: 
 

That this Assembly does not support the government’s 
refusal to properly address the issues in health care, 
education, adequately protect Saskatchewan jobs, and 
ensure transparency and accountability to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 

All those in favour of the amendment please stand. 
 

[Yeas — 10] 
 
Wotherspoon Chartier Belanger 
Sproule Forbes Rancourt 
Beck McCall Sarauer 
Vermette   
 
The Speaker: — All those opposed to the motion please stand. 
 

[Nays — 48] 
 
Wall Stewart Morgan 
Wyant Duncan McMorris 
Boyd Harpauer Doherty 
Moe D’Autremont Weekes 
Beaudry-Mellor Cox Docherty 
Campeau Heppner Cheveldayoff 
Harrison Ottenbreit Tell 
Bonk Brkich Hart 
Steele Doke Hargrave 

Makowsky Marit Merriman 
Wilson Ross Olauson 
Young Kaeding Parent 
Fiaz Nerlien Bradshaw 
Dennis Phillips Steinley 
Lambert Lawrence Carr 
Michelson Buckingham Kirsch 
 
[12:00] 
 
Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the amendment, 10; 
those opposed, 48. 
 
The Speaker: — Declare the motion lost. The question before 
the Assembly is the main motion, the address in reply to the 
Throne Speech moved by the member of Saskatoon Westview, 
seconded by the member from Estevan: 
 

That an humble address be presented to Her Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor as follows: 
 
To Her Honour the Honourable Vaughn Solomon Schofield, 
Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
May it please Your Honour: 
 
We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the Legislative 
Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in session 
assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the gracious 
speech which Your Honour has been pleased to address to us 
at the opening of the present session. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Yea. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — All those in favour of the motion say yea. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Yea. 
 
The Speaker: — All those opposed to the motion say nay. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 
 
The Speaker: — The yeas have it. Call in the members. 
 
[The division bells rang from 12:01 until 12:02.] 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the main 
motion moved by the member from Saskatoon Westview, 
seconded by the member from Eastview: 
 

That her honourable address be presented to Her Honour 
the Lieutenant Governor as follows: 
 
To Her Honour the Honourable Vaughn Solomon 
Schofield, Lieutenant Governor of the Province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
May it please Your Honour: 
 



180 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 2016 

We, her majestic dutiful and loyal subjects, the Legislative 
Assembly of the Province of Saskatchewan in session 
assembly, humbly thank Your Honour for the gracious 
speech from which Your Honour has been pleased to 
address to us at the opening of the present session. 

 
All those in favour of the motion please stand. 
 

[Yeas — 48] 
 
Wall Stewart Morgan 
Wyant Duncan McMorris 
Boyd Harpauer Doherty 
Moe D’Autremont Weekes 
Beaudry-Mellor Cox Docherty 
Campeau Heppner Cheveldayoff 
Harrison Ottenbreit Tell 
Bonk Brkich Hart 
Steele Doke Hargrave 
Makowsky Marit Merriman 
Wilson Ross Olauson 
Young Kaeding Parent 
Fiaz Nerlien Bradshaw 
Dennis Phillips Steinley 
Lambert Lawrence Carr 
Michelson Buckingham Kirsch 
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed please rise. 
 

[Nays — 10] 
 
Wotherspoon Chartier Belanger 
Sproule Forbes Rancourt 
Beck McCall Sarauer 
Vermette   
 
Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 48; those 
opposed, 10. 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the motion carried. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that this Assembly do now 
adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt this motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly now stands adjourned 
until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:05.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 161 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 161 
  Dennis ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 161 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................... 162 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 161 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 161 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Military Family Camping Program Celebrates Fifth Anniversary 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................... 162 
 Remembering Roy Atkinson 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 162 
 Unity Community Daycare Grand Opening 
  Doke ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 163 
 Cathedral Village Arts Festival Celebrates 25th Anniversary 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 163 
 Lloydminster Teacher Receives Prime Minister’s Award for Teaching Excellence 
  Young ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 163 
 Celebrate Success Awards Gala 
  Cheveldayoff .............................................................................................................................................................................. 163 
 Construction Begins on Affordable Housing Development 
  Fiaz ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 164 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Carbon Capture and Storage Project 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 164 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 164 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 165 
 Funding for Recruitment of Physicians 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 166 
  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 166 
 Northern Health Care Services 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 167 
  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 167 
 Delays to Toxicology and Coroner Reports 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 168 
  Tell ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 168 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 168 
 Reforestation Jobs 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 168 
  Cox ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 168 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 12 — The Public Health (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2016 
  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 169 
 Bill No. 13 — The Cancer Agency Amendment Act, 2016 
  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 169 
 Bill No. 14 — The Horned Cattle Purchases Repeal Act, 2016 
  Stewart ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 169 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 169 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 173 
 Recorded  Division (amendment) ................................................................................................................................................ 179 
 Recorded Division (main motion) ............................................................................................................................................... 180 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


	To Her Honour the Honourable Vaughn Solomon Schofield, Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan.

