






















































Hansard: October 24, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 29B  MONDAY, OCTOBER 24, 2016, 19:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (Ind.) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10; Independent (Ind.) — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 823 
 October 24, 2016 
 
[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I’ll call the Assembly to order. We’ll 
resume debate on the motion moved by the Premier and the 
concurrent motion of amendment moved by the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Moosomin. 
 

Position on Climate Change and Carbon Tax 
 
Mr. Bonk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To further 
highlight the potential of growing soils, last fall at the Paris 
climate talks the agriculture minister of France, Stéphane Le 
Foll, proposed a declaration called 4 per 1000. Its mandate is to 
increase soil organic matter by point four per cent per year in 
the world’s organic soils. It states if this is achieved, it would 
bring us back to pre-industrial levels of carbon in the 
atmosphere. The stated goal of this initiative is to engage 
stakeholders in a transition towards productive, resilient 
agriculture based on sustainable soil management and 
generating jobs and incomes, hence insuring sustainable 
development. 
 
Boosting soil organic matter does more than just sequester 
heat-trapping CO2. It improves crop yields, increases 
biodiversity, and most importantly holds more water, 
preventing flooding and enhancing resilience to floods. With 
drought identified as a contributing factor to social unrest, the 
issue is not just about climate. It’s about reversing 
desertification that has been destabilizing civilizations for 
millennia. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, about 30 countries are now signatories to 
this declaration. Saskatchewan is absolutely a world leader in 
this effort. We are poised to play a leading role globally, but our 
federal government has yet to sign. 
 
Proper grazing management stimulates growth and carbon 
sequestration. These three Saskatchewan farms illustrate this 
point: the Hjertaas family near Redvers, for every kilogram 
emitted, 17 kilograms of CO2 were sequestered; McNeils at 
Alameda, for every kilogram emitted, 25 kilograms were 
sequestered; the Corcoran family at Langbank in my home 
constituency of Moosomin, for every kilogram emitted, 39 
kilograms of carbon were sequestered. 
 
I spent a lot of my career working in these seasonal rainfall 
grasslands all over the globe. Some of these ecosystems are on 
the verge of collapse and are degrading and turning to desert at 
an alarming rate. Many of these areas of the world struggle with 
food security and political instability. Soil degradation is 
rampant and the amount of carbon lost to the atmosphere is 
staggering. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, believe me when I tell you that the 
technology and management techniques that we are employing 

here in Saskatchewan are not only sorely needed, but are in 
high demand all over the world. We have the opportunity to 
heal the planet while producing food, employing people, and 
preserving cultures. In fact this may be the only option left in 
many parts of the world. In Saskatchewan we have the tools and 
knowledge the world is looking for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the innovation that has happened here in 
Saskatchewan needs to be rewarded, not penalized by a 
short-sighted carbon tax that disproportionately penalizes the 
very people who are arguably doing the very most for our 
planet. These people are the most ardent environmentalists we 
have in this country. They understand the land. They make their 
livelihood and it depends on the health of the land. The 
Vancouver Declaration states that we should, and I quote: 
 

Work together to enhance carbon sinks, including 
agriculture and forestry, taking into account international 
best practices and accounting standards, to recognize their 
contribution to mitigating GHG emissions, and toward the 
establishment of a pan-Canadian offset protocols 
framework and verified carbon credits that can be traded 
internationally. 

 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are enhancing carbon sinks. We 
are using and developing international best practices. And we 
believe that we should be given credit for the good work we are 
doing here in this province. 
 
Are we being penalized for being too far ahead of the game? 
Each Canadian has a carbon footprint of 18.9 tonnes of CO2 per 
year. Now keep in mind, Mr. Speaker, that Canada has 65 
million hectares of farm land. At a sequestration level of 27.8 
tonnes of CO2 per hectare per year, the average of the farms 
tested in Saskatchewan, each hectare farmed regeneratively will 
sequester more than each Canadian’s footprint. 
 
The thrust of climate activism has predominantly been negative. 
It tends to come out against something. It is sometimes hard for 
us to articulate what we’re for. We believe we have a significant 
and dynamic story of success in this province in regards to 
carbon sequestration. It’s a story worth telling, it’s a story worth 
sharing, and it’s a story we should get credit for. I can’t think of 
almost anything that would offer more hope for the future. 
 
I wholeheartedly support the motion put forward by the Premier 
and reject the amendment. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I would 
like to say it’s a pleasure to get up and speak to this, but 
unfortunately it’s such a disaster that it’s not really even a 
pleasure, Mr. Speaker. The catch is, is this is going to be a 
terrible, terrible tax put on this province and all of Canada, 
really. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I have to say that I can’t totally blame our 
Prime Minister because I don’t think he’s got the wherewithal 
to figure this out. Really I think this goes right back to his major 
political adviser, senior political adviser, a fellow by the name 



824 Saskatchewan Hansard October 24, 2016 

of Gerald Butts. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Gerald Butts was the principal adviser to 
Dalton McGuinty back in Ontario, and Gerald Butts was the 
designer of the disastrous power supply that they had out there. 
He wanted to shut down all the coal-fired power plants rather 
than looking at how he could fix them like what we have done 
here in Saskatchewan, and he wanted to go out and have all 
solar and wind and pay tremendous prices. I remember the 
solar, if I remember right, was eighty and a half cents per 
kilowatt hour. And they signed long-term contracts, and I think 
if I remember right, wind was in around 50 cents per kilowatt 
hour. And they signed long-term contracts. 
 
Consequently what that has done is it’s given Ontario the 
highest power rates in all of North America. And then Ontario 
sits back and it says, well why can’t we get any manufacturers 
to come in here? Well let’s say you had somebody like GM 
[General Motors] came in. They’re going to set up a car plant. 
You know, next to wages one of their biggest costs is probably 
going to be the cost of energy, the cost of electricity. And in 
Ontario that cost has just ballooned so high that these plants are 
now moving to the US [United States] and to Mexico. 
 
Gerald Butts left there, and in 2008 he became the president . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Oh yes, yes. I forgot about this other 
thing about Gerald Butts too. He also charged, when Trudeau 
had him hired and moved into Ottawa, he charged over 
$100,000 for the move. So you know, you really got to question 
some of this. 
 
And then in 2008 he became the president and CEO [chief 
executive officer] of the World Wildlife Fund. And we know 
what he said when he was president there. He said we shouldn’t 
take any oil out of the ground. It should all be left in the ground. 
That was his thinking. We should leave all the resources, our 
natural gas and oil, in the ground. 
 
Then in 2012 he started working for who is now the Prime 
Minister, for Justin Trudeau. And now he is a senior political 
adviser. I really think that that is where this is coming from. 
What he wants to do is he wants to basically destroy the 
economy that we have out West here, forgetting about all the 
equalization payments we’ve been sending down there, 
forgetting about our resource-based things that we have here. 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is going to be a disaster. 
 
I actually have a letter here, and I just wanted to read this letter. 
It was sent to me from a trucking company that’s right across 
the street from our office, a trucking company in Carrot River. 
It just says, and I’m quoting here: 
 

To Fred Bradshaw, 
 
Under the Trudeau carbon tax initiative, a $50 per tonne 
tax would add 13.58 cents a litre or more to our diesel fuel 
price. This added tax would increase our operating costs by 
$300,000 a year. As a result, our company will need to 
increase our freight rates for everything that we haul, 
including farmers’ grain and fertilizers, adding costs to 
their already thin margins. We also haul 
Saskatchewan-manufactured products to the USA, and 
there we would struggle to be competitive with this kind of 

a cost increase. 
 
That came from a trucking company right in Carrot River. 
Three hundred thousand dollars out of their pocket — where are 
they going to get that money? Well it’s going to be passed on. 
Their main sources are lumber, so that makes our logging 
industry non-competitive. It’s fertilizer and grain. Those are the 
main things that they’re hauling. This makes us uncompetitive. 
The only thing they can do is, it’s got to go downhill. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as we all know, our lumber exports are 
mainly to the US. Guess what? US doesn’t have a carbon tax. 
So that makes our lumber more expensive to put into the US, a 
competitive disadvantage obviously to our farmers. 
 
And let’s just say, let’s just take a look and let’s say China was 
buying a bunch of wheat. Now it’s got to go on the market. Our 
wheat’s going to cost us more money to raise here because it 
costs us more for our trucking, more for our fertilizer, more for 
our diesel fuel, more for everything. 
 
So okay, so you’re over in China, and Viterra is trying to make 
a deal with China. And they say, well we want $7 a bushel for 
our wheat. And the Australians come along. They’ve gotten rid 
of their carbon tax, and they’re also a major competitor for 
wheat over in China. They come along and we say, well we’ll 
sell you the wheat for $6. And we say, well here in Canada 
though it costs us more to grow it because we’ve got this carbon 
tax and everything, and besides that we’re nice people. We’re 
really trying to help things out. And the Chinese say yes, but 
it’s a dollar more. Who do you think the Chinese are going to 
buy from if it’s the same quality of wheat? They’re not going to 
being buying it from Canada. They’re going to be buying it 
from Australia. And it will slowly, slowly sink us out here in 
the West because we can only take so much of it going down. 
 
Now let’s take a look at the initiatives that we have been putting 
forward which the federal government will give us no credit for 
— none. We’ve got our farms, our agriculture land. Basically 
we’re carbon neutral for the amount that our farmers . . . We’ve 
got the best farmers in the world, very innovative. Direct till 
seeding was basically invented here, actually at Bourgault. And 
they’re selling their equipment over into Russia and various 
different countries. 
 
We are sequestering. We’re carbon neutral on the agriculture 
end. Plus a little over half of our province is boreal forest. We 
actually are putting, the people in Saskatchewan putting out less 
carbon than what we’re sequestering. So we actually are doing a 
fantastic job here in Saskatchewan of getting rid of the carbon. 
We also have the world-leading Boundary dam. 
 
Now it was mentioned by my partner from Saltcoats here about 
how there’s 2,400 new coal plants being built in the world at the 
present time. We have the technology. We’ve got the only 
working technology to sequester that carbon, sitting right here 
in Saskatchewan. We’re leaders. And what does the federal 
government do with us? They don’t count that. They don’t 
count that. 
 
They forget that we live, we live in a large province with a 
small population. We have to travel. A very good example, the 
other day I was going to the dentist. I can’t jump into a bus in 



October 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 825 

downtown Toronto and go a few blocks down to a dentist. No, I 
have to drive 80 kilometres to the dentist over in Tisdale. That’s 
a 160-kilometre round trip. Of course I’m going to be using 
more fuel. But the federal government, our friendly Liberals 
that are in there right now in Ottawa don’t even think of that. 
 
They forget, they forget that on our farm we are putting carbon 
back into the ground. We’re putting it in there. We’re 
sequestering that carbon. I have land out there that hasn’t been 
summerfallowed for 30 years. That is all going . . . That carbon 
is being sequestered back into the ground, but we are getting 
absolutely no credit for it. 
 
As far as this being carbon neutral, really, Mr. Speaker, we all 
know that that’s a crock. It was mentioned by one of the other 
members here that, you know, this money is going to go to 
Ottawa. It’s going to up and disappear. You just wait. Ottawa 
will just take that money, and they’ll love to put it into the likes 
of Toronto, the likes of Montreal.  
 
Oh and speaking of Montreal, you know, here we have, they’re 
buying oil. They’re using oil the same as the rest of us. But 
what they want to do is they want to get oil from the Middle 
East. Like we have way better environmental standards within 
this country than what they ever even thought of out there. And 
take a look at Montreal for an example. They’re the only, the 
only place that I know of in the world that their beluga whales 
have actually turned brown because of what they’ve been 
pumping into the St. Lawrence River there. 
 
And the mayor of Montreal goes flying all over the world and 
guess what? Those planes aren’t flying on pixie dust. They have 
to have fuel. And then he sits there and complains about the oil 
that we produce, but he doesn’t complain when the cheque 
comes out there to help him out. He doesn’t complain when the 
federal government goes and cuts him a cheque for a billion 
dollars in the Bombardier of which those airplanes, guess what, 
they’re using fuel. They should be using fuel that is made right 
. . . or that comes right here from Western Canada, not that 
Venezuelan fuel or fuel that’s coming from Saudi Arabia. 
 
[19:15] 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we could go on and on about many of these 
things, but Canada . . . I don’t know where the idea even came 
from, other than from Gerald Butts via the Prime Minister. I 
think that what we should be doing on the world stage, Canada 
should be getting kudos for capturing all the carbon it does 
because we have a very small population and a very large 
country. 
 
We have to look at the technology that we have developed out 
here, right in Western Canada. It was mentioned before about 
our crop sciences. We’re putting out great crops, but can we 
compete on the world stage with these big taxes being thrown 
on us? No. We should be getting credit for that. 
 
We’re not getting credit for producing oil, and oil is not going 
to go away in the near future. Yes, there’s going to be 
renewables. There’s going to be things that come up. There’s 
going to be newer technology, but it’s not here yet. Everything, 
basically everything that we use is based on oil. 
 

Very good example: I was watching the news there that one day 
when they were protesting in South Dakota about the pipeline 
going through there, and here they were, they had a picture of 
all these tents that were out there. The tents were made out of 
nylon, which is an oil-based product. And beside every one of 
those tents was an SUV [sport utility vehicle]. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, some of these people have to give their heads a shake 
as to what is happening. 
 
It’s been said many a time, we are not going to be competitive 
with the drillers in South Dakota if we start throwing taxes on. 
It’s just not going to happen. But, Mr. Speaker, and this was 
brought up too. Like, why won’t the NDP [New Democratic 
Party] go along with this? Why won’t they stand up with the 
people of Saskatchewan? 
 
I know in my area there is not, I have not talked to a single 
person who said that this was a good idea. Not a single person, 
Mr. Speaker. And I had people come along and approach me 
and say, you guys, you have to fight against that carbon tax. 
This is a disaster for Western Canada. It’s a disaster for not just 
Saskatchewan but also Alberta, and I wish Alberta would stand 
up and say more about it, but unfortunately they have the NDP 
government over there also and who just can’t seem to figure 
things out. They would rather go along with . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Members will have ample 
opportunity to enter into the debate. Currently the member from 
Carrot River Valley has the floor. I recognize the member. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — But, Mr. Speaker, so I’m going to go back. 
How come the NDP will not help out our good people of 
Saskatchewan? As my buddies here said, they would sooner 
help out a few protesters and try and have this goody-goody 
thing, this I-feel-good thing. The only reason Trudeau is putting 
this out there is he wants a seat on the UN [United Nations] and 
he wants to make himself look very pretty. And that’s . . . I 
guess he does have nice hair, which I have to say, Mr. Speaker, 
is kind of a little bit of an attribute. But I really, really question 
where he is coming from. 
 
And you know something, Mr. Speaker? When his daddy was 
in there before, we ended up with a unity crisis. We haven’t had 
that, Mr. Speaker, since his son came along. We are going to 
have a unity crisis at the rate we were going and the rate that 
this Liberal government is shoving this down our throat. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that there are many other people that want 
to be out here speaking and talking about this. So I am going to 
support the motion that our Premier brought forward and I 
definitely will not be supporting the amendment from the other 
side. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad to have 
to have the opportunity to enter into this very important debate, 
Mr. Speaker. Many of my introductory comments have been 
well put by my colleagues, and I will get straight into my 
comments. 



826 Saskatchewan Hansard October 24, 2016 

Our government opposes a carbon tax because quite simply, 
Mr. Speaker, it won’t work. The driving force behind the 
carbon tax is meeting Canada’s Paris commitment to reduce our 
carbon emissions by 30 per cent by 2030. But Canada accounts 
for 1.6 per cent of global emissions and Saskatchewan only 
generates about 10 per cent of Canada’s emissions. On the other 
hand, 2,400 new coal-fired power plants — not existing ones, 
Mr. Speaker, new ones — are either under construction or 
planned around the world. These new plants will emit about 6.5 
billion tonnes of CO2, about nine times Canada’s total 
greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
This comparison really needs to be further explained. For 
Saskatchewan to hit the 2030 Paris emission target, we need to 
reduce our greenhouse gas emissions by about 22 million 
tonnes. Those 2,400 new coal-fired power plants will emit that 
much carbon, Mr. Speaker, in one and a half days. If we as a 
country reduce all our carbon emissions to zero, that reduction 
would be dwarfed by the increase that’s coming from those 
power plants. 
 
Proponents of a carbon tax will say it will be revenue neutral. 
That may or may not be the case, but a carbon tax will 
definitely not be sector neutral. All our key industries — 
energy, agriculture, mining — are energy intensive. The federal 
government didn’t even bother to do any economic impact 
analysis on this. 
 
Well I tell you what the economic impact is for Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. I haven’t been minister very long, but I have a 
clear understanding of what the carbon tax will mean to the 
heavy construction sectors. Following the federal government’s 
announcement, Shantel Lipp, the president of the Saskatchewan 
Heavy Construction Association, wrote a letter to the federal 
Minister of Environment: 
 

Our view is that the implementation of a carbon tax as 
described by the federal government will have a direct and 
negative impact on the heavy civil construction industry 
within Saskatchewan. Many of our members are small- and 
medium-sized businesses who will not be able to absorb 
the increased cost of an imposed carbon tax.  

 
We know there is more work to do building and repairing our 
highways, Mr. Speaker. The carbon tax will drive up our costs, 
which ultimately falls on the back of the taxpayers. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, many of these small businesses have 
been within the same family for generations. A good example 
of that is friends of mine, G.W. Construction. They started up 
more than 60 years ago with George Wilson, and now he’s got 
sons and he’s got grandsons taking over that family business, 
and they will be greatly impacted by this. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, today the president of the Saskatchewan 
Trucking Association, Susan Ewart, wrote a letter to Premier 
Wall. She said the following: The Saskatchewan Trucking 
Association has confirmed its support of the government of 
Saskatchewan in fighting the federal forced carbon pricing 
system for Canadian provinces. 
 
Why would the trucking industry join our government in this 
fight? Analysts have estimated that there would be a 

$50-a-tonne carbon diesel tax; it will cost approximately 14 
cents per litre more for diesel fuel and 12 cents a litre more for 
gasoline, so this dramatically drives up the cost for truckers. 
 
How are they going to deal with this cost increase, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? Will they eat the cost? Will they terminate staff and 
pass the cost along to the consumer? What would that mean? It 
would mean an increased cost in foods and goods. This will 
also make our exports less competitive, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
There will be a serious cost for their industry, which again is 
ultimately borne by the consumer. 
 
And Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d also like to speak to what a 
carbon tax will mean to rural Saskatchewan. We know the 
carbon tax would cost a Saskatchewan family of four about 
$1,250 per year just for gas, power and natural gas alone by 
2022, not any other cost for food or any other goods that they 
purchase. And it could cost the average family farm $10,000 
per year, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The Wood River constituency is 
made up entirely of agricultural land, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
have lived and farmed there all my life and the impact to the 
agriculture sector would be huge. 
 
Saskatchewan farmers are among the best and brightest in the 
world. Our famers have adapted with new technology, protected 
their land, the environment and their livelihood. Zero till 
seeding, GPS [global positioning system] navigation are 
common practices. These innovations have saved fuel and 
fertilizer, which translates into less emissions, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, The Western Producer ran an article in 
their October issue on this topic. In their article it explained, 
zero till seeding results in an average of point zero three eight 
tonnes of carbon dioxide per acre per year. Based on the 2011 
census, 23 million acres of Saskatchewan farm land was in zero 
till. That is equal to 8.74 million tonnes of annual carbon 
sequestered, which at a $50-a-tonne carbon tax, holds a value of 
$437 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What impact will this have on all our machinery manufacturing 
in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? What will be the cost of them 
getting their product around the world, the Bourgaults of the 
world, the Flexi-Coils of the world, the SeedMaster, the Seed 
Hawk and all those companies that are out in rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, earlier this month CTV [Canadian 
Television Network Ltd.] interviewed a farmer in Davidson 
area and his name was Gerrid Gust. He estimated that a 
$50-a-tonne carbon tax would increase his costs by 
approximately $80,000 a year. He said it’s impossible to 
compete with the proposed carbon tax. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Wood River also has a power plant and a 
coal mine in it which employs over 400 people. What will 
happen to that plant, Mr. Deputy Speaker? This will have a 
huge impact, not only to the Coronach area where the power 
plant and the mine are but also to communities surrounding 
there, like Rockglen, Assiniboia, Willow Bunch, as far away as 
even Lafleche and Gravelbourg, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And it 
will have a huge impact on secondary business, on the grocery 
stores, the hardware stores, and tire shops and other businesses 



October 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 827 

in those communities, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, those jobs at that mine and power plant 
are good-paying union jobs with young people, young families 
working and living in those communities and supporting those 
communities. It is important and is an important part of our 
economy that we keep those businesses viable, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
If I can, I do want to read some of the letter that also my 
colleague from Estevan read from Mr. Leguee. If I could, I’ll 
just read part of it because I think it’s important: 
 

A carbon tax has the ability to drastically increase my 
costs, without creating an incentive to reduce my 
emissions. In fact, I already have such incentives. Our 
farm’s move to no-till started in the late 1980’s, as many 
other Prairie farmers did, to reduce risk of soil erosion, 
increase soil organic matter, and, ultimately, increase [our] 
yields. No-till (essentially means that tillage is avoided if at 
all possible) has been a boon for our farm, and it allows the 
storage of massive quantities of carbon dioxide. 

 
As equipment changes [on my farm] and my farm grows, 
there will be a continuous need to upgrade to newer 
machinery. Due to the emissions laws already in place, our 
new equipment has lower emissions but . . . [come at that 
same cost]. Emissions equipment on our tractors is faulty, 
unreliable, and expensive to fix. If my tractor’s emission 
system has a plugged filter, it can shut down my seeding 
operation for hours, even days. When you have only two 
weeks to get your crop in the ground, this is hardly 
acceptable. 
 
Adding a carbon tax to my farm’s cost of production will 
make it less profitable, and ultimately less competitive 
with my neighbours to the south and across the oceans. I 
can only take what price is offered to me; I cannot pass 
along a carbon tax to my customers. I cannot switch to 
electric tractors, or run all new equipment to have the latest 
in emissions technologies. Sometimes my field needs to be 
blackened to keep sloughs from excess moisture, or to deal 
with high residue crops. That tillage pass already 
represents a cost to me, and I don’t need a tax to encourage 
me to avoid it. 
 
So, let’s exempt farmers, right? Make it revenue-neutral? 
While that may seem a simple solution, how will you go 
about that? I still have to purchase fertilizer, crop 
protection products, fuel, machinery, and so on. If those 
industries are paying a carbon tax, you can bet they will 
pass along that cost. What about my grain buyers? If a craft 
beer manufacturer has to pay a carbon tax, they may have 
to reduce what they pay for their malt barley. That also 
costs my family farm. 
 
If a carbon tax dries up my farm’s costs without creating 
an incentive for me to reduce emissions, why have one at 
all? It does not achieve the required goal of reducing 
emissions, and hurts my family in the process. I thought 
your government was going to help the middle class? 
 
Mr. Trudeau, please reconsider your plans to impose a 

carbon tax on my province. You speak about working 
together as Canadians, of uniting us as a country. Your 
proposed carbon tax will be divisive, ineffective, and 
detrimental to Canadian agriculture. Your carbon tax will 
hurt my family’s ability to make a living doing what we 
love to do — feeding the world. 

 
[19:30] 
 
I thought that’s an awesome letter, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Of all 
the tools a government has to fight climate change, a carbon tax 
will do the most harm to the economy and have the least impact 
on emission reduction. There are better ways to fight climate 
change, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We need to protect our jobs, 
allow our economy to grow, and focus on adaptation and 
innovation to make a real difference in the global fight against 
climate change, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Unfortunately the members opposite won’t join us. We need a 
unified voice to make our case to decision makers in Ottawa 
and other parts of the country. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be 
supporting the motion put forward by our Premier today, and I 
will not be supporting the amendment put forward by the 
opposition. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Westview. 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise 
today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to talk about an ill-conceived plan 
for a carbon tax on the citizens of Saskatchewan imposed on us 
by a federal Liberal government, a tax put in place without 
proper consultation and without any meaningful, in-depth 
research on how it will affect our province or our people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I spent the last 36 years in the trucking business 
and, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that the transportation industry 
is what keeps our economy moving. Without the transportation 
industry, our everyday needs would not be met. This tax would 
do untold damage to Saskatchewan businesses and residents. 
The trucking industry would be one of those businesses hardest 
hit. 
 
Let’s think about it for a minute, Mr. Speaker. When we first 
arose this morning from our sleep, the first thing we done was 
turn on a light. Also that light bulb is in a lamp, and those 
things are delivered by a truck driver. Then we walk into the 
kitchen and we make ourselves a cup of coffee — things that 
were delivered by the trucking industry. You know, the impact 
of the trucking industry on our business, I don’t think people 
realize how significant it is. A storm in the winter, and all of a 
sudden somebody doesn’t get their milk, and they realize how 
vital trucking is to our economy. 
 
You know, these are just a couple of items that I have illustrated 
within the first couple of minutes of getting up in the morning. 
But there are literally thousands of items delivered by the 
trucking industry that we come into contact with every day. 
And this is a short-sighted carbon tax, will do damage to the 
trucking industry that will affect each and every one of us. 
Without trucking, Mr. Speaker, our economy and our lives 
would be forever changed, and that is why this carbon tax issue 
must be put on hold as we develop better ideas on how to 



828 Saskatchewan Hansard October 24, 2016 

combat climate change. 
 
Let’s look at the BC [British Columbia] model for a minute. 
They put that in, you know, a few years ago, and it’s actually 
had the reverse effect. 
 
So what kind of evidence? There is no solid, scientific evidence 
or research that supports the idea that putting a carbon tax on 
will change the outcome of climate change. 
 
I have no doubt that climate change is occurring and will have a 
significant impact on our economy if we fail to act. A $50 a 
tonne carbon tax will cost 13 to 14 cents a litre for every truck 
going up and down the road every day. The average truck uses 
about 500 litres a day at the trucking company I worked at, 
which would calculate out to about $70 a day. That small 
trucking company that I worked for with 10 trucks would cost 
an additional $700 per day or almost 22,000 per month or over 
250,000 per year. As you can see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that will 
have a huge impact on even a very small trucking company. 
Companies will be forced to raise rates or to reduce services in 
order to remain viable. 
 
When you think of the trickle—down effect this will have on 
consumers, it will be very significant and drive up prices on 
almost every product or service in the supply chain. Another 
major consideration is the effect it will have on wages in the 
industry as trucking companies try to incorporate these costs. 
Now is not the time for a carbon tax on an industry so 
vulnerable due to the reduced prices on our commodities, and 
specifically the impact of lower prices in the oil industry. This 
carbon tax will undoubtedly sink many trucking companies if it 
is imposed. 
 
And Ottawa tells us it will be revenue neutral. Well the only 
way we can be revenue neutral is to not impose the carbon tax 
and instead invest into other technologies to reduce the effect of 
climate change. 
 
Saskatchewan has already invested more per capita then any 
other province in Canada through our carbon capture and 
sequestration project in Estevan. In the 2016 federal budget, the 
federal government allocated two billion for a low carbon 
economy fund. Why not use that money to find technology 
through our universities or through private enterprise or both? 
Why not develop a technology that we can export to other 
countries through innovation? Let’s give our students and our 
business sector the opportunity to show just how smart 
Canadians are. 
 
I also want to read a letter I received from the Saskatchewan 
Trucking Association, which represents 65 to 70 per cent of the 
rolling stock in Saskatchewan. And so I read the letter here: 
 

The purpose of this letter is to inform you that the 
Saskatchewan Trucking Association has confirmed its 
support of the Government of Saskatchewan in fighting a 
federally forced carbon pricing system for Canadian 
provinces. 
 
The Saskatchewan Trucking Association board of directors 
agreed on October 22, 2016 that the implementation of a 
carbon pricing system such as a carbon tax would have a 

negative effect on the truck transportation industry in the 
province. [Strong words.] 
 
While the truck transport sector in Saskatchewan does 
acknowledge and support the creation of more 
environmentally friendly business practices, it supports the 
use of incentive-based programs and supporting innovative 
technologies to reach the goal of a greener economy. 
 
Currently there is a plethora of technologies, some 
mandated, some voluntary, that are driving the changes 
required to meet harmful greenhouse reduction goals of 
both our province and country. 
 
Environment Canada currently regulates the industry 
through a series of standards on equipment and emissions. 
The Phase I standards which were introduced in 2013 
covered tractors and engines from model years 2014 to 
2018. Phase II will encompass the entire vehicle — tractor, 
engine and trailer. The Canadian Trucking Alliance, the 
federal voice of truck transport on which the Saskatchewan 
Trucking Association holds 8 seats, has worked diligently 
with the Federal Government to ensure environmental 
regulation on commercial vehicles is implemented in such 
a way that it is effective in reducing harmful emissions.  
 
“At no time in our industry’s history have carriers’ 
economic goals been more aligned with society’s desires in 
terms of carbon emissions reduction than they are today.” 
 

That by CTA [Canadian Trucking Alliance] President David 
Bradley. 
 

The Saskatchewan Trucking Association supports an 
increase in incentive-based initiatives that would allow 
companies to more easily access existing and developing 
technologies. Such an example of this would be an 
accelerated rate of depreciation of assets that would free up 
capital to be invested in greener technologies. 
 
The speed of regulatory change can also play an important 
role in adopting such technologies. Regulation needs 
adjustment to more efficiently allow the use of products 
such as boat tails and wide-base tires in the truck transport 
industry. 
 
While careful consideration is required to ensure mandated 
technologies such as phase 1 and phase 2 engines are 
effective in Canada’s unique operating conditions, optional 
technologies need to be more easily accessed more quickly 
within the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
There is no desire for our industry to pollute more than 
necessary. It is key to our bottom line to reduce fuel 
consumption, as it is one of our highest operating 
expenses. The Saskatchewan Trucking Association board 
and its membership agree with you, Mr. Wall. Our focus 
should be innovation and easy adaptation, not taxation. 
 
The trucking industry is a leader in green technology. It 
was long before the talk of carbon tax from the federal 
government. Small adjustments in how governments allow 
industry to use said technology will be much more 



October 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 829 

effective in fighting the global issue of climate change than 
yet another tax in an already heavily taxed industry. 
 
The Saskatchewan Trucking Association is looking 
forward to continuing our existing efforts with both 
provincial and federal governments to create a productive 
business environment for the trucking industry that 
considers and protects the fragile environment of both 
Canada and the globe. 
 
As proactive, trusted advisers, the Saskatchewan Trucking 
Association is a knowledgeable membership association 
that represents the collective interests of the truck transport 
industry through authentic advocacy and education. A 
not-for-profit, membership-driven organization, the 
Saskatchewan Trucking Association is the leader and voice 
for truck transport in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 
That letter was signed by Susan Ewart, the executive director of 
the Saskatchewan Trucking Association. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I support the Premier’s motion, and I do not 
support the amendment. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood. 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is a 
privilege to rise in the Assembly today to support the 
Government of Saskatchewan’s position on addressing climate 
change and oppose the federal government’s plan to unilaterally 
impose a national carbon tax. 
 
Perhaps a good place to start is to define climate change. The 
definition posted on the Government of Canada’s website 
states, and I quote, climate change is a long-term shift in 
weather conditions measured by changes in temperature, 
precipitation, wind, snow cover and other indicators. It can 
involve both changes in average conditions and changes in 
variability including, for example, changes in extreme 
conditions.  
 
Climate change can be caused by natural processes such as 
changes in the output of the sun and in the amount of volcanic 
dust in the atmosphere. It can also be affected by human 
activities. In particular, human activities that involve burning 
fossil fuels — example, coal and oil — can change the 
composition of the atmosphere through emissions of 
greenhouse gases and other substances. The buildup of 
greenhouse gases in the atmosphere is the primary cause for 
concern about climate change now and into the immediate 
future.” 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is important to note that global warming 
refers specifically to an increase in the global average surface 
temperature. Global warming is an indicator of climate change. 
So what does scientific evidence tell us will happen as a result 
of climate change? Let’s see what some educational resources 
have to say. 
 
The Earth’s climate is getting warmer. Rain patterns are 
changing. The sea level is rising, and snow and ice are melting 
sooner in the spring. These changes will affect people, animals, 

and ecosystems in many ways. Global warming causes ice 
sheets to melt in icy regions. The result is rising water levels 
that can cause floods and destruction in low-lying towns and 
cities along water bodies. 
 
Changing climate can cause the weather to become more 
extreme — be it droughts or heavy rains — with impacts on 
agriculture and food supplies of particular concern to a growing 
human population. Climate change can change the natural 
habitats of plants and animals. Polar bears and penguins cannot 
survive elsewhere. Plants and animals in hot regions cannot 
survive if the temperature becomes too cold. 
 
[19:45] 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is accepted that the global warming 
since the mid-1950s has been largely attributed to human 
influences. We do know that as we generate carbon and other 
gases to feed people and participate in the economy, carbon 
dioxide gas in particular causes the Earth to warm. This 
warming endangers our future, so a decision has to be made on 
what approach is best to limit global climate change, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Do we look at adaptation, whereby 
governments work with the sectors to ensure there are policies 
and technologies in place to assist with adaptation to the reality 
of climate change? A national cap-and-trade system that would 
place absolute limits on greenhouse gas emissions while 
allowing the trading of credits appears to carry considerable 
risk. This can provide emission reduction certainty, but not 
price certainty. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, another approach is a tax to help reduce 
carbon emissions. Carbon taxes provide price certainty, but do 
not provide emission reduction target certainty. Therefore I 
support the approach put forward by this government that we 
focus on innovation and technological development to address 
climate change. Why? Because it offers the potential to 
significantly reduce global emissions while causing the least 
harm to our economy. 
 
Canada accounts for less than two per cent of the world’s 
emissions. In Saskatchewan we are responsible for about 10 per 
cent of Canada’s total. Just like our history of leading the 
country in volunteer work, we are prepared to do our part, and 
believe the best way to meet Canada’s target of reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions by 30 per cent below 2005 levels by 
the year 2030 is through innovation and technology. 
 
Saskatchewan is often called Canada’s breadbasket, as we 
produce over 54 per cent of the country’s wheat crop. Canada is 
the top mustard producer in the world, and 75 per cent of that 
mustard comes from Saskatchewan. In this province we have 40 
per cent of Canada’s arable land—more farm land than all the 
other provinces combined. This arable land absorbs millions of 
tons of carbon dioxide. Saskatchewan farmers have 
significantly reduced carbon emissions by producing more food 
on less land and reducing the use of diesel fuel. The practice of 
no-till farming has enhanced fuel savings and soil conservation. 
 
Why should our farmers be penalized for carbon taxes on their 
fuel, fertilizer, and farm equipment when they have reduced 
carbon emissions and are near to producing net zero carbon 
emissions by extracting carbon from the atmosphere and 



830 Saskatchewan Hansard October 24, 2016 

sequestering it in plants for the purpose of producing food? 
Stretch your memory back to elementary school when we 
learned about photosynthesis. People around the world need our 
high-quality food. We are producing more food and exporting 
more food as demand is increasing globally for our agricultural 
commodities. I am most reluctant to harm agriculture in this 
province through a carbon tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are the most trade-dependent province in the 
country. We are a province that exports, and the process of 
getting our Saskatchewan goods to our customers will become 
more costly with a carbon tax. The premise of this carbon tax is 
that it will modify behaviour of Canadian citizens. But will it 
really work? 
 
British Columbia introduced a revenue neutral carbon tax in 
2008, and emissions have been rising in that province since 
2012. Even with a carbon tax, BC’s greenhouse gas emissions 
are forecast to increase by 32 per cent by the year 2030. If this 
forecast is correct, there is no guarantee that a national carbon 
tax will achieve its goal of reducing carbon emissions. An Ipsos 
Reid poll conducted on behalf of Global News earlier this 
month found that 78 per cent of respondents agreed that the 
carbon tax would, and I quote, “. . . start with good intentions 
but eventually just become another source of revenue that does 
not achieve its goals.” 
 
Generating electricity accounts for about 20 per cent of 
Saskatchewan’s emissions, Mr. Speaker. As the primary 
electricity provider in this province, SaskPower has a goal to 
reduce emissions by 50 per cent from 2005 levels by the year 
2030. This goes beyond what is being asked for by the federal 
government. SaskPower will invest billions of dollars in 
upgrading the province’s electricity system, and it’s committed 
to 50 per cent renewable electricity generation by increasing 
renewables like wind and solar. SaskPower has also made the 
largest per capita investment in clean technology in the world 
with its carbon capture and storage technology at Boundary 
dam in Estevan. 
 
As almost half of our energy is coal in this province, we have 
chosen to answer that challenge with our own innovation. At 
present about 40 per cent of the world’s electricity is generated 
using coal. Today 2,400 coal-fired power plants are being built 
or planned in other countries. Our carbon capture technology 
can help the world clean up coal-fired electricity generation. 
 
Our innovation with CO2 storage doesn’t stop with Boundary 
dam. New generations of carbon capture and storage are in the 
works in this province. There are three jurisdictions in Canada 
that are expected to post actual GHG [greenhouse gas] 
reduction from current emissions by the year 2030 according to 
the federal government: Nova Scotia, Newfoundland, and here 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
We are already making strides towards efficiency and emission 
reductions without a carbon tax. I would like to take a moment 
to quote parts of an open letter to the federal Minister of the 
Environment from the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce. 
And I quote: 
 

Canadians agree that a reduction in our carbon emissions is 
a positive goal, but also agree that the method of achieving 

this goal must be sustainable from both an economic and 
environmental perspective . . . 
 
The implementation of a tax . . . The direct and significant 
impact it would have on many energy and trade-intensive 
industries will be quick and dramatic. As most companies 
in these sectors are “price takers” and sell their products 
and services globally, they will not be able to pass on the 
increased costs which will cause real and serious impacts 
to their operations. 
 
A blanket carbon tax will have a very negative effect on 
three key sectors: 
 
Transportation . . . As a province that relies upon truck and 
train transportation for trade, these transportation methods 
have no clean energy option. 
 
Agriculture. All fuels that power equipment will increase 
in price, as well as the related cost of fertilizers and the 
cost of steel in machinery. Saskatchewan agricultural 
producers have no option but to use fuels to produce the 
food that helps feed the world. 
 
Heating. All companies who sell, pay for, use, or service 
heating for buildings, drying grains, and even drying 
potash will be impacted. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the ABEX [Achievement in Business Excellence] 
Awards sponsored by the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce 
celebrates excellence in Saskatchewan business, recognizing 
companies for not only their business success but also their 
commitment to their employees and their communities, along 
with the growth they have achieved. I could not help but 
wonder at the awards banquet this weekend how a carbon tax 
would hinder the efforts of these Saskatchewan companies and 
disadvantage them with their global competitors. 
 
Can it be said that a carbon tax will definitively reduce 
emissions? It cannot. Can it be said that a carbon tax will 
damage our Saskatchewan economy? It can. Potash, oil and gas, 
uranium, agriculture, Saskatchewan’s major industries are 
high-emitting industries. They must move their products to 
international markets. These industries, mainstays of our 
provincial economy, will be hard hit by a carbon tax. 
 
Can it be said that a carbon tax will prove costly to taxpayers in 
this province? It can. Heating, electrical, and transportation 
costs will climb. Products will be more expensive. My 
constituents of Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood will pay more to 
heat their homes and drive their cars and buy their groceries. A 
carbon tax will take more money out of their pockets and the 
pockets of Saskatchewan families. How will we feel when 
someone we love loses their job as a result of the carbon tax 
which has little impact on mitigating global climate change? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all need to work toward solving the global 
problem of climate change. Saskatchewan needs to do its part, 
but we do not need to bear a disproportionate part. This carbon 
tax could serve as an impediment to growth if it is pushed 
through with no regard to the economic cost. The solution to 
climate change must involve fairness. The solution to climate 
change must protect our economy. The solution to climate 



October 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 831 

change must protect our jobs here in this province. We can be 
leaders in a solution to climate change, but the solution is not 
through a carbon tax. I will be voting in favour of the motion. I 
do not support the amendment. I move to adjourn debate. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood has moved adjournment of debate. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 16 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 16 — The 
Adoption Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur 
l’adoption be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize Regina Douglas Park.  
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my duty and 
honour to rise tonight to speak to Bill No. 16, An Act to amend 
the Adoption Act, 1998. This Act contains a few different types 
of changes. Most of them are fairly nonconsequential. They 
change the grammar. They change some of the language. It 
helps to modernize the Act, which is great, but they do have 
some changes in this Act that are a bit more consequential. And 
I’m looking forward to when our critic has the opportunity to 
ask some questions at committee with respect to these changes, 
but in any event until we have that time I am going to speak to 
them a little bit this evening. 
 
So the bill, like I said, makes some fairly minor changes at first. 
It changes, for example, “Crown ward” to “permanent ward,” 
which “Crown ward” frankly is a fairly antiquated term. It’s not 
commonly used anymore, so it makes sense to change that. It 
also removes simple adoption from The Adoption Act. And 
from what I understand, that piece of the legislation was very 
rarely ever used in Saskatchewan, so it makes a lot of sense. 
 
One of the more consequential amendments, Mr. Speaker, is 
some of the changes to the language around the child’s best 
interest. Again, I think it’ll be important for our critic to ask 
some questions about this in committee to find out exactly who 
was consulted with respect to this change, and we just want to 
make sure that all the i’s are dotted and the t’s are crossed, 
frankly, in this change. 
 
Another change that this legislation has is changing 
considerations for the religious faith, if any, in which the child 
has been raised to more of a consideration on making sure that 
the adoptive parent that’s chosen will essentially support the 
growth and the continuation of the child’s cultural and spiritual 
heritage and upbringing when they’re determining what is in the 

best interests of the child, which frankly makes sense, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In a sense this is a modernization of outdated language. There 
are many people, many families who maybe prefer the term a 
“spiritual faith” rather than a “religious faith.” It removes the 
question as to, if you’re not of a certain . . . If you’re not, for 
example, of one of the Christian traditions, if it still counts 
towards consideration and best interests. There are many people 
whose spiritual beliefs may not be what we’ve traditionally 
defined as a religious belief, so it’s important that those are 
reflected and those considerations are made so that children are 
placed with families who are going to respect that child’s 
history and further it. 
 
Another fairly consequential amendment is it increases the 
amount of time parents can revoke their consent to an 
independent adoption from 14 days to 21 days, which actually 
brings our legislation in line with the majority of other 
jurisdictions. When it was moved shorter to 14 days, that 
actually moved us outside of what was normal in essentially all 
the other jurisdictions except for Saskatchewan. And it places a 
fairly onerous burden on birth parents to make a very 
consequential decision, a very important decision, in a very 
short amount of time. So it’s good that we’re expanding that. 
Again I want to make sure that everyone is consulted on that. 
And I’m looking forward to our critic having the opportunity to 
look into that a little bit more. 
 
[20:00] 
 
This bill is also going to allow for assisted adoption benefits to 
continue to subsequent legal guardians if both adoptive parents 
pass away. From what I understand there was some issues with 
that in the past, so it’s really good to see that we’re trying to 
close some gaps to make sure that kids aren’t essentially left in 
the dark in terms of being able to receive appropriate funding if 
the tragic situation occurs when both legal guardians pass away 
and they’re sort of left in the lurch. 
 
It also allows the minister to enter into payment agreements 
directly with a youth between ages 18 to 21 if the youth is 
engaged in educational or vocational plan. This is really 
important. It helps to recognize youths’ independence from the 
family unit. Oftentimes once they turn 18 they’ll, as many kids 
do, leave the homes of their parents, go to school, pursue their 
own goals and dreams. And this provides for them to essentially 
not be completely cut off financially. It gives the government a 
little bit of leeway in terms of being able to support these 
individuals. 
 
Another fairly consequential amendment, Mr. Speaker, is an 
amendment to section 16 which actually restricts the court’s 
ability to consider a child’s voice in court subject to an age 
restriction. I’m interested to see a little bit more information 
about why this was done, if there was some sort of, if there was 
problems in the past that this is trying to resolve or if this is 
trying to simplify a procedure or if there was concern about 
anything that was going on essentially in the past. I’m hoping at 
committee there can be some answers with respect to that 
particular issue because it’s not quite explained in the 
explanatory notes why this was done, and I wonder about that. 
 



832 Saskatchewan Hansard October 24, 2016 

I believe . . . I can’t remember if it was age seven. I think it was 
age seven that it’s restricted to, whereas I know in other court 
proceedings, for example, there is the opportunity for children 
to have their interests reflected, maybe not their voices exactly 
heard directly, but there are children’s counsel, for example, in 
child and family services proceedings. And where if a child is 
fairly young and perhaps they’re not able to articulate their 
specific position on where they want to be placed, the children’s 
counsel has the ability to essentially act as an amicus in terms 
of making sure that the best interests of the child are reflected in 
the court proceedings and that nothing is essentially left out. So 
it’s important that even though a child is very young, that there 
are still avenues for making sure that their voice is heard in 
some way. So essentially I’m hoping that’s going to be looked 
at as well. 
 
I know that my colleagues have quite a few other comments to 
make and will be making future comments on these bills or this 
bill and many other bills. So with that, I will be adjourning 
debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Regina Douglas Park has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 16, The Adoption 
Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 17 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 17 — The Power 
Corporation Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to stand in my place this 
evening to make some comments in reference to Bill 17, The 
Power Corporation Amendment Act. And, Mr. Speaker, the two 
primary sections of this particular bill that we want to spend a 
bit of time with . . . The first section really is a grammatical 
housekeeping update, Mr. Speaker, where I think in Bill 17 one 
of the thrusts or one of the purposes of this particular bill on the 
language is basically a housekeeping matter in which updates 
are required to change the word “his” to “his or her,” and again 
the second section where they make reference to “he” when the 
proper language should be to “he or she.” 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what this particular bill does, it removes 
unnecessary plurals by changing “person or persons” to 
“person” only. So the housekeeping bill is an area where, under 
this particular Bill 17, we’re not going to spend not a whole lot 
of time, because obviously these are errors that are 
housekeeping in nature and obviously they want to reflect the 
proper language. And, Mr. Speaker, the New Democratic 
opposition, we don’t have any problems with updating language 
and making sure that we are proper in some of the 
terminologies that we use. 
 

That being said, Mr. Speaker, the second area of this particular 
bill is where the really . . . the crux of the situation lies, and that 
in a sense is where SaskPower is now allowing their borrowing 
limit to increase, Mr. Speaker, which we’ve always suspected 
would happen under the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
We are seeing debt overall, right through the entire government 
operations, whether it’s Crown debt or whether it’s operating 
debt or whether it’s just debt for the GRF [General Revenue 
Fund], that this debt continues to go up and up and up, Mr. 
Speaker. And now we’re seeing that particular practice happen 
and occur under the SaskPower Corporation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what the bill does, Bill 17, it primarily allows SaskPower’s 
borrowing limit to increase to $10 billion, Mr. Speaker, from an 
amount of 8 billion which was previously in place. So what the 
SaskPower Corporation is now doing under Bill 17, Mr. 
Speaker, is increasing this borrowing limit from 8 to $10 
billion, Mr. Speaker — and “b” for billion, Mr. Speaker. It’s not 
million; it is billion. 
 
So what happens, Mr. Speaker? A lot of people in the province 
are going to ask the question: if you’re increasing SaskPower’s 
borrowing limit from 8 billion to 10 billion, what is the $2 
billion required for? Obviously these are questions that are 
very, very important, and especially in the sense that we look at 
some of the cost of our power bills back home. They are 
increasing on a continual basis, Mr. Speaker, and these are 
some of the carbon tax scenarios that the current government 
doesn’t want to admit to, Mr. Speaker. Obviously when people 
at home see their power bills going up and then going up again, 
we obviously point out to them that that’s a carbon tax in its 
hidden form. And now we’re seeing that not only are the power 
bills going up, but now the debt is going up from SaskPower, so 
the question people are going to ask is, where is the money 
going to? Why are you mismanaging our Crowns, mismanaging 
our Crowns so terribly? 
 
And more importantly, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t make any sense 
in the sense of you seeing the power bills going up at home for 
the business community, for the farm families, for the average 
household in the province of Saskatchewan and these bills are 
going to go up higher and higher, Mr. Speaker. There’s no 
bones about it. The Saskatchewan Party are going to make sure 
that these bills are elevated each and every year and yet they 
have the audacity here to stand in the Assembly to talk about 
carbon tax when they’re carbon taxing our power bills on a 
regular monthly basis, Mr. Speaker, and that is certainly 
unfortunate. 
 
So the question that we have at the outset of Bill 17 is why is it 
that not only are our power bills increasing, now the debt under 
SaskPower is increasing as well. What is the $2 billion required 
for? Where is the primary thrust of that particular spending, Mr. 
Speaker? These are some of the questions that we have to know 
and we have to find out as the official opposition. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we are finding out those details as time goes 
on. And we are going to certainly expose the Saskatchewan 
Party government for their mismanagement, not only of our 
general finances but certainly of something that the people of 
Saskatchewan are very proud to call their own, and these are 
our Crown corporations like SaskTel, SaskPower, and SGI 



October 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 833 

[Saskatchewan Government Insurance], and the list goes on. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s really important is that the $2 
billion increase in borrowing . . . We need to know where the 
money is going, Mr. Speaker, the increase in revenues as a 
result of the power bills being jacked up not once this year but 
twice. We also need to know where is the money going, Mr. 
Speaker, and is there any agenda that the Sask Party has for not 
only increasing our debt and then the GRF but also increasing 
the Crown debt? What is their overall game plan? Is it just to 
borrow, to borrow, to borrow, to borrow? Where is their 
management plan? Where are some of their objectives that they 
have outlined for these corporations? And these are some of the 
worrisome trends that we see, Mr. Speaker, with not only 
SaskPower but some of the other Crown corporations as well. 
 
The overwhelming message we have from the opposition is the 
fact that once these Crown corporations are gone, they’re gone 
forever, Mr. Speaker. And I think people ought to be told that 
every single day, but certainly unlike the Sask Party in the last 
election, Mr. Speaker. They hid a lot of these details from the 
people of Saskatchewan — not only the state of our finances 
but many issues around things like the GTH [Global 
Transportation Hub] land scandal, things around the increased 
debt for our Crown corporations, and now the discussion 
around selling SaskTel. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, these are some of the arguments that we make 
in the opposition, that we don’t believe the Premier and the 
entire cabinet and the Sask Party caucus had the courage to tell 
the people the real story of what’s going on in Saskatchewan — 
not only in SaskPower as the Bill 17 alludes to, Mr. Speaker, 
but our overall financial state, Mr. Speaker, the future of 
important Crowns like SaskTel, and of course all the scandals 
and the issues that have been raised over the last number of 
years with not only SaskPower but all the other organizations, 
Sask Highways and the GTH, and the list goes on. 
 
So there are many, many questions we have as to the extra $2 
billion. We need to know what the money is used for. We need 
to know exactly how they are planning on spending this, 
especially in light of the fact that we have increased power bills 
that are going up and up in each and every turn that the Sask 
Party has the opportunity to. They are jacking up our electrical 
rates and thereby our electricity bills. 
 
And to me, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are 
paying. They’re paying each and every month for the Sask 
Party’s mismanagement through increased power bills, Mr. 
Speaker, through increased power bills and yet they want to 
have more money, more debt put on the SaskPower 
Corporation. It just doesn’t make any sense, Mr. Speaker. Mind 
you, it never made any sense. It never made any sense to the 
people of Saskatchewan to begin with, especially to the 
opposition. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think, I think the people of Saskatchewan 
have had enough of the Sask Party, had enough of their 
mismanagement. They’ve had enough of their scandals, and 
they certainly have had enough of putting our Crown 
corporations at risk. I say shame to the Saskatchewan Party, and 
tell the people in Saskatchewanland that, don’t worry; that 
particular problem will come to roost in the Sask Party’s lap. 

We’re going to continue hammering home the message that the 
Saskatchewan Party government doesn’t have a clue what it’s 
doing with our Crown corporation, doesn’t know how to 
manage the finances, Mr. Speaker, and once again the people of 
Saskatchewan are on duty, are on duty to pay off the debt left 
behind by a party and by a government that is bereft of 
direction, Mr. Speaker, and certainly not knowledgeable overall 
on how to manage the economy, how to protect our Crowns, 
and how to build for the future. 
 
So I think this is something that we certainly have to pay very 
close attention, and we are. We are. We encourage people that 
have information around SaskPower Corporation and some of 
the challenges that it faces and some of the debt that it’s 
currently inheriting under the Saskatchewan Party government. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what we want to point out is that, when it 
comes to SaskPower, the people in Saskatchewan want to keep 
the Crowns. I don’t know how many more times we’ve got to 
say this to the Saskatchewan Party. They’re highly valuable — 
SaskTel, SaskPower — they’re highly valuable Crowns, and 
there are many others. 
 
And they are the ones that create jobs. They create jobs for the 
people of Saskatchewan. They help develop the economy for 
the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and they generate 
profits for the people of Saskatchewan, something that the Sask 
Party just can’t do. Our Crown corporations are doing what the 
Sask Party cannot do. And they’re playing their vital role and 
important role in making sure that Saskatchewan stays 
competitive, that Saskatchewan stays a province where good 
investment can happen, but at the same time, embracing the role 
of our Crown corporations to make sure that we’re all doing our 
part to revitalize and continue stimulating our economy as a 
province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot of questions from the NDP 
perspective as an opposition. We pay very close attention to 
what they’re doing with our Crowns. And again I reiterate to 
the people of Saskatchewan that the Crowns should not be for 
sale. And if you want to send a message, then I would highly 
recommend you stop voting Saskatchewan Party because that’s 
exactly what they’re going to do. They’re increasing debt 
throughout all our Crown corporations because their intent is to 
sell it as soon as they can, Mr. Speaker. But once it’s sold it’s 
gone forever. And the first phase of their plan to really hurt our 
Crowns is to allow the debt to be placed against our Crown 
corporations, and this is further evidence, Bill 17, that they’re 
increasing debt from 8 billion to 10 billion. 
 
[20:15] 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this charade that the Sask Party is certainly 
trying to present to the people of Saskatchewan that they’re not 
going to sell their Crowns, well I think that charade is over. 
People on this side of the Assembly know very well their game 
plan. And we ask all the Saskatchewan people very loudly and 
clearly to help us stand up to the Saskatchewan Party and 
protect our Crowns because they’re highly valuable. And the 
Crowns do more for this province than the Saskatchewan Party 
government could ever achieve in their entire lifetime. And, Mr. 
Speaker, on that note, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 17, 
The Power Corporation Amendment Act. 



834 Saskatchewan Hansard October 24, 2016 

The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 17, The Power Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 19 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 19 — The Film 
and Video Classification Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again 
I’m pleased to stand on my feet and present our initial 
comments around Bill No. 19, The Film and Video 
Classification Act, 2016. Again as I noticed, there’s been a few 
changes in this particular bill, as you look through the intent of 
the bill and certainly the explanation that the minister has 
provided. And the two areas that the bill really touches on, Mr. 
Speaker, really talks about replacing a Film Classification 
Board with a film classification director.  
 
In many ways, Mr. Speaker, what it primarily is saying that as 
we classify films, and there’s a wide range of films that need to 
be classified for a number of reasons, in the past that we did 
have a Film Classification Board. But obviously, in 
streamlining some of the operations and costs attached to this 
particular bill, the government certainly wanted to go from a 
full board to a film classification director. And, Mr. Speaker, 
obviously there’s financial considerations given as a result of 
this. Or is there a collaborative agreement? And as in the case 
the bill did touch on it a bit in terms of having a collaborative 
process with the BC government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need to know what the intent of the bill is, and 
certainly we need to know what the impact of some of the 
changes attached to the bill. So what makes the difference? 
What’s the better process, having a full classification board or 
having a classification director? These are some of the things 
that we need to find out, Mr. Speaker, because it’s so important 
that this work continue. 
 
Obviously families watch very carefully. They monitor very 
carefully what children watch on television or certainly in our 
theatres. And film classification boards certainly do their work. 
And a lot of folks out there appreciate some of the warnings 
that they afford to their children before they’re allowed to watch 
certain videos and I think even games as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think what’s important here is that we need to find out who the 
film classification director is. Is it a person or is it a government 
entity in a different jurisdiction, as I indicated earlier, that will 
be doing this kind of work? Is that collaboration with BC? Is 
that going to be now the process where, if we’re simply going 
to ad hoc adopt what BC may determine as our practices in 
Saskatchewan when it comes to classifying videos or films, Mr. 
Speaker? We don’t know the twists and turns attached to that 
and we certainly should. 

Obviously at the outset, we talked about the importance of us 
having classification warnings for parents. It’s a really 
important role that the government and certainly the particular 
Act plays. So we have to make sure that we are diligent and 
vigilant in making sure that the classifications are done 
properly, thoroughly, and as professionally as possible, all the 
while knowing that we are protecting our children’s or the 
negative influences that could affect our children’s lives, and 
that’s important work. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we need to find out that the process that’s a 
more effective process. We don’t know that yet, but obviously 
that work will continue. And this is the reason why we have the 
process that we’re now undertaking here in the Legislative 
Assembly, in a sense that these bills need to be vetted through 
the opposition. And we’ll certainly get advice from people 
involved with this particular industry. 
 
Finally the second point I would make as a result of the 
classification board, Mr. Speaker, we all know that the 
Saskatchewan Party, in their own limited view of things, killed 
the film employment tax credit, Mr. Speaker. It was a great 
verging industry. There was a lot of films being developed here 
in Saskatchewan. There were many jobs attached to that 
particular industry, Mr. Speaker. And then along comes the 
Saskatchewan Party in their own silliness, in their lack of 
vision, Mr. Speaker, and their own silliness saw this as a great 
program that was really doing wonders for Saskatchewan. Well 
they said, well we better not do it. We better not allow this to 
continue. Why, Mr. Speaker? Well because it was an NDP idea, 
and that’s just plain immature, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They should have continued supporting the film employment 
tax credit. It’s something that was working good for 
Saskatchewan. It brought an industry to the province. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we often talk in the NDP circles that it’s important that 
we do as much as we can to expand the opportunity to our 
economy, to make sure that we have as many efforts and in 
many sectors as possible, all the while knowing that agriculture 
and potash and oil and gas, they drive the economy. They’re the 
main players. But in order for us to strengthen our resolve as a 
province economically, we must do all we can to certainly 
continue building different sectors. 
 
And the film industry was a verging industry that was really 
starting to come into its own. It was strengthening. We met 
people involved with the industry and now, Mr. Speaker, as a 
result of the Sask Party, their lack of view and certainly their 
silliness, we’re finding now that the film employment tax credit 
which was a great investment opportunity for the film industry, 
well they ended that film tax employment credit. And what 
happened, Mr. Speaker, is the film industry ended up drying up. 
And, Mr. Speaker, today we are a lesser province for it, and 
that’s thanks to the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
So if you see Bill 17, some of the . . . sorry Bill 19, some of the 
illogical moves, some of the silly moves tied to their ideology, 
that’s ancient, Mr. Speaker. It’s the same old, tired approach by 
conservative governments right across the country, Mr. 
Speaker. And we’re seeing that the Saskatchewan Party is 
following suit. They are becoming a tired, old government, Mr. 
Speaker, that is bankrupt of ideas and proposing silly solutions 
like killing off the film employment tax credit, Mr. Speaker. 



October 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 835 

That’s why on this side of the Assembly, we do know, we do 
know that they don’t know what they’re doing on the 
government benches, Mr. Speaker. Their job, their job, their 
job, Mr. Speaker, has always been . . . Their job was to criticize 
the NDP and fight the NDP. 
 
When it came to governing, Mr. Speaker, they got a big fat F 
from the film industry. They got a big fat F because some of 
their silly moves here, some of their silly moves. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I would say further that the film industry will never 
forget the Saskatchewan Party government and the fact that 
they moved, and the fact that they moved, Mr. Speaker, to kill 
off a very important part of our industry, a very important part 
of our economy. And yes, the members across laugh, Mr. 
Speaker, laugh. They’re talking about their 51 seats, Mr. 
Speaker.  
 
And I would say to them, for the rest of their lives they’re going 
to have to live with the fact that they hid a bunch of important 
details about a lot of things that concern the people of 
Saskatchewan out of the last provincial election. And they’re 
going to have to live with that, Mr. Speaker. They lack the 
courage to tell the people the true state of our finances, Mr. 
Speaker. They lack the courage and conviction to tell people 
what is happening in the GTH land deal, Mr. Speaker. They 
lack the courage to tell the people what problems that they’re 
having in the wide variety of industry, whether it’s oil or gas, 
whether it’s potash. And, Mr. Speaker, they sat on their hands. 
They sat on their hands, and they didn’t tell the people of 
Saskatchewan the truth of where our finances were, and they 
can live with that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Yes, they won 51 seats but, Mr. Speaker, I’ve always 
maintained that it’s good to win on principle, not hiding the 
facts from people of Saskatchewan. Because to me, Mr. 
Speaker, to me I think they hid a lot of information. They hid a 
lot of critical information from the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, and that’s exactly why they can sit and gloat from 
their benches. 
 
And the worst part is, Mr. Speaker, the province is now broke. 
The province is now broke. Why is it broke, Mr. Speaker? 
Because despite the fact that they had record revenues, they had 
money in the bank, and they had a lot of money in the savings 
account as well, Mr. Speaker, guess what? Guess what? The 
money now is gone. The money now is gone and the 
inheritance is spent and shame on the Sask Party. And it goes 
back to my assertion, from day one they didn’t know what they 
were doing. They still don’t know what they’re doing, Mr. 
Speaker, and I ask the people of Saskatchewan to get rid of 
them, Mr. Speaker. Get rid of them. Put them back in the 
opposition where their only credible job was to blast away at 
the NDP.  
 
But in the meantime people said, okay, we’ll give you a chance 
to govern. And, Mr. Speaker, now we see. Now we see, Mr. 
Speaker. They’ve had their chance, and what do we have? We 
have record debt. We have record debt. Our Crown corporations 
are deep in debt and now they might be for sale. We have 
scandal after scandal, and worst part is their money’s gone. 
Their money’s gone. 
 
And I can tell you one thing as well, Mr. Speaker. I’ll almost 

bet my mortgage, Mr. Speaker, almost bet my mortgage that 
two-thirds of them will head out of Dodge before the next 
election. You watch, Mr. Speaker. Two-thirds of them will head 
out of Dodge before the next election because they have to do 
something they never had before — figure out how to rebuild 
an economy, Mr. Speaker. Figure out how to rebuild the 
finances and figure out what we’ve always known, that it’s 
important to diversify the economy, and making sure we had a 
burgeoning, successful film industry in this province of 
Saskatchewan is an important component of that. And they just 
don’t get it, Mr. Speaker. They don’t get it. 
 
So on that point, Mr. Speaker, I’ll point out to the people of 
Saskatchewan, be very worried because prior to the election 
they were saying, we’re not going to sell SaskTel. And now, 
Mr. Speaker, they’re saying well, we never got an offer. So why 
did the language change? Why did the language change? 
 
So I say to the people of Saskatchewan, this bill, Bill No. 19, 
talked about the decimation of the film industry compliments of 
the Saskatchewan Party government. And they can gloat and 
brag from their benches, Mr. Speaker, but they gloat and brag 
from a position of hiding the exact truth from the people of 
Saskatchewan on our finances, hiding behind the exact truth 
behind what happened to the GTH land scheme, Mr. Speaker, 
hiding behind the true intent to deal with our Crowns. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, all that will come to roost. And I tell the people of 
Saskatchewan this, that we cannot forget the fact that they lack 
the courage to tell the people of Saskatchewan the full, true 
picture; not only on Bill 17, but on our finances. And the list 
goes on and on and on. 
 
So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate 
because we have a lot of issues to bring forward yet. I move 
that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 19, The Film and Video 
Classification Act, 2016. I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has adjourned 
debate on Bill No. 19, The Film and Video Classification Act, 
2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 26 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 26 — The Patient 
Choice Medical Imaging Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join in 
on Bill No. 26, The Patient Choice Medical Imaging Act. You 
know the government last session introduced a bill that allowed 
for a patient to make the choice to pay. And you know, you 
have a choice to pay. And the second part of that bill was the 
company would have to offer a free imaging or a free . . . If you 
had one pay, you would offer the second. 
 
Now having said that, we’ve been talking about privatization. 
Now they’re going to repeal the bill. And all this does is repeal 



836 Saskatchewan Hansard October 24, 2016 

legislation that they . . . Because a part of their campaign, they 
campaigned to add this to it. So now they’re doing that. And 
what this does is repeals. But before we get into the details of 
that, I think it’s important, Mr. Speaker, to talk a little bit. 
 
I’m hoping there’s other areas, I wish they would repeal some 
of the terrible decisions they made to northern Saskatchewan 
and many people that are suffering in this province because of 
the waste, because of the scandals, because of the money that 
they have promised. Whether you look at them: SkipTheDishes, 
$3 million; you know, the Lighthouse in Saskatoon. This 
weekend we were there supporting the Lighthouse, trying to get 
their funding back, to get this government to change their 
decision on the most vulnerable, on the most vulnerable to 
change their decision, their mean—hearted decision to cut the 
most vulnerable, Mr. Speaker. And again, I wish they would 
repeal that decision, like take that decision and throw it in the 
garbage because that’s where it belongs. You take the most 
vulnerable. And you know, we’ve seen hundreds and hundreds 
and hundreds of people protesting. It was nice, it was good to 
see people, citizens of this province. 
 
The government says they’re so popular. They brag about all 
the seats they got, how good it is. But again as my colleague 
talked about, did they share this with the public about the 
finances? Oh, we’re not going to do this. We’re not going to do 
that. We’re not going to show this. We’re not going to do that. 
But then after they’re elected, you know, it’s interesting. I’ve 
had people tell me — teachers, just people who are supporters 
of that government, the Sask Party government — say, you 
know what? They pulled the wool over my eyes. And some of 
them aren’t so happy. They’re not so happy. 
 
[20:30] 
 
So they can sit there and say, feel like the confidence, have at 
’er. That’s all right. If that makes you feel good, you have that. 
But I know there’s people struggling, and they’re not happy 
with the choices the government has made and not coming, you 
know, telling them everything that they needed to tell them. It’s 
in the election, the platform. So they didn’t come clean on a lot 
of stuff that they should have, and they should have made sure 
the public knew that. That’s all people ask. Take care of their 
finances. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this government has made choices that have 
impacted so many people. And I think about northern 
Saskatchewan, and I think about the leadership. I think about 
the community members. I think about the school divisions and 
all of them. They’re going to come forward. 
 
This government has turned their back on so many 
organizations and they, you know, the finances. They’ve had 
record revenue year after year. And yes, we see that there’s 
times. But, Mr. Speaker, they’re now wanting to take a bill and 
repeal it. They came in and great idea at the time, they said. We 
argued about this bill, our concern. And there’s going to be a lot 
more concern from people about privatizing our health care, 
you know. Did they talk about their . . . Where are they going to 
go with this bill? And that’s exactly where people need to ask. 
 
You know, I listen to a lot of people and they talk about the 
health care and how important it is that everyone have access to 

health care. We see the cuts of this government when it comes 
to mental health, addiction services. We see what happens 
because in my communities and in the constituency — and it’s 
happening all over — we see the impact of the cuts from this 
government, the cuts that they have caused so much damage out 
there. They don’t even realize it, and that’s the sad part of it. 
They just go ahead and make their decisions. They don’t 
consult, you know. 
 
And you’ve got to be careful if you share your concerns with 
this government because they’re known . . . And people, we talk 
about bullies, they passed bully legislation to protect people, but 
they need to have their own bully legislation on them so they 
can protect the people who want to complain, who come into 
this Assembly, who will raise the issues and the concerns. So 
let’s bring in some of that legislation to protect individuals out 
there who want to complain and bring concerns, wherever it’s 
from. We see how they’ve treated family members who’ve 
come in to this Assembly to share about their concerns about 
their loved ones or the issue that’s facing their home, their 
family. And this government, you know, they have shown how 
they’ve treated some of them. And some of those people have 
come back to say how terrible it was. We see it in the media. 
 
But having said that, they’re making the decision and they’re 
going to repeal. And they’re going to come in with new 
legislation, and this legislation will give them an opportunity 
again, they’re saying, for someone who’s going to pay for the 
service. And like I said, they’re going to do MRI [magnetic 
resonance imaging] and they’re going to do the CT 
[computerized tomography] scan. And you’re going to pay and 
then they’re going to have to offer, that company, whoever they 
pay, the private company will have to give one back to 
somebody that’s in the line. Now, we’ll see who’s waiting. And 
it is a lineup because I’ve heard some people say they’re not 
sure where they are in their line. They’re waiting patiently. 
They’re waiting for a service to take care of them, to make sure, 
whether it’s their loved one . . . So in that slow process line of 
waiting for a scan, the imaging, MRI, whatever they’re waiting 
for. 
 
Now this also takes it a step further. It’s going to allow the 
government, the Premier, and cabinet to, you know, kind of 
through the back door . . . We’re not going to bring legislation 
here where you have to bring legislation in when you want to 
change this. They’re going to allow them to look at other areas 
that they can just — my understanding, and we’ll make sure 
that that’s clear — through order in council that they can just 
change some of this or add things to the legislation. That’s very 
concerning because where does it go and where does it stop, 
you know. Where does it go? Where does it stop?  
 
That’s an interesting factor and I think there’s a lot of questions. 
And we don’t know who’s been calling for this. You know, 
who have they consulted with? Who have they consulted with? 
We’re not sure, you know, so there are questions that we will 
have to ask. 
 
And there’s a few of those members on that side really like to 
yell. I wish they would do that sticking up for Saskatchewan 
families who are struggling, but they don’t do that, Mr. 
Speaker. They don’t do that. Oh, they make it. They scream in 
here, but out there where the suffering is going on, we don’t see 



October 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 837 

them doing much back home. Because I never seen any of them 
at the protest when, in Saskatoon at the Lighthouse, they were 
protesting your terrible, terrible impact. Any of you there? No, 
didn’t see any. I seen MPs [Member of Parliament]. I seen 
people who are running. I seen a lot of people who care, Mr. 
Speaker, but I never seen any of the Sask Party there. 
Interesting I never seen them there. Well they’re the ones 
making it. 
 
But having said that, again where here we are going to 
privatize, the government privatizing. So they’re privatizing. 
And we’re not sure where they’re going with this legislation, 
Mr. Speaker. Where? We don’t know where they’re going with 
this legislation. 
 
Like you know, you hope at the end of the day that, through the 
process, that we can talk to people. In committee, I know my 
colleagues will be asking questions, the critic, and trying to 
clarify what exactly and why. Why add this opportunity for the 
Premier and cabinet to deal with other issues as well? I talked a 
little bit about it. But I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s so important. It’s 
so important that we make sure we go through this process. 
 
But I think, you know, I think I’ve had an opportunity to speak 
on this one and to share some light. But I know my colleagues 
will have more comments to make on this. Maybe people will 
contact us and we’ll hear from community members. And we’ll 
see where it goes, but at this point, Mr. Speaker, I’m prepared 
to adjourn debate on Bill No. 26. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 26, The Patient Choice Medical 
Imaging Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 28 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 28 — The 
Extension of Compassionate Care Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to stand 
here and talk about the amendments to The Extension of 
Compassionate Care Act, Bill 28. This was produced and 
presented by the Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 
minister. And this actually, a lot of the information on this 
amended Act, the Sask Party Government tried to use that as an 
election platform, but it’s actually due to the fact that the federal 
government has made some changes to the Employment 
Insurance Act. So they’re just making these changes due to the 
new federal legislation. So the government that they just spent a 
lot of time today, you know, insulting with regards to what we 
had discussion earlier in the day, they’re taking some of the 
credit for what they did after their election. 
 

But regardless, we all know that compassionate care is 
important, and just like the minister also talked about when he 
presented this amended Act, you know, families are really 
important. And families have changed through the years, and so 
it’s really important that we look into this and ensure that 
people will be able to take some needed time off work if they 
have a loved one that’s ill. 
 
So it looks like some of the changes that are going to be done 
here, they’re going to increase it from 8 weeks to 28 weeks. But 
it also says like 26 weeks you’ll get off and there’ll be a 
two-week wait period, so I think that’ll need to be clarified a 
little bit more when they meet in council. 
 
And I also noticed there was some language with regards to 
job-protected leave. And so I don’t understand exactly why it 
was worded that way, job-protected leave, so I hope that also 
gets maybe addressed once it’s brought up to council. 
 
And the word “family” oftentimes is really interesting because, 
you know, family can be so broad. And when you look at 
different people, their family, their auntie could have been like 
their mother, so does that constitute as a family member that 
they can take leave for? And how will they define what family 
is? So I also hope that they consider to continue to have that 
discussion with regards to what that’s going to look like in the 
Act. 
 
And so, like I said before, you know, our families are changing. 
And so we oftentimes have this sandwich generation that we 
talk about, you know. So like for myself I got younger children 
but I also have aging parents, and so oftentimes it’s difficult 
managing both. 
 
And I know when my father got very ill, as soon as he was in 
the hospital I left work. And I was very fortunate to have a 
manager that said, go and we’ll handle things later. And so I 
fortunately didn’t need something like this, but I can understand 
other people who are in this situation. When you have someone 
in the hospital that’s very ill and a loved one that you care 
deeply about, it’s hard to concentrate at work. You want to be 
with that person. And so, like I said before, you know, we need 
to make sure that there’s an ability to do that.  
 
So we have to meet the demands. We’ve got an aging 
population. People are living longer and longer, and so 
oftentimes things will come up in a person’s lifespan that they 
have to go and spend some time with their loved ones in the 
hospital. And you know, most families, they rely on their 
income. They don’t have a lot of give. They’re living 
paycheque to paycheque. And so one person, or even if they 
have a dual family or if they’re just the only provider, they can’t 
afford to just not have an income for a period of time, and so 
they need to have these options of being able to take time off 
and be able to still, you know, meet the needs of their living 
arrangements. 
 
And so also, like I said, like when you have someone who is 
sick and a loved one that you have to care for, this is mentally 
and physically draining. Like I said before, you can’t focus on 
work. And it’s really important that you manage your own 
mental health during that period of time because you might 
have the loved one that’s ill, and then you might have other 



838 Saskatchewan Hansard October 24, 2016 

family members that you need to care for. And so people will 
go through bouts of depression. Or even if your loved one is 
terminal — which I believe is the case of this compassionate 
care Act, that your loved one needs to be deemed as being 
terminal in order to qualify for it — and so a person oftentimes 
is going through the grief cycle before their loved one actually 
even has deceased. 
 
You know, and so we’ve got to take that into account that 
people need to be able to have that time to process their 
emotions and be able to go through this. And this is going to, 
you know, help us for years before . . . If someone doesn’t 
properly deal with their grief or their depression at that moment, 
that will end up with long-term mental health issues. And we’ve 
got to look at that long-term cost effect so we can provide 
families the resources that they need at that moment. Then we 
don’t have to provide that later on in the course of life. So that’s 
really important that we do that. 
 
But I would really challenge this government to be a little bit 
more progressive with regards to this compassionate care Act. 
And what I would like to see is it maybe progressed farther. 
And I know the federal government talked about how they’re 
looking into this. So maybe once their federal counterparts do, 
they’ll make the changes here because that seems to be what 
they do, is they just make the changes when they have to. 
 
But they’re looking at maybe making it so that it’s not a benefit 
that you only get when your loved one is terminal. They want to 
be able to help out families so that they could qualify if a loved 
one has a serious illness such as what if your partner . . . or like, 
I hate to think about it, but your child comes down with 
something serious like cancer and you need to take time off and 
be with them and care for them. So it would be nice to have that 
put into this Act and reflect that. And so I hope there is some 
consideration of expanding this so that, like I said before, that 
we could support hard-working families in our province so that 
they can have the benefits that they need to take care of their 
families. 
 
So with that, like I said, so this is a very important Act and I’m 
glad that it’s being addressed. And I am looking forward to 
hearing more about what’s going to be happening with this Act. 
And I know that I have some colleagues that will want to add 
more information with regards to this discussion, so I move to 
adjourn this debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Prince Edward Northcote 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 28, The Extension of 
Compassionate Care Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 29 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 29 — The Justices 
of the Peace Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 
sur les juges de paix be now read a second time.] 
 

[20:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in on the 
Bill No. 29, The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act. In this 
Act again they’re repealing some things, but I won’t get into the 
. . . As I spoke earlier, I won’t get into the repealing of some of 
the other things the government should repeal, which I wish 
they would. But . . . [inaudible] . . . that they’re repealing the 
traffic court of Saskatchewan Act and they’re coming up with a 
different process so that you can have the Justice of the Peace 
deal with it outside of court and what it will do. 
 
And I think we’re going to have to ask some questions, but I’m 
not sure exactly what type of offences are they talking about. I 
know they’re saying traffic, but I was wondering about this. So 
they’re going to be . . . We’ll have some opportunity, and I 
know in committee, to work through that. 
 
So it also allows in this bill to create an assistant supervising 
Justice of the Peace that will act and take over in light of the 
Justice of the Peace not being there as a supervisor. He will be 
assistant, will be able to take over those duties, responsibilities. 
So they were adding more, but as they’re adding and they’re 
doing this, they’re also . . . They’re actually . . . It’s going to be 
a senior Justice of the Peace, and they’re also, in this Act, 
they’re giving some provision to set some salaries, and I don’t 
know what exactly the payments will be and I don’t know . . . 
And I guess we’ll have an opportunity to ask some of those 
questions, to figure out what exactly is it for a senior Justice of 
the Peace. 
 
Now I don’t know if that’s a monthly salary or if it’s on a case 
of when they come before, you know, and they’re dealing with 
offences that they’re going to decide the fine. And they’ll have 
provisions in there — from my understanding, and we’ve got to 
get clarification — to impose fines. But they’ll also have the 
provision in there, should you be an offender with a number of 
traffic tickets, that they’ll have the ability to order that 
individual to take driver safety training to go back. 
 
So they’re making some adjustments and I know at the end of 
the day we’ll have to find out in committee exactly what it is 
that they’re, you know, they’re allowing them to do because at 
this point it’s not clear in here. But we’ll ask those questions in 
committee and we’ll get to the bottom. And it might be a very 
good thing and it might be . . . 
 
And I’m not sure who’s requested, and it might be the courts 
are asking for this for some help. Maybe there’s been cuts; I 
don’t know. This government wouldn’t tell you if there’s cuts 
or not, but maybe there’s been some cuts in the area. Well I 
know in some areas of justice there has been, with the court 
workers. I know that’s had an impact on many communities and 
it’s unfortunate on the, you know, especially the Aboriginal 
people that were using those services to assist them through the 
court system. So maybe that’s an area where we could look at 
changing and repealing that decision that this government has 
made, to put those back and to help the, you know, I guess 
some of those individuals going through the court system. So 
it’s one way of having those court workers help. 
 



October 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 839 

But at this point, you know, I don’t have any more comments 
on this bill. In committee I know my colleagues will have more 
and we can get to, once the minister and the officials are there, 
to ask exactly who and maybe we can find out exactly who 
requested it and what’s the reason and get some of the 
clarification that needs to be then to go through that process to 
make sure if this bill has met everything. 
 
So at this point I will adjourn debate on Bill No. 29, The 
Justices of the Peace Amendment Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 29, The Justices of the Peace 
Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 30 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 30 — The 
Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy 
Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to rise 
to discuss the amendments on The Freedom of Information and 
Protection of Privacy Act. This is Bill No. 30 and this was 
presented by the Justice minister. And this is a really important 
one for me because, as my background being a registered social 
worker and a background with mental health, privacy is very 
important. Information about people’s confidential situations 
are very important. And so I think sharing information should 
only be done when there’s proper consent and proper 
documentation of that consent, and so that really needs to be a 
priority. 
 
And it’s been really troubling to hear in the news about 
situations where people have been accessing information that 
they’re not supposed to be, or they didn’t have a relationship 
with that person or for a variety of reasons. And so I think that’s 
really troubling. And so I’m glad that this is something that is 
going to be more fully enforced and that it’s going to be 
reflective of a lot of different agencies which I would’ve 
thought, you know, in this day and age, that we would have a 
lot of this enforcement already in place and that this 
information would have been applicable to all the government 
agencies. 
 
Unfortunately, this was introduced as a result of inappropriate 
management of private information by this government. But 
nonetheless, at least this is important that it’s being addressed at 
this point and further, hopefully, this issue won’t ever be 
something that happens again. 
 
So first of all, I would like to thank the Privacy Commissioner 
for the report and his recommendations. It was a really good 
report. I took the time to look at it and he did provide a lot of, a 

number of recommendations. And it sounds like this is going to 
be something that’s going to be ongoing, which is also 
something that I think is great because the Privacy 
Commissioner said that this information hasn’t been updated 
for 22 years. Like that just, you know, really surprises me — 22 
years. And if you think about the level of technology that’s 
been introduced in the past 22 years, gosh, even at that time, I 
was still in high school, you know. So we didn’t have the 
telephones that we have now. We didn’t have the computer 
access that we have now, you know. 
 
And so when you think about how we can access our emails on 
our phones and we can access anything . . . Like we just go on 
all these different portals, you know, and such. And so how did 
that impact the ability to keep things confidential and private? 
It’s not just simply having a written file that you have in your 
office, enclosed in your locked-down file cabinet. This is like 
every day, all the time with us. And so we’ve got to make sure 
the things are confidential. 
 
I remember when I first started at mental health, we couldn’t 
phone clients unless it was on a land line because that would be 
the only guarantee that that was a confidential phone call. But 
now in this day and age, a lot of people don’t even have land 
lines and so to phone people, you have to phone them on their 
cell. And I know one of the issues that we were dealing with 
was that a lot of people don’t even actually use phone calls. 
They mostly use texting or Facebook messaging. 
 
And so we’re getting into this day and age of just multiple 
different ways of communication, and communicating with 
different people. And how do we ensure that all this information 
continues to be confidential so that people’s private information 
is not being leaked? 
 
And so like I said, I’m so happy that the Privacy Commissioner 
has taken this on and provided the report, and it was time for an 
update because of access and privacy. So thank you to him for 
all this information that he has given. And like I said, like this is 
a good start, but it doesn’t meet all the needs. 
 
So first of all, it sounds like one of the things that are going to 
be implemented is an increasing of penalties. And so it’s a good 
idea to increase some penalties at some times on certain things, 
but how are these going to be enforced and who’s going to be 
enforcing them? That’s a good question to ask, especially when 
you’re in committees. Like how is this going to be actually 
monitored? 
 
And then the other thing is creating new legislature so that 
people aren’t able to go into files or information that they 
should not have access to, you know, and how to find that out. 
How do you determine if people are accessing files that they’re 
not supposed to, you know? And how do you monitor that? 
Like I said, especially with the technology in this day and age, 
are there ways, are there systems for that? 
 
So that’s a much more complicated issue for me to try to 
explain or . . . I don’t even have that background, so I think it’s 
important to talk to people who do have that information. And 
so I hope this is also discussed in committees. 
 
And a couple of things that I was kind of concerned about was 



840 Saskatchewan Hansard October 24, 2016 

the fact that the Privacy Commissioner recommended changing 
the maximum time for response from 30 days to 20 days, but I 
didn’t see that reflected in this amendment. And this privacy 
amendment should be looked at about every five years due to 
the modern technology. 
 
So like again, you know, we think about how technology had 
changed in 22 years. Every five years technology changes so 
rapidly. Like our phones don’t even often times last more that 
two years before you’re already two phones behind, you know. 
And so I think it’s very reasonable for him to suggest that five 
years is a good time to review the Act, but I did not see that 
reflected in the amendment. So I hope that’s considered. 
 
So like I said before, as MLAs [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly], like we get a lot of confidential information from 
residents and people that we serve. And people tell us very 
sensitive and confidential information, so I believe that it’s very 
important that we demonstrate how important, maintaining 
confidentiality. We need to set the bar, and we should be 
reflective of that. 
 
And so this is a good start, amending this Act. I hope we look 
into including a little bit more what the privacy commissioner 
suggested. I’m sure my colleagues will have a lot more 
information that they’ll want to add to this discussion. 
 
And so I move to adjourn this debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert Northcote 
has called adjourned debate on Bill No. 30, The Freedom of 
Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 31 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 31 — The Local 
Authority Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy 
Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure indeed to rise and join into this debate and follow my 
colleague who has been speaking with the partner bill, Bill No. 
30. But mine’s No. 31, An Act to amend The Local Authority 
Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment 
Act. And it’s a very important discussion we’re having as my 
colleague pointed out. It’s been 22 years since we’ve had an 
update and this is actually some new changes which I think are 
very, very important. 
 
But before I start, I wanted to take a moment to reflect on my 
colleague’s comments about the safety of land lines. So she 
may have not been around when there were party lines on 
phones, and that was not very private. Some of us will 
remember the old click, click and you knew it was your aunt on 

the line. Somebody was on the line and you all went very cool. 
But it is interesting how things evolve and I can remember 
those things. It was always exciting to hear who’s getting a call 
and . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Telegraph. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — A telegraph line and climbing up the pole to get 
the first line. But anyways I digress, Mr. Speaker. It is all very 
interesting. 
 
And it is an interesting topic because it’s like two sides of a 
coin, you know. Freedom of information and the right to know 
and then on the other side protection of privacy which is also so 
critical in our society and that goes back . . . And I know I was 
doing some research. This goes backs hundreds of years to the 
first peeping Tom laws when you talk about privacy in our 
communities. This is serious stuff. 
 
[21:00] 
 
And so when we talk about this, it is odd. And I think about the 
presidential election that’s happening with WikiLeaks and 
what’s happening there in terms of right to privacy but also the 
freedom to know, and the debate around emails and what’s 
private emails, and all of us as we become in the public eye. 
What is information that we have to share and what is 
information that is our own? And this debate will go on and on 
and on. 
 
And so this is an evolution of that and I have to say that we’ve 
been well served. We have been very well served by the privacy 
commissioners, the current one and the one prior, both who 
were very astute in terms of research and the fine line of this 
discussion. But it’s important to evolve and keep this in the 
public eye about what’s the proper format. 
 
And one that I just wanted to say that we’re very, very glad to 
see is that the police service in our communities are now being 
brought into and under the local authority of freedom of 
information and privacy Act because we were one of the last, if 
not the last province, to have our police services be held 
accountable in terms of freedom of information. And I know 
and I have a lot of respect for our police chief in Saskatoon who 
has done so much and speaks so well in terms of how we can 
make our communities safe and how we can . . . the root causes 
of the crime. But one thing we don’t see eye to eye on is the 
whole thing around privacy and the role of the police. I know 
there has been concerns around this within the police services 
and the leadership of our services. And I hope that as we get 
this going up and running that they can feel much more secure. 
 
One of the big debates we’re having in Saskatoon, as we speak 
in this election, is around police carding and the asking of 
people for identification in a random manner. The police will 
say this is a way to create safe streets, but we see right across 
North America where this has been challenged, as can be 
sometimes, profiling in some cities. And it can be seen as an 
infringement on human rights, whereas others will say there is a 
greater good, that it protects our streets, our homes, and people. 
 
If they are out and it’s late at night and looking kind of 
suspicious, then it’s only reasonable to ask them who they are 



October 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 841 

and what their business is. But the question then becomes, what 
is reasonable, and is it reasonable grounds for suspicion for 
some illegal activity. And if there isn’t, then these folks have 
the right not to say. 
 
I think, in my opinion, the police will have a lot more 
credibility with this piece of legislation around the access to 
freedom of information because they will have to share more 
about what they’re doing. Now we’re not asking them to share 
all the details that may lead to significant arrests or charges, and 
we’ve seen that in our cities as it has evolved in terms of gangs 
or organized crime, that type of thing. So it’s important to allow 
the police to do their work within the frames of our human 
rights, but I think that we all grow together. 
 
They get more credibility when we see this kind of stuff coming 
forward. This is not an infringement or a way of stopping them 
from doing their work. It’s a way of saying it’s just a self-check 
and it’s a way to check on what information are you gathering. 
Is it necessary? 
 
You know, there’s always this fine line between what you need 
to know and what you’d like to know. People like to know 
more, but what do you really need to know to get the job done? 
And this is what this bill goes a long ways to do, so this will be 
very important to move forward. And I am glad to see the 
government moving this forward, though it has been 22 years. 
And I know some of that was our time, but it has been nine 
years on their clock. So it is something that we need to see 
happen. And so with that, I think that’s very, very important to 
have. 
 
I think that we will see more and I look forward to this because 
I hope . . . This is, you know, one of the things the Privacy 
Commissioner said is that we should be looking at updating the 
legislation every five years. And I think that’s a reasonable 
thing, particularly when you come to considering the evolution 
of technology. And I don’t know whether five years ago we . . . 
We weren’t talking about WikiLeaks. I’m not sure Facebook 
was as big as an issue. It might have been. I mean it seems to all 
blur really closely together, the whole social media thing, and 
what was there five years or not, and what was not there 10 
years ago. But I think that we do need to keep looking at 
updating our legislation, and then maybe we get better at this, 
and the amendments become smaller and smaller and more 
refined. But this is an important thing to do. 
 
The one area that I do want to flag and I want to make sure that 
we look at this and I urge the government to take a look at this 
is we know that there are, when it comes to the workplace, there 
are issues around privacy and also freedom of information in 
the public service but not in the private workplace. And I know 
across Canada . . . Alberta has legislation under the 
Conservative government that brought it forward there. I know 
it’s happening, happens right across Canada. So I think this is 
one that I would flag and say this is something that we now 
would ask the government to turn its attention to and say how 
can we make sure our workplaces have the best privacy 
legislation, the best freedom of information legislation because 
the two do go together. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think that, as we said, the bill is . . . It comes 
out of the 2015 report. It’s time for an update that the 

Information and Privacy Commissioner called for. I think that 
22 years is a bit too long. I think this is important in terms of 
the impact on police services, and it creates new offences for 
snooping on personal information, which is significant because 
we just need to feel confident that when we share our personal 
information, that it is secure, that it is secure. But as my 
colleague said, it didn’t address the recommendation for 
changing the maximum time for a response from 30 days to 20 
days. And the LAFOIP [The Local Authority Freedom of 
Information and Protection of Privacy Act] should have a 
requirement it be updated every five years to respond to modern 
technology. 
 
So I know the minister says he’s going to be working closely 
with the police services and other stakeholders to make sure 
that the regulations are strong and effective for the police and 
how it applies to The Police Act, 1990. But as I said, there are 
more and more questions about our police services in our 
communities, and I think this can go a long way to ensuring and 
restoring confidence that they are there for our communities and 
for our citizens and are not beyond a reasonable expectation of 
appropriate work. 
 
So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would say this is a very, 
very important bill that we take a look at, and I’ll be interested 
in hearing more about this from my colleagues. I know many of 
them will have lots to say about all of this and then when we get 
to the committee, and I hope the commissioner will be part of 
that committee hearings, that they will in fact invite the 
commissioner as well as the ministry folks along to have that 
discussion. So I would move adjournment of Bill No. 31, An 
Act to amend The Local Authority Freedom of Information and 
Protection of Privacy Act. I do so move. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 31. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 1 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 1 — The 
Crown Corporations Public Ownership Amendment Act, 2016 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to rise tonight and join in the debate surrounding Bill 
No. 1, An Act to amend The Crown Corporations Public 
Ownership Act. 
 
Now it’s been stated a few times, as we know, the bill removes 
Sask liquor and gaming association from The Crown 
Corporations Public Ownership Act and essentially allows the 
government to do what they did — and I will admit, say that 
they would do in their campaign — which was to sell 40 public 
liquor stores. 



842 Saskatchewan Hansard October 24, 2016 

Now the Sask Party did fail to say quite a few things in the 
campaign. They failed to give us the true state of the finances. 
They failed to present a budget, which I like to call the 
death-by-a-thousand-cuts budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And it’s 
not just me that describes it by that name, Mr. Speaker, when I 
talk in the community, to community-based organizations in 
particular, and non-profits in particular, that are doing front-line 
work helping to improve our province as they definitely echo 
that sentiment. This was a budget that was truly a 
death-by-a-thousand-cuts budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So yes, they did campaign on this, but it doesn’t give them the 
blank cheque that they think it does. There are still some really 
important questions here that are left unanswered. What this 
does is it provides for no more protection to any of the other 
SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority] stores. So 
I’m a little bit worried about what this means for the future. We 
still do have some public stores. We have public stores that 
make a lot of money for this province and that do have jobs that 
are serving our communities. 
 
So what does that mean for those jobs that are still left and what 
does that mean for liquor stores in those communities? Like I 
said, there’s a lot of questions about this and I had the 
opportunity to ask some of those questions to the former 
minister for SLGA in estimates in the summer. Unfortunately 
pretty much all of my questions were, remained largely 
unanswered. The responses I received were political, and a lot 
of people want to know what’s going to happen with these 
stores in terms of the promises that were made with the 
privatization of these stores. 
 
For example, we’ve been told time and time again that these 
sales are going to be revenue neutral for the province. Well 
when I asked the former minister what does that mean, I 
couldn’t get a response that I could understand and that frankly, 
that the stakeholders could understand, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know we’re at the . . . I believe we’re at the 
request-for-proposal process through these liquor stores. We 
still haven’t seen too much in terms of how that’s been going, 
who’s been granted those RFPs [request for proposal], who’s 
made those applications. I do hope that it’s been a robust 
application process. I do hope that there’s been a lot of 
competition, and boy I sure do hope that those RFPs are going 
to be granted to local businesses ideally and all of these profits 
aren’t going to go to Ontario and out of country like they have 
in other jurisdictions, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And that’s one of the main concerns with respect to this. And 
I’m hoping that the opposition will have the opportunity to 
actually be able to look at this and scrutinize it and make sure 
that it’s being run in essentially the most efficient manner 
because there’s been studies in the past that have said that there 
is no way that this could be done in a revenue-neutral manner, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. So I’d really like to see some sort of cost 
analysis in how this actually is going to play out and how this 
actually does benefit the people of Saskatchewan because it 
really frankly hasn’t been shown yet. 
 
And there are still detractors to this. There is still a lot people 
who are very concerned about how this is going to play out. I 
know I had colleagues that were in some of the committee 

meetings with respect to these privatizations and there were 
voices of concern. And they were, frankly, from business 
owners, and they were from business owners in smaller centres. 
 
There was a woman who owns a business in the southwest end 
of the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and she was very 
concerned with having to do what she has to do now with 
changes to SLGA that require her to negotiate discounts with 
her local off-sale, Mr. Deputy Speaker, rather than through 
SLGA. And when her local off-sale is her competitor, it 
provides a situation for her that she finds very alarming, and 
she’s not sure if she’s going to be able to stay in business any 
longer. 
 
Another concern is what’s going to happen to the actual 
infrastructure? What’s going to happen to these actual buildings 
once these SLGA stores are closed off? Because as I understand 
it, these RFPs do not include the actual infrastructure, that it’s 
more just an RFP for the ability to open up a store, whether 
that’s in connection with an already existing store or if it’s a 
new building. But that actual infrastructure, that actual physical 
building is not a part of that RFP. 
 
So what is this going to result in? Is this going to result in 
another empty building in a small town, like it has in other 
towns that already have been faced with this in Saskatchewan? 
Because I don’t see how that is going improve the situation 
anywhere in this province, Mr. Speaker. It’s quite alarming. 
 
[21:15] 
 
The government has said that this is going to improve better 
hours, better selection, new locations, more refrigerated 
product. Again, we still haven’t seen whether or not this is 
actually going to come to fruition. And frankly, what I don’t 
understand is why we couldn’t modernize SLGA. Why we can’t 
make SLGA competitive? I think the Sask Party seems to just 
want to let SLGA stores essentially wither and die. They’re 
creating a situation where they have no chance of ever being 
competitive. It’s a historical and typical conservative move, Mr. 
Speaker, frankly, to essentially strangle and starve public 
resources into the point where we feel as if the private sector is 
the only thing that can do this properly when public resources 
are underserved and underutilized. It’s really creating an unfair 
playing field and essentially setting a disadvantaged situation 
up for the rest of the SLGA stores. And maybe what this 
government should be looking at doing is not just modernizing 
the stores themselves but modernizing SLGA. 
 
I hear from, as critic for SLGA, from stakeholders all the time 
who have expressed so much frustration over the rules of SLGA 
and how they’re constantly changing, how many hoops they 
have to jump through. It seems like the pricing keeps changing. 
They never know what’s coming down the pipe next, who are 
they supposed to be talking to, who are they not supposed to be 
talking to. And if you don’t think that that’s true, feel free to 
talk to any of the many business owners in Regina, for example, 
who have expressed nothing but immense frustration over how 
to deal with SLGA. So maybe we should be focusing a little bit 
on improving that situation for our business owners instead of 
focusing on starving and then privatizing all of our SLGA 
stores. 
 



October 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 843 

We have many great craft brewers in the province. I’m happy to 
see that the government has said that they were going to put in, 
in two locations, two SLGA locations . . . So it’s like the babiest 
of baby steps in terms of modernizing our SLGA stores, putting 
in craft beer dispensaries in those locations.  
 
Now I don’t see why we can’t be doing more of this. We’ve 
been calling on this on behalf of the craft brewers of 
Saskatchewan for quite a while now. So I’m happy to see it’s 
being done, but why does it have to be the tiniest of baby steps? 
Why can’t we move forward on this, expand it, make it better? 
I’m happy to see that finally, after calling for it for a very long 
time on this side of the House, the craft brewers are now 
allowed to serve beer in their locations. Now thankfully for me 
and my staff, we can go across the street to the craft brewer 
location in the General Hospital neighbourhood to enjoy a beer 
and shop for vintage clothing actually, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s 
quite a great location. 
 
These are logical steps in terms of modernizing SLGA. I don’t 
see why this is so difficult. I don’t see why the Sask Party has to 
stall and make the tiniest of baby steps in terms of modernizing 
SLGA. Instead we focus on privatizing these stores, and that’s 
where their, apparently, their focus is on. So fine, if you’re 
going to focus on this, then let’s see you do this right. Are you 
doing this right? We don’t know yet, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
haven’t heard anything yet. My members on this side haven’t 
heard anything yet about how the RFP process is going. I do 
sure hope that, like I said, it’s a robust RFP process, that there’s 
lots of competition, and that ideally those RFPs are going to 
local business owners because that’s really what we should be 
doing in terms of improving the economy in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
So I’m looking forward to committee on this bill so that we can 
have the opportunity to ask some more questions, maybe get 
some more real answers from the new minister for SLGA with 
respect to these issues. With that, I think I will end this for now 
and adjourn debate on Bill No. 1. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 1, The Crown Corporations Public 
Ownership Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 32 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 32 — The 
Automobile Accident Insurance (Benefits) Amendment Act, 
2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 
is a pleasure tonight to get into Bill No. 32, An Act to Amend 
The Automobile Accident Insurance Act respecting Benefits and 
Actions and to make a consequential amendment to The Traffic 

Safety Act. 
 
And right off the bat I have to say that it’s kind of an odd choice 
of words about benefits. There’s no benefits to being involved 
in an accident. I mean there may be compensation, but it would 
be interesting to know if that’s the best choice of word we could 
have. I mean I find this often when I talk to people about 
workers’ compensation and accidents that happen and how, 
boy, if you could just not have that accident, that would be the 
very, very best. 
 
And so we try to be as safe as we can, but sometimes things 
happen, and we have to make sure that everyone is treated fairly 
and appropriately. And this piece of legislation, over the years, 
has served to do that. And always the question is, has it been as 
fair as it can be? Will it ensure that people can continue on with 
the life that they had prior to the accident? In the case of death, 
is there a way of compensating the loved ones for that? 
 
And it’s interesting this piece of legislation tackles the issue of 
not compensating those who are in prison because it just seems 
to make very little sense to have people who have been 
involved in crime and then involved in an accident be receiving 
compensation while in jail. And a situation that may come to 
mind is stealing cars, getting into an accident while in that car, 
and then going to jail. It just doesn’t make a lot of sense. And 
so I’ll talk about some of these pieces. 
 
You know, when we get into technical bills like this, really in 
many ways I know and I would think that the people who are 
working on these pieces of legislation have spent a lot of time 
balancing out what is fair, what is reasonable, and what is 
sustainable. And especially in this day and age when we’re 
living longer and costs are significant, we have to make sure 
that’s reasonable. 
 
But I’ll just take a minute to reflect on the second reading 
speech of the minister at the time. This goes back to June 15th, 
and he talked about how there’s going to be more than 30 
changes to this piece of legislation. And I won’t go through 
them all, but of course he talks about “When an impaired driver 
causes a collision and is killed, the family impacted will now be 
able to sue the estate of the deceased impaired driver for pain 
and suffering or bereavement damages.” And that’s very 
important. I mean it’s interesting as I’m reading this. 
 
I’m going back and forth between the Bill and the legislation, 
but it looks like the compensation for a funeral now is about 
$5,000. I’m not sure if that’s been updated or not, but we know 
that in many cases, especially in the case of a sudden death 
that’s caused because of drinking and driving, there is a great 
outpouring of feelings and so costs can be significant. And so 
this is important. So that’s something that we look forward to 
and we think is important. 
 
The list of offences that trigger the ability for an innocent party 
to sue has also been expanded to cover criminal negligence 
causing death or bodily harm, criminal negligence causing 
bodily injury, flight from a peace officer, and dangerous 
operation while street racing. 
 
And that’s very, very important. We’ve seen that become a 
major issue, particularly in cities like Vancouver. But I know in 



844 Saskatchewan Hansard October 24, 2016 

Saskatoon we can think of late-night speeding cars that cause 
death on our streets, and this has been has been an issue. So this 
is important, and all the costs that come along with it, rehab 
benefits and counselling and that type of thing. So this is 
significant. And so he goes on and he says that there were “. . . 
many interested parties who influenced these changes through 
the consultations in 2014 and ’15.” And so we’d like to know 
who they were. That’s important. 
 
So in summary what we’ve seen, and I’ll reflect on some more 
of these, but increases the amount of weekly benefits for 
employed injured persons from equivalent to 40 hours at 
minimum wage for fully disabled persons and 20 hours a week 
at minimum wage for partially disabled persons for those 
confined to a hospital, bed, or wheelchair. Prohibits SGI 
[Saskatchewan Government Insurance] from paying benefits to 
a person who’s in prison. Prohibits SGI from paying benefits to 
a driver who is more than 50 per cent responsible for the 
collision, and convicted, as I’ve said, or charged with causing 
death or bodily harm by street racing, being negligent, or 
fleeing a peace officer, and has been found guilty in the last five 
years of causing death or bodily harm by street racing, being 
negligent, or fleeing a peace officer. So we’ll have to take a 
look at some of the other changes at committee. 
 
But when I look back at this, the original piece of legislation is 
pretty thorough and pretty prescriptive, and it talks about the 
benefits particularly to those who are, if the insured is a 
homemaker. So section 24(1) talks about, and this is just an 
example that I want to raise, section 24(1) is talking about 
somebody who is hurt who is a homemaker, and that person is 
eligible for $300. That’s the old legislation. So it’s interesting 
that you would have to bring the legislation back every time 
you wanted to change that amount, so $300. So we debate that, 
whether 300 is right, whether it’s 320, whether it’s 340. 
 
But now what they’ve done for section 24(3), and I just use this 
as an example, now says that it’s either going to be $396 or a 
weekly benefit calculated on the basis of a 40-hour workweek, 
and the minimum wage established by pursuant to part II of The 
Saskatchewan Employment Act. So that’s the minimum wage. 
We know that the minimum wage just went up, I think to 
$10.75 an hour, I believe, somewhere around there. And so we 
can multiply that out quite easily. It’s 400-and-some dollars. 
 
So that is what someone who was a stay-at-home person is 
valued at by us, Saskatchewan legislature, saying that they’re 
worth essentially minimum wage at a 40-hour workweek. I’m 
not sure how I feel about that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because I 
could tell you I think homemakers are worth a lot more than 
that. In fact I think at the very least they should be getting a 
living wage, not a minimum wage. And we often talked about 
that. We debate that, whether that’s $15 an hour. I think in 
Regina the living wage is around sixteen seventy-five or 
something, when you take in the impact of the rent and 
groceries and that type of thing. 
 
[21:30] 
 
And even at, let’s say, $17 an hour . . . You can do the math 
quickly: $17 an hour, that’s 2,000 hours a year, that’s 34,000. 
That is not very high. That’s not very much money who’s fully 
. . . who cannot work. And I think this is something that I’d like 

to know a little bit more about because I think this is, especially 
when you’re talking about a homemaker, it might be a single 
parent, a single parent and it doesn’t talk anything about 
whether you have dependants or not. 
 
Now I may be reading this wrong because . . . This is the 
wonderful thing about doing debates like this is we get a chance 
to say, so how do they figure out the compensation or the 
benefits once you’ve been injured in an accident and if you 
cannot work and you have multiple disabilities? How do they 
figure that out with SGI? And is that a reasonable way? Well 
it’s in the legislation. They have a very particular form letter if 
you’re not working at the time and they consider you to be a 
homemaker. And I’m not sure what they do . . . [inaudible] . . . 
and we’ll have to study this more. If you’re a student or if 
you’re an artist, what is the long-term impact of these kind of 
pieces of legislation? So with that I mean, this really shows how 
this is a very important piece of legislation. 
 
And I know that when we get into committee, I hope that we 
have a pretty good discussion about, are these reasonable 
amounts? Is the compensation that’s coming forward . . . 
Particularly when we’ve seen a province like ours that’s 
benefited so much for the resource activity of the past years, in 
the past years, but we’ve seen the cost of living go through the 
roof, and we know that minimum wage has not caught up with 
that. We know that we need . . . Well there just has to be much 
more done. So are these reasonable amounts? Are these 
reasonable amounts particularly when we’re putting into place 
now formulas that are . . . Especially when we consider 
minimum wage, if we’re not going to be revisiting this as we 
have in the past years. 
 
In the past years we’ve revisited it because it was a fixed 
number — $300. Is that reasonable? But at least we were 
visiting it; now we’re not going to come back to this probably 
for many years. There’d have to be a big reason to come back 
because now there are formulas in place. And I think that in 
many ways that’s locking people into poverty because of 
injuries, and that’s not a benefit at all. That’s not a benefit at all. 
And so I think we need to take a look at this and have a good 
long discussion about this. I think this . . . a good long 
discussion about this. 
 
I’ve only talked about one or two examples, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I understand that there’s 30 changes here. We also 
understand that the government side is bringing forward more 
legislation around drinking and driving because some of the 
events that have happened in recent months. So I look forward 
to that. I look forward to what that might be in terms of this 
piece of legislation as well. 
 
So I know my colleagues will have a lot to say about this. 
We’ve thought a lot about this on our side. But I think when we 
come to this particular piece of legislation, it’s so prescriptive. 
And if we are locking into long-time amounts for compensation 
that are locking people into poverty, that’s not, not a good 
thing. And as we’ve said, maybe it needs to have a revision or 
revisit clause: revisit every five years, every 10 years, to make 
sure that they’re reasonable. As I said, we’ve seen minimum 
wage already falling behind. 
 
We are, I think, the second lowest minimum wage in Canada. 



October 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 845 

We see our sister province beside us, in Alberta, going to $15. 
Many are well above 11 and into the $12 amount. And at this 
point, if we’re locking people in, this may be a dangerous thing. 
And it could be, we could all have that impact because this is 
because of accident. These things are not planned and the 
tragedy of it, it could impact anybody, unfortunately. 
 
So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is a very importance piece 
of legislation before us, Bill No. 32, An Act to amend The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Act respecting Benefits and 
Actions and to make a consequential amendment to The Traffic 
Safety Act. Apparently, some 30 amendments to this piece of 
legislation. I think we’ll have to make sure we have enough 
time in committee to go through it all. But I would want to 
make sure we provide time for all our colleagues to have a good 
go at this. So with that, I move adjournment on this bill. Thank 
you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 32. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 33 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 33 — The Child 
and Family Services Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to join in 
on Bill No. 33, The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 
2016. In this Act, I guess there’s . . . Government has been 
getting into agreements with First Nations and different 
agencies, communities. And I’m not sure exactly who all they 
have been. But from what I could see, this provision, in your 
part of it, it gives a notice to go to legislation, to cancel an 
agreement, to end an agreement. 
 
But having said that, I would like to . . . And it’s interesting 
because I don’t believe right now Métis . . . And I think about 
that, I realize there’s agreements. I see there’s a number of 
different agreements with First Nations. But I believe in the 
province of Saskatchewan there are none, agreements with the 
Métis community, Métis Nation of Saskatchewan or any of the 
communities that are Métis communities. So I’m not sure . . . 
And it’s curious to see at the end of the day if there will be a 
provision and if government is looking at that. Like we’re 
hoping, you know, at the end of our election with the Métis 
Nation of Saskatchewan in, I believe it’s February, once that 
election is done. And we’re hoping that the government could 
move forward, making sure that the Métis would have an 
opportunity to look after their children in care, and some type of 
agreement. 
 
I know they’ve been called for years in light of the problem 
within the Métis Nation. It has its issues, but at the end of the 

day they will resolve it and, you know, the people will go to the 
polls and they will elect The Métis Nation of Saskatchewan, 
who then . . . and we’ve seen some of the court rulings and 
we’ve seen court rulings that have favoured the Métis, and in 
the Supreme Court of Canada made it very clear. 
 
So I think government’s going to have, you know, to deal once 
and for all with the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan. There might 
be the Métis National Council as well that will put some 
pressure, and I think it’s the right thing to do: to sit down with 
the Métis. Right now I know there’s been . . . they have no 
funding, the provincial government hasn’t, but I’m hoping at 
the end of the day when the new election comes in, the federal 
government is supporting The Métis Nation of Saskatchewan or 
the PMC [Provincial Métis Council] with getting everything in 
place so they can hold an election. And that process is 
happening and government’s working with them. 
 
After that happens, I think there’s going to be, you know, an 
obligation on the province to deal with the Métis once and for 
all as well, and there’s areas where they can improve. And 
that’s one area that they can give authority. The Métis Nation 
does some great work; some of its organizations, affiliates, they 
do some great work. When I think of MACSI [Métis Addictions 
Council of Saskatchewan, Inc.] centre, Gabriel Dumont 
Institute, there are many great institutes that’s within the Métis 
Nation that are doing some great work. 
 
But again, hopefully this is one area government consult and 
work with them and get an agreement so that they can take care 
and be responsible for the Métis children in care. So really this 
agreement, again, doesn’t allow for that. I can’t see that, and in 
questions and answers, I guess, within committee we could find 
out. And my colleagues . . . And we can ask some of those 
questions and maybe there is opportunity for Métis Nation to 
take the responsibility of Métis children in care. It’s the right 
thing to do, and I hope the government will do that at that time. 
 
At this point I have no further comments on this bill, and I’m 
prepared to adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 33, the child and family service Act, 
2016. It is the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 34 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 34 — The 
Provincial Lands Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise this evening to speak on Bill No. 34, The Provincial Lands 
Act. I see that there are no explanatory notes for this, because 
apparently when a bill is repealed and then replaced with a 
whole other bill, explanatory notes aren’t provided. I’m not sure 



846 Saskatchewan Hansard October 24, 2016 

if this is the way it’s always been or if this is a new thing. In 
any event, it’s a frustrating situation when you don’t have any 
explanatory notes to go off of, and as an opposition you’re told 
to go through the old Act and the new Act and go line by line to 
see exactly what the government has decided to leave in and 
take out and change and not change. 
 
So frankly, Mr. Speaker, it’s very frustrating when, like myself 
as Justice critic, you have to review a lot of these bills. Many of 
them are repeals of entire Acts, so you have to, without any 
explanatory notes, go through the whole thing and figure out 
exactly what’s been changed and what hasn’t been changed, and 
essentially why it’s been changed is completely left up to 
anyone’s guess essentially, Mr. Speaker. Or hopefully once it 
goes to committee you actually have the opportunity to get 
some of those questions answered, because you sure don’t get 
them answered when it’s tabled and you’re not provided with 
any explanatory notes, frankly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What I do know with respect to this bill is that it does have 
quite an extensive change to The Provincial Lands Act, and it’s 
quite important that this is done right and that stakeholders are 
properly consulted and actually listened to. From what I 
understand, in 2013 there were some consultations that were 
done on some proposed changes but because the changes were 
so criticized the government at that time decided to back down. 
I understand that some consultations were restarted earlier this 
year but the time frame for consultations was extremely short 
and there’s already been some criticism with respect to these 
consultations. 
 
And I think we have some right to be a little bit concerned 
because I think this government has shown quite well that 
they’re, and I’ve said before in other debates, frankly, that 
they’re not very good at listening to consultations and listening 
to stakeholders. And frankly, Mr. Speaker, this past budget is an 
indication of that. Because did they consult with the justice 
community when they decided to make cuts to the Aboriginal 
court worker program? I assure you they did not. They 
definitely didn’t consult with the judiciary. Did they consult 
with the justice community when they decided to make cuts to 
the alternative measures program? I assure you they absolutely 
did not. Did they consult with the justice and corrections 
community and the community in the North when they decided 
to close Buffalo Narrows Correctional Centre? No, they 
certainly did not. 
 
So there’s obvious reason why we’re concerned and we want to 
make sure that appropriate consultations are done and that this 
government is not running roughshod on a really important 
piece of legislation. So I’m hoping that at committee we’re 
going to have the opportunity to exactly see who was consulted 
on this, why these changes were made, and we want to make 
sure that this is done correctly and that it’s done in a way that 
we don’t have to come back and make changes again. 
 
I know my colleague spoke to some earlier bills where changes 
have been made to legislation time and time again. Essentially 
almost every two years, the government is coming back to this 
House with changes to legislation. So hopefully they’re getting 
it right this time. And hopefully they got the consultations right 
this time because they seem to not have done that in 2013. With 
that, I think there’ll be a lot more, especially that the critic for 

this Act is going to want to talk about, so with that I will move 
adjourned debate on Bill No. 34. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Regina Douglas Park has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 34, The Provincial Lands 
Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 35 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 35 — The Small 
Claims Act, 2016/Loi de 2016 sur les petites créances be now 
read a second time.] 
 
[21:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to get up this evening and speak to this Bill No. 35, An 
Act respecting Small Claims and making a consequential 
amendment to another Act. And I think this is again a 
significant piece of legislation from Justice. It is interesting. 
Many of us have had experiences regarding small claims. And I 
know I did as part of a house maintenance over a roofing job, so 
it’s . . . Now that has been several years ago. I think maybe 
about 20, 25 years ago, and so the rules may have changed. But 
it is important that we keep, as I say, current and make sure that 
our legislation provides access to justice for everyone on both 
sides, on both sides, those who are claiming to have been done 
wrong and those who say no, this is all fair and reasonable, and 
there should be no claims against themselves. 
 
And so I read with interest the minister’s remarks, and they 
were informative. But it is a big piece of legislation. Now I 
need to say that it is some 24 pages, but it is in both English and 
French and so . . . And it lays out the whole process in fairly 
good detail and some of the new methods of doing this, 
including case management conferences and all of that 
processes. 
 
And those are things that were not available back in the times 
that I had a case before this. Of course these are all things that 
are done without, in small claims, more often than not without 
the aid of legal services or lawyers. And so you know, you 
come into it as pretty much as an amateur . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Oh, they can’t hear me over there. Oh, all right, 
I’ll start over again, Mr. . . . Let me just back up this chair 
though so I can and move this over like that. Sorry about that. 
Thank you. And I take that finger wag as . . . All right, thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. I do want to say, and I do appreciate the fact 
that obviously if nobody can hear me that they notice that, and 
they do want to hear what I have to say about this because I do 
think this is an important piece of legislation, Bill No. 35, The 
Small Claims Act, 2016. In fact I thought maybe I was on the 
wrong piece of legislation, but I was at the wrong desk. 
 



October 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 847 

But, Mr. Speaker, I will go ahead with talking about how 
important this piece of legislation is because for many of us we 
will have that experience of appearing before small claims, 
either as someone proceeding with a case feeling that they had 
been done wrong, whether it was through a service that 
should’ve been provided or not completely provided, or 
someone is making a claim against you and you feel, no, it was 
all fair and reasonable and the expectations were unreasonable. 
And so I think and it often is the case, and I’m not sure of all of 
the parameters of small claims, but the fact that we will be there 
without the aid of lawyers or legal services very much studying 
up on the law, as it were, and making the best case that you 
can . . . 
 
And so it is interesting to see that this has come forward, and as 
I was just pointing out as I was flipping through, that it’s fairly 
prescriptive. It talks about commencing a claim and as well case 
management conferences, that type of thing, things that have 
evolved over the course of time. But still there are people who 
try to evade the arms of justice, and whether it’s just by simply 
not showing up at court or simply delaying or whatever, this 
piece of legislation that deals with that. 
 
So I want to just reflect for a moment on some of the things that 
the Minister of Justice, when he brought this forward back in 
June 15th, he talked about. He talked about how, “The Ministry 
of Justice [has] developed the justice innovation agenda in 2014 
with a vision to create understandable, timely, and affordable 
justice for Saskatchewan citizens.”  
 
Now that’s interesting because this seems to be one part of it. 
We’d like to know the whole part of it and how this fits into 
that. It’s interesting when we see these kind of announcements 
made indirectly as part of ministers’ remarks, and you go, 
what? I had not heard of this justice innovation agenda before, 
and here we are two years later. So it would be . . . Now I’m not 
the critic for Justice so maybe others are up on this, but it would 
be something to know more about. So it’s part of an agenda 
that, “. . . the ministry is reviewing the way justice services are 
delivered and what improvements can be made to ensure 
Saskatchewan citizens have access to these [very] important 
services.” And so true.  
 
So apparently last year, they conducted a review of small claims 
process and they went out with a consultation paper and they 
got some feedback from various groups and citizens. It would 
be very interesting to know what that scope was, how many 
people replied, whether these were people who had been 
involved in the small claims process — I assume it was — both 
those who felt that they had done well by small claims and 
those who felt that they weren’t well served by it, and why 
weren’t they well served by it. I think that’s very, very 
important. 
 
And so some of the recommendations that came out because of 
that review was the amendments. The monetary limits were 
increased from 20,000 to $30,000. So that’s a very important 
one. And some other changes were expanding “. . . the court’s 
authority to award costs to be paid from one party to another.” 
And the ability to award costs or giving the court authority to 
award costs where a party fails to attend or purposely delays 
any steps in the proceedings. Again that’s huge because people 
don’t have a lot of time and especially, as I said, if you’re doing 

this yourself without any support from a lawyer. If you’re 
taking time away from work and you show up to court and the 
other person doesn’t show up, then that is a problem. And so 
this is significant. 
 
As well he talks about awarding general costs at the conclusion 
based on factors such as the behaviour of the party. So what we 
want to get away from is discouraging disruptive or 
uncooperative behaviour by the parties in court and making sure 
that if we can resolve the disputes in a timely and cost-effective 
manner, that’s muchly appreciated by everyone, everyone 
involved. 
 
So some of the things that we could expect is that all defendants 
will have to file a reply to a claim. And right now under the 
current rules, the defendant is not required to file a defence 
unless they are ordered to do so. So here’s a good move, that 
you are expected to file a reply to a claim. And so it goes on 
and on to make sure that parties are actively engaged at an early 
stage in the proceedings and to promote a timely resolution on 
the matters. 
 
And then it goes on about making sure that, you know, where a 
defendant fails to file a reply and does not attend proceedings, 
the bill clarifies the powers of the court to award a default 
judgment in favour of the claimant. But in the case if they had a 
reasonable excuse for not appearing, then in fact that can be 
reversed. As well that the bill will also grant the court authority 
to cite individuals for contempt in appropriate circumstances. 
 
So again, maybe that was felt that was out of the scope of small 
claims. But in many ways, you know, it is interesting when you 
have . . . It seems odd that it doesn’t really matter the amount of 
money sometimes. But there’s a lot more to it, whether it’s 
being respected or not respected. Somebody feels that they’ve 
been really badly treated. You know, small claims is a good 
venue to make sure people feel that they’ve had their day in 
court, as the saying goes. And so we think this is an interesting 
piece of legislation. And I think this is one that is timely and 
I’m glad to see it moving ahead. 
 
There will be questions, I know, that many will have about this. 
We don’t have more notes to explain some of the changes 
because they’re repealing the whole bill and replacing — or the 
current piece of legislation — with this bill. And so I’m just 
going to leave my comments at that. But it’s a good start. 
 
We look forward to hearing others speak to this piece of 
legislation, particularly the critic. I’m looking forward to 
hearing her comments on small claims court. I think that she 
brings a lot of skill and talent and some opinions about small 
claims. And I know that it will be . . . When we get into 
committee, it won’t be a small claim day. It will be big issues in 
the committee. 
 
So with that, I would like to move adjournment of Bill No. 35, 
An Act respecting Small . . . No, Bill 36 . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Bill 35? 35. All right, I’m right — Bill 35, An 
Act respecting Small Claims and making a consequential 
amendment to another Act. I do so move. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 35, The Small Claims Act, 



848 Saskatchewan Hansard October 24, 2016 

2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 36 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 36 — The Small 
Claims Consequential Amendments Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I rise tonight to enter into the 
debate on Bill No. 36, An Act to make consequential 
amendments resulting from the enactment of The Small Claims 
Act, 2016. 
 
And we may be getting ahead of ourselves because we haven’t 
enacted The Small Claims Act, 2016. But in anticipation of that 
Act being moved and passed, we need to be ready for this. And 
it is always good to see that this government is practising 
anticipation of some of its work moving forward even though 
this is a small piece of legislation. And it took a lot of practice 
for them to practise that anticipation. We’ll leave that at that 
because we know that the real meat is in Bill No. 35, and we’ll 
focus on that. 
 
So I would move adjournment of Bill No. 36, An Act to make 
consequential amendments resulting from the enactment of The 
Small Claims Act, 2016. I do so move. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 36, The Small Claims 
Consequential Amendments Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 37 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 37 — The 
Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, I’m honoured to rise today to 
talk about the amendments, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 
Bill No. 37. And this was presented by the previous deputy 
premier and previous minister of SGI so it’ll be interesting to 
see what the new Minister of SGI has to say with regards to 
some of these issues. And I’m sure that’ll be discussed a lot in 
committees. 
 
I guess I had more questions than I had answers when I was 

reading a lot of this information here. And it seems like today’s 
been a day of reminiscing a lot of our childhood and such. But I 
was looking at the child restraints requirements and there was a 
lot of discussion in there about what’s required for different 
child restraint seats. It’s been a while since I had to worry about 
that with my children. And I remember the days when I was a 
child and I was laying on the back of the window in the back of 
the car there, and so child restraints weren’t really something 
that was a priority back in those days. But now I know it’s 
really important that we have these safety precautions. 
 
[22:00] 
 
But when I look at it, there’s a lot of variety. Like they say, you 
know, they have to be in a booster seat until the age of seven or 
up to 50 pounds. And I changed everything to pounds because 
they were in kilograms, and that’s not the way I roll. And so 
like most children on average age of 11, they reach 50 pounds, 
so it’s a good thing that at least the age seven. Now I have some 
grandchildren, so I talked to some friends and people that I 
know that know a lot about child restraints because I want to 
make sure they’re safe because grandchildren are really 
important, where kids are . . . You’re learning through that 
process, and then grandkids you really want to do the right 
thing with regards to them. 
 
And a lot of people that I talked to, they said it’s about keeping 
the brain and the muscles. It depends on the strength of the 
muscles of the child of which seat that they should be in. And 
so I know that’s probably hard to measure but it should be 
something that should be looked into at one point with regards 
to, are our requirements for child restraints appropriate, and are 
we looking at the brain development and the muscle 
development of children when we’re thinking about which child 
restraint we should be using? 
 
But it got me thinking about that because part of this Bill talks 
about three-wheeled vehicles, and ensuring that children that 
are seven and under are not riding on three-wheeled vehicles. 
And so I guess we’ll have to have some clarifications on what 
they mean by three-wheeled vehicles, and talk about like, 
should these requirements be on four-wheeled vehicles as well, 
like quads and such? And what was the rationale of coming to 
the age of seven of why they shouldn’t be riding on these 
vehicles? And there just seems to be a lot of clarification that 
needs to be had with regards to committee, so I’m sure this will 
be all discussed at that point. 
 
And another area that I was looking into was with regards to 
motorcycles. And my partner, he rode a motorcycle before, and 
when we talked about it he said that there was a time when 
there was no regulations with regards to safety requirements 
when riding a motorcycle. And in the United States apparently 
it’s very lax as well as what the safety regulations are. 
 
And I personally think that safety regulations are important, but 
I know that people who ride a motorcycle, they have some 
particular opinions with regards to this. And it looks like there’s 
discussion on having even more protection, so not only with 
just regards to wearing a helmet, but needing to have eye 
protection and the footrests and such. 
 
And again this isn’t an area that I know a lot about, but I think it 



October 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 849 

wouldn’t hurt to consult with some people who do feel very 
passionate about these issues and see what their concerns or 
what they would think about this, and some pros and cons with 
regards to all of that. But safety, of course, safety is always a 
good thing. You want to make sure that when people are on the 
road that their safety is a priority. 
 
So a lot of the other things that are discussed in this bill is with 
regards to people who haven’t paid their debt to SGI, and it 
could be with regards to impounded fees or other fees that they 
owe, and having some, you know, ability for SGI to be able to 
restrict their licence or ability to register vehicles. And I could 
see where it might be difficult for SGI, when people are owing 
them money, on being able to collect that and wanting to ensure 
that people make a payment schedule. 
 
And there’s some discussion here of how . . . I know when the 
minister presented this amendment he said that SGI worked 
hard at trying to establish payment plans with individuals who 
have payments due. And so I hope that they consider that and 
make sure that that’s a priority so, moving forward, that people 
who have these unpaid dues, when they are able to start making 
their payments, they’re not completely restricted. Because that 
could, you know, have an impact on them having employment 
or being able to get from one place to another. 
 
So with regards to The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, Mr. 
Speaker, I know my colleagues will have a lot more information 
that they want to add to this discussion, and so at this point I’m 
going to move to adjourn this debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert Northcote 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 37, The Traffic Safety 
Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
move that this House be now adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
. . . Okay. This House now stands adjourned until . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Well tonight has been a little bit of a 
troublesome one for me tonight. The House Leader has moved 
adjournment for the evening. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. We stand adjourned until tomorrow 
at 1:30. Thank you. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 22:07.] 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 Position on Climate Change and Carbon Tax 
  Bonk ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 823 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................... 823 
  Marit .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 825 
  Buckingham .............................................................................................................................................................................. 827 
  Lambert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 829 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 16 — The Adoption Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’adoption  
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 831 
 Bill No. 17 — The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2016  
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 832 
 Bill No. 19 — The Film and Video Classification Act, 2016  
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 834 
 Bill No. 26 — The Patient Choice Medical Imaging Act  
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 835 
 Bill No. 28 — The Extension of Compassionate Care Act, 2016  
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 837 
 Bill No. 29 — The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur les juges de paix  
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 838 
 Bill No. 30 — The Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016  
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 839 
 Bill No. 31 — The Local Authority Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016  
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 840 
 Bill No. 1 — The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Amendment Act, 2016  
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 841 
 Bill No. 32 — The Automobile Accident Insurance (Benefits) Amendment Act, 2016  
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 843 
 Bill No. 33 — The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2016  
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 845 
 Bill No. 34 — The Provincial Lands Act, 2016  
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 845 
 Bill No. 35 — The Small Claims Act, 2016/Loi de 2016 sur les petites créances  
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 846 
 Bill No. 36 — The Small Claims Consequential Amendments Act, 2016  
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 848 
 Bill No. 37 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2016  
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 848 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


