






















































Hansard: November 14, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 41A  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 14, 2016, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (Ind.) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10; Independent (Ind.) — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1289 
 November 14, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave for 
an extended introduction, please. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you. It is my pleasure to introduce 
a very special guest at the Legislative Assembly today. Seated 
in your gallery is Mr. Massimiliano Iacchini, consul general of 
Italy in Vancouver. A career diplomat, Mr. Iacchini was 
appointed to his current position in August of last year. This is 
his first official visit to our province. Accompanying the consul 
general on his visit are David Salamena, the deputy consul of 
Italy in Vancouver. 
 
The consul general has a busy schedule during his two full days 
in our province. We had lunch together, and he has already met 
with the ministers of Agriculture and the Economy and with 
you, Mr. Speaker. This afternoon he meets with Her Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor. He will also visit SaskPower where he 
will have a presentation on carbon capture and storage from 
officials and the International CCS Knowledge Centre. 
 
Tomorrow the consul general and his delegation travel to 
Saskatoon where they have meetings scheduled with officials 
from the Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership, the 
University of Saskatchewan and its Crop Development Centre, 
and the Canadian Light Source synchrotron. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Italy is a very important trading partner and 
market for Saskatchewan. The country is Saskatchewan’s 
ninth-largest export destination. Our exports were valued at 
almost 468 million last year. Most of these exports were durum 
wheat. Saskatchewan is Canada’s largest agriculture food 
export to Italy, and Italy is the largest export destination for our 
wheat. 
 
I am confident that during his visit the consul general will see 
many examples of the dynamic nature of Saskatchewan as we 
work to build on the strong bonds of trade and friendship 
between Saskatchewan and Italy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members of the Assembly join with 
me in welcoming Consul General Iacchini and his delegation to 
Saskatchewan legislation. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d just 

like to join with the minister and welcome on behalf of the 
official opposition — benvenuto a Saskatchewan — the Italian 
delegation that is here today. 
 
Certainly it’s a good sight to, Mr. Speaker, to see in your 
gallery Mr. Massimiliano Iacchini and Mr. David Salamena. 
Certainly the work that these gentlemen do to further and 
strengthen the relationship between Canada and Italia, and 
certainly Saskatchewan and Italia, is a wonderful thing. 
Certainly the Italian community in Saskatchewan is one that we 
value very much and contributes an awful lot to the well-being 
of the province. So to see these gentlemen here furthering that 
work is a good sight to see. Mille grazie and buongiorno. 
 
The Speaker: — Today I’d like to introduce a guest sitting in 
my gallery, if Emma Bonk could please rise, give a quick wave. 
We had a chance to spend some time together today and over 
lunch. We discussed the role of Speaker and world events and 
life in general. She is a very smart 12-year-old and if she is 
representing the next generation, I think Saskatchewan will be 
in great hands. Please join with me in welcoming Emma to her 
Assembly. 
 
I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to this Assembly, it’s my pleasure to introduce a 
number of officials from the Canadian Diabetes Association. 
The association is having an advocacy day today. They have a 
number of events they’ve been holding in the building including 
a number of meetings, including one with the Minister of Rural 
and Remote Health and myself earlier this morning. 
 
They also were hosting a 21-day healthy habit challenge which 
the Minister of Rural and Remote Health is participating in, 
which is good, Mr. Speaker, because he has a number of bad 
habits. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re also hosting a reception later today at 5 
o’clock, I believe, for MLAs [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] from both sides of the House. We look forward to 
that. 
 
And in the west gallery with us today, we have — I’ll just get 
you to give a wave when I introduce you — we have Brie 
Hnetka, who is the regional director for Saskatchewan. We have 
Warren Wagner, the senior regional director for Western 
Canada; Russell Williams, vice-president, Government 
Relations; Scott McRae, regional director for Alberta. 
 
And a number of advocacy committee members are with us as 
well, Mr. Speaker. We have Tristan Banyay, Peter Dickinson, 
Lynne Eikel, Bob and Evelyn Gawley, Bill Gowen, Georgia 
Joorisity, Paul Kuspira, Bob Lydiate, Renee Mochnacz, Diana 
Orser, Ken Zech, and Don Henricksen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, we look forward to the reception 
later on today to chat with the various members of the 
association and we thank them for being here. And I ask all 
members to please give them a warm welcome to their 
Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 



1290 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2016 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure on 
behalf of the official opposition to welcome this delegation 
from the Canadian Diabetes Association. I didn’t have an 
opportunity earlier today to take in the 21-day challenge, but I 
will think very closely about all the habits that I have that could 
be changed, Mr. Speaker, including that road trip back to 
Saskatoon that often involves puffed wheat squares or any kind 
of treat that I can get my hands on, Mr. Speaker. But I . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . A&W occasionally, Mr. Speaker. 
But I know my colleague and the Leader of the Official 
Opposition is committing to no late-night snacks. I understand 
he’s a fan of ice cream very late in the evening, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Peanut butter. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — And peanut butter, Mr. Speaker. But I look 
forward to the reception this evening and conversations. And 
thanks to all these folks again from the Canadian Diabetes 
Association for all that they do around research and advocacy 
and helping us understand the issues better, around service, 
education, and information, making sure people living with 
diabetes are well served as well, Mr. Speaker. So with that, I’d 
ask all my colleagues to join in welcoming these folks to their 
legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Request leave for extended 
introduction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Rural and 
Remote Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s indeed a 
pleasure for me to rise in the House today to introduce a very 
special group in your gallery, on the east side of the gallery. Mr. 
Speaker, they’re children that have gone through a cancer 
journey, along with their family and some friends that have 
been affected by childhood cancer. Some I met along with the 
member from Saskatoon University in September when we did 
the flag-raising outside, bringing awareness to the province 
through commemorating Childhood Cancer Awareness Month 
in September. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s great strides that have been made when it 
comes to cancer, specifically childhood cancer, but we know 
there’s more work to do. And it’s important, I believe, to bring 
awareness and also to recognize these families, especially these 
young ones that are going through a struggle. And we know 
through diagnosis that we are supporting them, but also they 
need our thoughts and our prayers and that’s part of what we’re 
doing in this advocacy as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My family strongly believes that God comforts us in our 
troubles so we’re there to comfort others in their time of need, 

Mr. Speaker, and it’s truly my pleasure to introduce these 
individuals in your Assembly today. With us today are Jennifer 
Lyster and Steve Lyster — can you guys give us a wave as we 
introduce you — with their kids Jessie Lyster, and of course 
Tegan has successfully gone through a cancer journey, Mr. 
Speaker. Marla Bachman and Aaron Bachman, Kaidence 
Bachman is with us. Joel Bachman. Kim Lendvay, Lauren 
Lendvay, and Isaac Lendvay. Unfortunately Naomi Lendvay 
was supposed to be with us today, but she’s feeling a little bit ill 
today, Mr. Speaker. She couldn’t make it, but she’s in our 
thoughts and our prayers, along with her mom, Vanessa, wasn’t 
available to make it today as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also with us today are Mary Lou Selinger, Brenda Rookes, 
Leonard Selinger, Enrique Reyes Viltre, Brad Boyko, Kim 
Pasloski, Jason Cody, and I think Scott Livingstone is with us 
today. He was supposed to be with us — I don’t see Scott up 
there — from the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. But, Mr. 
Speaker, please join with me in welcoming these very important 
guests to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure and 
honour to join with the minister opposite in welcoming these 
very strong families, the Lyster, the Bachman, and the Lendvay 
family, among many others, to their legislature today. Thank 
you for bringing a face to childhood cancer. I know your 
journey isn’t an easy one but know that there are many thoughts 
and best wishes and prayers on both sides of the House in your 
journey, and we wish you all the best. I’d ask all members to 
join me in welcoming these special guests to their legislature 
today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you and to 
all members of the Assembly, I would like to introduce my 
mother, Marilyn Wilchuck, seated on the floor of the legislature 
Chamber. Mom’s maiden name is Berthiaume and she was born 
here in Regina. Mom left her job with Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance to become a full-time homemaker of 
seven children born in nine years. I was the middle child of the 
clan. She modelled volunteerism to me through the school, 
church, and community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my mother was a great support to me once I made 
the decision to seek the nomination for Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. Her support never waivered during the 20 
months I spent working to win the election. Although Mom was 
not politically active she always exercised her franchise. She 
offered me practical advice during the election campaign, and 
she was confident that this was the path I was meant to follow. 
 
Mom had a penchant for baking. I share her love of baking. 
When I published a cookbook in 2013, I named it Recipes I 
Stole From My Mum to honour the time she spent in the kitchen 
cooking for her large family. I ask all members to join me in 
welcoming her to her Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 



November 14, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1291 

Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you and to all members of this Assembly, I’d like to introduce 
an individual seated way up at the top of the east gallery, my 
mother, Donna Sarauer. Donna was born and raised in 
Muenster, Saskatchewan, and then mom went to STI, 
Saskatchewan Technical Institute at the time, to study computer 
technology in Moose Jaw. And then after moving around with 
my dad, we finally settled in Regina where we’ve been living 
ever since I was five. 
 
She currently works for SaskCentral and has been my number 
one supporter, not just during this campaign but always. She 
definitely learned the importance of door knocking, 
unfortunately for her, I think. But we got to spend a lot of 
quality time together over the last 18 months during the 
campaign. If she’s taught me anything, it’s hard work, 
independence, and compassion. And I hope to be half the 
woman that she is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I hope I’ve done a sufficient job sucking up to her so she’ll 
continue feeding me and buying me lunch every once in a 
while. I’d ask that all members join me in welcoming her to her 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve got a few 
guests to welcome here but I would like to just start with those 
that are in the Speaker’s gallery here today, those courageous 
young people, families that are here today. We can only 
imagine what you’re going through and our thoughts, our 
prayers are with you on this very challenging journey. We know 
you’re very courageous, very courageous people, children, and 
families. So thank you for being here today. 
 
I’d like to recognize or welcome in your gallery, Mr. Speaker 
. . . actually in the east gallery, 50 Mustangs here today, Mr. 
Speaker. These would be grade 4 and 5’s from McLurg school 
in my riding, Mr. Speaker. They’re accompanied here today by 
Ms. Weinrauch and Ms. Brittnee Cruse, two awesome teachers, 
Mr. Speaker. They’re also here with some parents: Ms. Lana 
Wilkinson, Ms. Tera Roberts, Ms. Valerie Sawcyn. 
 
I’m looking forward to meeting with these students after 
question period. I look forward to their questions. I already 
visited with them briefly. These are a very bright group of 
young leaders that bode well for the future of this province. So I 
ask all members to join with me in welcoming 50 McLurg 
Mustangs to their Assembly, along with these teachers and 
parents. And I ask them to say hello to Principal Norman for 
me. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[13:45] 
 
While still on my feet, I’d like to introduce a guest in the west 
gallery. This would be Mr. Pat Dunne. Pat Dunne has practised 
law in Regina for many, many years. He’s also a rugby player, 
and he’s also the brother of Sister Veronica Dunne of the Sisters 
of Our Lady of the Missions, Mr. Speaker. Pat Dunne has been 
following proceedings closely. He’s committed to getting to the 
bottom of the GTH [Global Transportation Hub] land scandal, 

along with the sisters, and I’m pleased to have him in his 
Assembly here today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask members to ask for leave when 
extended introductions take place. I recognize the member from 
Prince Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a very 
important guest of mine sitting here in the Assembly today, 
actually in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, and that’s my partner, 
Darren. I think most members here would relate that family 
plays such an important part with us getting to be elected 
officials and supporting us through our journey here with our 
workloads and such. And Darren has been ever so supporting to 
me. He’s a dedicated father to not only his children but mine as 
well. And he’s such a loving grandfather to our two grandsons. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, since I’ve been elected, Darren’s been 
following the proceedings here, and this is the first time he gets 
to see everything live. So I’m really happy to have him here, 
and I’d like all members to welcome him to his Legislative 
Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
once again to present a petition to reverse the cuts to the 
Lighthouse program. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that 
in April 2014, the minister of Social Services, the then minister 
said that the Lighthouse in Saskatoon would “. . . take pressure 
off existing detox facilities, hospitals, and police cells, while 
keeping people safe, especially in our brutally cold winters.” 
The petitioners point out that too, on that same day, the minister 
of Health said, “We want to ensure that individuals with mental 
health and addictions issues have a safe place to stay.” 
 
And again they point out that this government has repeatedly 
indicated that the Lighthouse stabilization unit keeps 
individuals out of hospital emergency rooms and jail cells. In 
Saskatoon Health Region, the hospitals in Saskatoon have seen 
record over capacity this last month, Mr. Speaker, and although 
the Lighthouse isn’t the whole problem, making these cuts to 
the Lighthouse stabilization unit certainly don’t help with those 
ER [emergency room] waits, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to read the 
prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately reverse 
their recent cuts to funding that allows extremely 
vulnerable people to access the services of the Lighthouse 
stabilization unit in Saskatoon, and revisit their imposition 
of a strict and narrow definition of homelessness in 
November of 2015 which forced the Lighthouse to cut 
back its hours of essential services in February of 2016, 
and take immediate steps to ensure that homeless people in 
Saskatchewan have emergency shelter, clothing, and food 
available to them before more lives are lost. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens of 
Saskatoon. I so present. 



1292 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2016 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on this 
province. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Saskatoon. I 
do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am standing in my 
place today to present a petition to stop the sales of our Crown 
corporations, and that’s all our Crown corporations, because 
they belong to the people of Saskatchewan. And this particular 
petition, it relates to SaskTel, Mr. Speaker, but it goes for all the 
Crowns. And, Mr. Speaker, some of the points that people are 
raising is that SaskTel creates thousands of good jobs, ensures 
services to parts of the province that other providers ignore, and 
offers the lowest mobile phone rates in the country, Mr. 
Speaker. So our Crown corporations, in particular SaskTel, the 
people of Saskatchewan, I tell them it belongs to them and that 
they don’t want them sold in any way, shape, or form. 
 
And the people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, 
they’re all from throughout Saskatchewan, and on these 
particular pages . . . The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Call on the Saskatchewan Party government to keep their 
promise, stop their plans to sell off SaskTel, and keep all of 
our valued Crown corporations in the hands of the people 
of Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, and as I said, the people that have signed this 
petition are all from throughout Saskatchewan, and on these 
particular pages they’re primarily from Regina, Saskatoon, 
Spruce Home. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition regarding wetlands. The people that have signed the 
petition wanted to bring to our attention the following: wetlands 
serve a very vital function in our ecosystem. They take the form 
of marshes, bogs, fens, swamps, and open water. Wetlands are 
home to wildlife, including waterfowl. They clean the water 
running off of agricultural fields. They protect us from flooding 
and drought, and they are a playground where families can 
explore and play and hunt, Mr. Speaker, duck hunt. 
 
In the worst cases, such as some areas on the prairies, as much 
as 90 per cent of our wetlands have disappeared. As they 
continue to disappear, so too do the many benefits they provide. 

Sound wetland policy will allow Saskatchewan to provide 
sustainable development for all sectors of business in the 
province. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the Government of Saskatchewan to: 
 
Increase funding to do the proper inventory work, putting 
Saskatchewan in a better position to manage the water 
resource; 
 
Speed up the evaluation of high-risk watersheds where 
there is significant damage annually from flooding. This 
evaluation must include a recognition of drainage works 
that could be closed or restored that will alleviate some of 
the issues downstream with respect to flooding and nutrient 
loading; and 
 
Create a sound and transparent mitigation process that 
adequately addresses sustainable development. This 
sequence should first focus on avoiding environmental 
harm whenever possible, before a secondary focus on 
minimizing the harm with compensation being sought only 
when the development is deemed essential and the first two 
stages cannot be met. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by individuals, 
citizens of Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would like to 
present a petition in support of Wakamow Valley Authority. 
And we know that as a result of the passage of The Wakamow 
Valley Authority Amendment Act, 2016 on June 30th, the 
Wakamow Valley Authority lost its statutory funding of 
$127,000 from the Saskatchewan government in addition to its 
$30,000 in supplemental funding. And this loss of annual 
funding negatively affected the ability of Wakamow to maintain 
its lands and repair its facilities and provide services to the 
community of Moose Jaw and surrounding area. Mr. Speaker, 
on June 21st, 2016, the provincial government voted in favour 
of this bill, including the members from Moose Jaw, that 
resulted in the cuts to Wakamow and subsequent job losses. I’d 
like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to immediately repeal The Wakamow Valley Authority 
Amendment Act, 2016 and reinstate statutory funding to the 
Wakamow Valley Authority. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition are from Moose 
Jaw. Thank you so much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 



November 14, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1293 

Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present to you a petition condemning the Sask Party cuts to the 
SAID [Saskatchewan assured income for disability] program. 
After nearly a decade of wasting the economic boom and 
blowing through the savings, the government is now forcing the 
province’s most vulnerable people to pay for the Sask Party’s 
mismanagement. 
 
The Sask Party’s latest cold-hearted cut will take money away 
from people who are unable to work due to a disability. The 
many people who are being hurt by the Sask Party cut live with 
serious illnesses such as multiple sclerosis, cancer, and autism, 
among other illnesses, and that contrary to the Minister of 
Social Services’ claims, the government underfunds clients in 
regards to shelter allowance, and that shelter allowance should 
be reflective of the current rental costs, not availability. I will 
read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to stop their plan to cut 
the SAID funding and immediately restore funding for 
those living with a disability; that shelter allowance is 
reflective of the current rental costs; and that the 
Saskatchewan Party government implement the 
recommendations of the Advisory Group on Poverty 
Reduction. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I got many petitions here that I’m going to present 
today and the residents that signed these petitions are from 
Saskatoon, Regina, Maple Creek, Cabri, Eastend, Abbey, 
Rouleau, Spruce Home, North Battleford, Dalmeny, Lake 
Lenore, Dundurn, Cumberland House, Prince Albert, Air 
Ronge, Ile-a-la-Crosse, Martensville, La Ronge, Canwood, 
Meadow Lake, Hague, Warman, Shellbrook, Buffalo Narrows, 
Carrot River, Harris, Humboldt, and Swift Current. I do so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition regarding child care centres in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Those signing this petition wish to draw our 
attention to the following: many of our licensed non-profit child 
care centres pay commercial property taxes, and this is not done 
in Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario, BC [British Columbia], or New 
Brunswick. 
 
Child care is essential to the economy, yet most centres struggle 
to balance their budget, and this issue threatens both the quality 
and number of spaces. Mr. Speaker, quality child care has an 
enormous positive impact on a child’s future outcomes and 
yields high rates of economic return. 
 
I will read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan recognize 
that licensed non-profit child care centres provide 
programs that are foundational to a healthy society by 

including them in the Saskatchewan education Act and 
exempt all licensed non-profit child care centres in 
Saskatchewan from property tax through changes to 
appropriate legislation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the pages that I’m submitting today are signed by 
residents of Regina. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition calling for a stop to the redirection of funding 
of the Northern Teacher Education Program Council, Inc. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the undersigned residents of the province of 
Saskatchewan wish to bring to your attention the following: that 
NORTEP-NORPAC [northern teacher education 
program-Northern Professional Access College] has been a 
program of higher learning and has changed the educational 
landscape in the North over the past 40 years. 
 
They point out that NORTEP-NORPAC is a successful 
program where, in the most recent report of the last five years 
of graduates, it has been shown that 94 per cent of the teacher 
education program graduates have successfully found 
employment in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
They point out that NORTEP-NORPAC has always 
incorporated the inclusion of the First Nations and Métis 
cultures, languages, and traditional ecological knowledges 
which are so important to northerners and the truth and 
reconciliation process, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I could go on in terms of the things that they point out. It’s a 
long list certainly. But in the prayer that reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker, the petitioners: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan call on the Saskatchewan Party government 
to immediately restore their five-year agreement to fund 
the Northern Teacher Education Program Council, Inc. and 
to continue to fund NORTEP-NORPAC programs in La 
Ronge. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these particular petitions are signed by citizens 
from La Ronge and Air Ronge. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present another petition calling on the government to reverse 
the short-sighted cuts to the Aboriginal court worker program. 
The Government of Saskatchewan cut the budget for the 
Aboriginal court worker program in the 2016-2017 provincial 
budget. Aboriginal court workers play an important role helping 
Aboriginal people in criminal and child apprehension cases. 
Aboriginal peoples are disproportionately represented in 
Saskatchewan’s correctional centres, and Aboriginal court 
workers successfully help to make our communities safer 
through reduced recidivism rates. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 



1294 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2016 

that the Government of Saskatchewan reverse its 
short-sighted and counterproductive cuts to the Aboriginal 
court worker program. 

 
I have pages of this to submit today, Mr. Speaker. Those 
signing this petition today are from Pennant, Regina, Nipawin, 
Shaunavon, Moose Jaw, and Melville. I do so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Saskatchewan Air Ambulance Marks 70th Anniversary 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In February 1946 
the Tommy Douglas government launched the Saskatchewan 
air ambulance service, SAAS, the first non-military service of 
its kind in the world. At that time many Saskatchewan residents 
lived far apart, with an inadequate network of roads to transport 
patients to emergency medical services. 
 
[14:00] 
 
In its first year, SAAS began its service with two planes, and in 
that first year those two planes flew 250 patient missions. 
Saskatchewan people felt some relief knowing accident victims 
could be transported within a few hours to medical facilities in 
either Regina or Saskatoon. Pilots required impressive courage 
and skill to land in pastures and fields while avoiding various 
obstacles, including a documented close call with a bull on a 
landing strip. 
 
Since those early days, Saskatchewan air ambulance has 
transported more than 65,000 patients province-wide and has 
expanded to a 24-hour operation, employing nearly 70 people in 
a variety of roles. Today its three planes can each hold two 
patients on stretchers. The ability to be dispatched in as little as 
30 minutes gives communities in remote locations who may not 
be properly equipped to deal with certain emergencies peace of 
mind that help is on the way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 2016 marks the 70th anniversary of the 
Saskatchewan air ambulance service, which continues to be an 
essential part of health services in our province. Congratulations 
and thank you to the remarkable people who have served us so 
bravely over the past seven decades. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 
 

Diabetes Awareness Month and World Diabetes Day 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. November is Diabetes 
Awareness Month and today is World Diabetes Day, a day 
which seeks to raise awareness about diabetes and also 
commemorates the birthdate of Canadian Sir Frederick Banting, 
the co-discoverer of insulin. More than 90 years ago, Canada 
gave the life-saving gift of insulin to the world. The Diabetes 
Awareness Month is an opportunity for Canadians to celebrate 
this important discovery and create greater awareness of this 
complex chronic disease. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today more than 97,000 people in Saskatchewan 

are living with either type 1 or type 2 diabetes. Diabetes costs 
individuals 5 to 15 years of life expectancy. It contributes to 30 
per cent of strokes, 40 per cent of heart attacks, and 70 per cent 
of all non-traumatic amputations, as well as being the leading 
cause of blindness. 
 
Diabetes must be diagnosed early and managed well in order to 
delay or prevent serious complications. The Diabetes 
Association encourages everyone to visit diabetestest.ca this 
month to complete a short online risk assessment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in commemorating 
Diabetes Awareness Month and World Diabetes Day. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

University of Saskatchewan Student 
Makes Innovative Discovery 

 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 
I’d like to recognize a constituent of mine, University of 
Saskatchewan biology master’s student Rachel Parkinson. 
Parkinson, with the aid of supervisor Jack Gray, has become an 
international pioneer of innovation this year when her use of a 
virtual reality simulator led to a breakthrough in her study on 
the harmful effects of neonic pesticides on locusts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Rachel has created a 3-D [three dimensional] 
flying simulation where insects roam through a video game-like 
environment. By using this simulation on locusts, she has found 
that neonic pesticides, among the most commonly used in 
Canada, may play a role in affecting insects’ ability to detect 
moving objects. This study is paving the way for research on 
the effects of such chemicals on insects with even more 
complex flight patterns such as bees, and may even demonstrate 
how pesticides can contribute to the deaths of millions of bees 
worldwide. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Parkinson’s findings have been presented at 
conferences around the world. Now, going forward, Parkinson 
and Gray are interested in directly testing neonic pesticides on 
bees in hopes that their findings may contribute to the 
protection of the species in the future. Mr. Speaker, I ask all 
members to join me in congratulating Rachel Parkinson’s 
innovative discovery and for her work towards the protection of 
environmentally significant insects. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
University. 
 

Raising Awareness of Childhood Cancer 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning it was 
my pleasure to join with the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health to meet a remarkable group of individuals. Mr. Speaker, 
these individuals are here today to raise the awareness of 
childhood cancer, every one of them impacted by this disease in 
some way. A diagnosis of cancer affects more than just the 
child, Mr. Speaker; it affects family, friends, the school, and the 
whole community. 
 



November 14, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1295 

In the group today are Kim, Lauren, and Isaac Lendvay, dad 
and siblings to Naomi Lendvay, who are constituents of mine. 
Today and on other occasions I have heard Kim and his wife, 
Vanessa, who is unable to be here today, describe their family’s 
experience with their daughter Naomi’s treatment for stage IV 
cancer. This is just one Saskatchewan family, along with others 
here today, who are every day faced with a situation no parent 
should have to. 
 
On September 24th, the Minister Responsible for Rural and 
Remote Health, the member for Saskatoon Westview, and I 
attended a flag-raising ceremony at the Legislative Building to 
publicly recognize September as Childhood Cancer Awareness 
Month. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the diagnosis of childhood cancer is devastating, 
but we can look to inspirational stories of children like Naomi 
Lendvay with extraordinary courage. We thank them for joining 
us today to raise awareness of this disease. Mr. Speaker, 
research is the answer; fundraising is the lock, and awareness is 
the key. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

Saskatoon Hilltops Win Canadian Junior 
Football League Championship 

 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again 
I’m pleased to inform members of the House that the Saskatoon 
Hilltops have won the Canadian Bowl again. Mr. Speaker, for 
the third time in a row and the 19th time in club history, the 
Hilltops have won the prestigious CJFL [Canadian Junior 
Football League] championship. The team battled through a 
back-and-forth game on Saturday to defeat the Westshore 
Rebels 37-25. 
 
The Hilltops struggled with turnovers and penalties throughout 
the championship game, taking points off the board and giving 
their opponents extra opportunities. Despite this extra adversity, 
Mr. Speaker, running back Logan Fischer, the game’s offensive 
MVP [most valuable player], helped lift the team to a victory 
with two touchdown runs and 246 yards in total offence, 
including a massive 202 yards rushing. The defensive side of 
the ball, linebacker Cody Peters earned defensive MVP honours 
for his 11 tackles throughout the game. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Hilltops have much to be proud of. And 
although the game was closer than Head Coach Tom Sergeant 
would have liked, he had to say this about his team: “We just 
believed. We stayed together and we figured it out.” 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating the Saskatoon 
Hilltops, their players, coaches, and fans on winning their third 
straight Canadian Bowl national championship. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Westview. 
 

Breweries Granted Court Injunction 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Mr. Speaker, last Tuesday an Alberta 
court granted an injunction to Saskatoon’s Great Western 

Brewing Company and Toronto’s Steam Whistle against the 
Government of Alberta’s small brewers development program. 
This was an important victory for the brewers over the 
Government of Alberta and its unfair markup on 
out-of-province beer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Alberta NDP [New Democratic Party] 
government introduced a grant and markup program in August 
2016 to subsidize Alberta craft brewers and provide them an 
unfair advantage against craft brewers from any other province, 
including Saskatchewan. Both brewers alleged that the program 
created unconstitutional barriers against brewers from outside 
Alberta. And in May 2017, the Alberta court will hear 
arguments on the larger constitutional issue of trade barriers. In 
the meantime, the brewers will revert back to paying the 
markup price prior to the grant program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in direct response to the Alberta’s NDP predatory 
pricing and direct handouts to its craft beer industry, our 
government introduced a new markup rate structure. It allows 
all craft and regional brewers to make necessary investments for 
them to grow their production, create jobs, and not be unfairly 
impacted by Alberta’s protectionist policies. 
 
Our government supports Great Western Brewing Company 
and their injunction, and will continue to fight for the 
province’s interests in order to keep Saskatchewan strong. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Liquor Markup Structure Supports Beer Industry 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, and speaking of the NDP and 
liquor, the NDP here in Saskatchewan appear to have not done 
their homework again. On October 27th, our government 
introduced a new markup structure to support a growing beer 
industry in our province. The large reduction in markup rates 
will assist brewers to make the necessary investments to 
increase their production volumes and create jobs. 
 
The next day, the NDP issued a reality check on that that once 
again lacked reality. The NDP alleged that large multinational 
brewers were getting a markup cut as well. Wrong. If the 
members opposite paid attention to liquor policy in this 
province, they would have known that since October the 9th, all 
liquor retail store permittees operate under the same level 
playing field and set of rules. All permittees purchase from the 
SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority] 
warehouse at the same warehouse markup, allowing individual 
stores to set their own retail markup, unlike the former 
combined markup structure. 
 
The SLGA has not reduced the retail portion of the markup for 
large national brewers at their stores. Had the NDP taken the 
time to do their research, they would’ve known that fact and not 
spread false information to the public. I ask members opposite 
to support this initiative to create jobs and build our province’s 
brewing industry, as well as do the research from now on. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
 



1296 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2016 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Auditor’s Report and Details of Land Transaction 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, day after day the Premier 
has shown no interest in answering any of the important 
questions that Saskatchewan people have about the Sask Party’s 
GTH land scandal. But perhaps he’s willing to answer some 
questions now that the Sisters of Our Lady of the Missions are 
engaged and wondering about themselves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 2010, under the threat of expropriation, the 
Ministry of Highways purchased 29 acres of land in the GTH 
from the Sisters for 11,000 per acre. Mr. Speaker, a few years 
later, the rest of the nuns’ former adjoining land was bought 
through the GTH for over 100,000 per acre. This time though, 
the land was bought from a Sask Party supporter who flipped 
the land after buying it from a Sask Party-supporting land baron 
from Alberta that had bought the land from the nuns, whose 
identity was concealed and also who rented land to the then 
minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Deputy Premier, why did the Sask Party 
force a group of nuns to sell their land for millions less and then 
pay far, far more than market value to wealthy businessmen 
with connections to that government? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the premise of the 
question is of course wrong. The auditor had, the auditor had 
full authority to look into all of these matters. The auditor was 
tasked by the Public Accounts Committee and by cabinet to 
look into these questions and the transaction. 
 
What the auditor confirmed — again, as recently as last 
Tuesday in Public Accounts Committee — was that there was 
no fraud, there was no conflict of interest and there was no 
wrongdoing, Mr. Speaker. She in fact, she in fact directly 
refuted the conspiracy theories put forward by members 
opposite as directly as she could, Mr. Speaker, proving again 
that, and confirming . . . I would actually quote, Mr. Speaker, 
from the Public Accounts Committee, Jason Wandy, who is the 
lead auditor amongst those tasked with this matter, and what he 
said as recently as Tuesday, and I quote, “The audit did not find 
evidence of conflicts of interest or indications of fraud or 
wrongdoing by GTH management or its board of directors.” 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, no answer there. Of course 
the question was to the Deputy Premier. Of course we haven’t 
got answers day after day from the Premier. And the nonsense 
from the minister again, he should finish maybe some of those 
quotes as well about the auditor. But everyone knows that 
wasn’t a forensic audit. And even the statement that he refers to 
doesn’t exonerate the Sask Party cabinet or lead actors of 
government, Mr. Speaker. It’s scathing and exonerates no one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, rising land prices are one thing, but the nuns got 

only $11,000 per acre for their land in 2010. Then they made a 
deal with a well-connected businessman for $55,000 an acre. 
But, Mr. Speaker, when the sisters heard about the possibility of 
more expropriation by that Sask Party government, they did 
what honest people do. They called the potential buyer and told 
him that $55,000 may be too much. They were worried he 
might get ripped off by the government through expropriation. 
Little did they know, Mr. Speaker, he would be just fine. 
Apparently he knew too because he said he was happy to take 
that risk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the Deputy Premier explain why the nuns 
thought that more expropriation was coming from that Sask 
Party government, but the well-connected businessman 
somehow knew millions were in his future? 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — You know, of course, Mr. Speaker, the 
auditor had full authority to look into all of these matters. The 
auditor had access to all of the documents to which she asked 
for access. She had access to all of the individuals involved in 
the transaction. 
 
She did, on the basis of those documents, including cabinet 
documents, a very thorough report . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . Well the Deputy Leader of the NDP says, bring her back. 
She was back, Mr. Speaker, on Tuesday. And what did she do? 
She confirmed the findings of her report and systematically 
refuted the conspiracy theories of the members opposite, 
including the member for Athabasca. She systematically refuted 
the conspiracy theories of the members opposite and reinforced 
her conclusion, Mr. Speaker, there was no fraud, there was no 
wrongdoing, and there was no conflict of interest. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about $25 
million of Saskatchewan people’s hard-earned dollars here. The 
question wasn’t for the minister who stands up day after day 
and provides tired and growingly arrogant talking points. The 
question was for the Deputy Premier. 
 
The nuns got one price: $11,000 per acre. The two 
well-connected businessmen walked away with an $11 million 
profit of Saskatchewan people’s dollars, Mr. Speaker, at 
$103,000 an acre. Eleven thousand dollars an acre for the nuns, 
$103,000 for the well-connected business men. To the Deputy 
Premier: how can he justify this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well of course, Mr. Speaker, the 
premise of the member’s question is just wrong. With respect to 
the knowledge in the community, I want to quote from the 
Provincial Auditor, from her appearance at the Public Accounts 
Committee just last week. And she said, and I quote, “. . . what 
it showed to us is that there was knowledge within the general 
community that the GTH and Highways was interested in 



November 14, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1297 

purchasing these specific properties . . .” There was general 
knowledge in the community. The auditor confirmed that. 
 
What she also confirmed, Mr. Speaker, what she also 
confirmed, Mr. Speaker, was that there was no fraud, there was 
no conflict of interest, and there was no wrongdoing. The 
auditor very directly and specifically refuted every single one of 
the conspiracy theories put forward by the members opposite — 
directly refuted every single one. No fraud, there was no 
conflict of interest, and there was no wrongdoing. That was her 
conclusion, Mr. Speaker, and we support the work of the 
Provincial Auditor. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the question was to the 
Deputy Premier. The minister with his tired talking points got 
up. But he also said something else. He said the premise of the 
question was wrong. It was a pretty straightforward question to 
the Deputy Premier. One was that the nuns got $11,000 per 
acre, and the business people with connections to the 
government got $103,000 per acre — $11 million profit from 
taxpayers. 
 
My question to the government: what’s wrong with . . . What 
facts does that minister take issues with? To the Deputy 
Premier: how can he justify this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor, at 
the request of the Public Accounts Committee, at the request of 
the Public Accounts Committee, with the support at . . . and 
frankly at the call . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Public 
Accounts Committee heard from the Provincial Auditor just last 
week. The Provincial Auditor was asked by the Public 
Accounts Committee to do an audit of the transaction in 
question. She did that, Mr. Speaker. She conducted that audit 
with full access to all of the documents, including cabinet 
documents, with access to all of the individuals involved, whom 
she interviewed with the support of a forensic auditor as a part 
of her team of experts who looked into all of these matters. 
What she concluded with her team of experts was that there was 
no fraud, there was no conflict of interest, and that there was no 
wrongdoing. She also said in a subsequent interview that there 
were no red flags that would require subsequent investigation. 
 
She addressed all of these matters again as recently as Tuesday. 
The government accepts her report, all 10 recommendations. 
Why won’t the members opposite do likewise? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s that sort of 
pathetic and weak display from this government that has people 
like the brother of Sister Veronica Dunne, Mr. Pat Dunne, here 

and asking questions and working to get to the bottom of this 
scandal. 
 
Day in, day out we see a government that won’t answer basic 
questions. We see a Premier that hides from answering 
questions, a Deputy Premier that’s hiding from answering 
questions here today. 
 
Back to an important question . . . Then a minister with tired 
talking points that gets up and utters a bunch of nonsense, 
makes allegations of which simply aren’t the case, Mr. Speaker. 
The question is to the Deputy Premier: can he explain why the 
nuns thought that more expropriation was coming from the Sask 
Party government, but the well-connected businessmen 
somehow knew better? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, you know who got to the 
bottom of the matter? The Provincial Auditor got to the bottom 
of the matter. At the request of the Public Accounts Committee, 
the Provincial Auditor examined every single one of the 
questions being posed in the Assembly. She examined every 
single one of these matters. And she came to a conclusion, Mr. 
Speaker, which was that there was no fraud, there was no 
wrongdoing, and there was no conflict of interest. That was the 
Provincial Auditor getting to the bottom of the matter, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
She provided a list of recommendations, which we accept. We 
also accept the conclusion of the report. It’s unfortunate that the 
members opposite do not. But with respect to the matter, I’ve 
referenced the knowledge in the general community from the 
testimony of the Provincial Auditor just last week, and I would 
quote it again: “. . . what it showed us is that there was 
knowledge within the general community that the GTH and 
Highways was interested in purchasing these specific 
properties . . .” 
 
That’s the testimony of the Provincial Auditor. We accept the 
recommendations and the report, and we wish the members 
opposite would do likewise. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, again this is, for anyone 
watching this, this is utter nonsense again. The question was to 
the Deputy Premier. These are straightforward questions. 
 
We know that the Ministry of Highways bought land from the 
nuns for far, far less: $11,000 an acre. And we know that the 
nuns were being told that the rest of the land would likely be 
expropriated. So the question to this government and to this 
Deputy Premier — not the minister who can’t answer a 
question, Mr. Speaker, but to the Deputy Premier — is, why did 
those businessmen get the royal treatment from this 
government, the Sask Party government with a sweetheart deal? 
And what does he have to say, what does he have to say to the 
nuns? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 



1298 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2016 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Of course 
we’ve responded to every single question posed by the 
members opposite. And do you know who else responded to 
every single question posed by the members opposite? The 
Provincial Auditor did, Mr. Speaker, last Tuesday. And what 
did she, in her testimony, make clear? She refuted every single 
one of the conspiracy theories advanced by the members 
opposite directly. Every single one in the Public Accounts 
Committee just last week were refuted by the Provincial 
Auditor. 
 
The auditor had full authority to look into all of these matters. 
She did, by her own testimony, a very thorough job of looking 
into the matters, of examining all of the documents, of 
interviewing all of the individuals involved. Her conclusion 
after all of that work, Mr. Speaker, was that there was no fraud, 
there was no wrongdoing, and there was no conflict of interest. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 

Support for the Northern Teacher Education Program 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, last week the Minister of 
Advanced Education took a trip up North. After five hours of 
listening to the reality of northerners from chiefs, from 
stakeholders, community members, and students, the minister 
said that we should “. . . broaden, not shrink, the umbrella of 
northern education teaching program.” She said, “We should do 
more talking and sharing of our collective past in this 
province.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, after listening to students talk about their present 
realities, she tried to compare herself to them because her 
grandparents had it hard too. Mr. Speaker, did the minister hear 
anything that was said to her at that meeting? Will the minister 
show that she was not just talking but listening too? Will she 
reverse the Sask Party’s plan to take away northern control of 
these successful northern programs? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — I spent the day in La Ronge on Thursday 
listening to stakeholders and community members and found it 
very productive. I understand that tensions are running high, 
and the prospect of change can sometimes be difficult. But I 
think it’s great news, Mr. Speaker, that NORTEP [northern 
teacher education program] council is leading consultations 
with other post-secondary institutions to find the best solution 
for teacher programming in arts and science education in the 
North for everybody, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, how can the minister act so 
unaware of the current reality of indigenous people? She 
doesn’t even acknowledge that assimilation happened to 
indigenous people in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yes, people had it hard back in the day, her 
grandparents too. In residential school, kids weren’t provided 
any education past grade 8 since they assumed they could only 
be labourers anyway. There were laws set up just to hold 

indigenous people back, and they tried to force the Indian out of 
the child. And because of all of this, indigenous people are still 
working on healing and reconciliation. Mr. Speaker, today 
indigenous kids are twice as likely to live in poverty. And on 
reserve, 60 per cent of our children do. That is the reality today. 
 
The minister said this cut is “. . . not just about saving money 
when times are tight.” So when she points out to students, who 
are desperately trying to save a post-secondary education 
program that works, that her grandparents weren’t bitter, Mr. 
Speaker, what is she insinuating? That we should just suck it 
up? Why is she being so patronizing to the northern people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The comment, Mr. 
Speaker, by the member opposite is a complete 
mischaracterization. And it was said in the spirit of truth and 
reconciliation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What I said is that, like the story that one young woman from 
La Ronge shared about some of the hardships that her 
grandparents had faced, so it was with my grandmothers, my 
grandparents. Lunch money was also unheard of. They also had 
no running water or indoor plumbing, and ultimately they didn’t 
have the access to education, certainly to post-secondary 
education, that perhaps they should have had, that they 
deserved. They too, Mr. Speaker, experienced child poverty. 
 
What I said was that we should draw on our own stories, share 
stories as different people with different backgrounds in this 
province, draw more from our collective past in order to move 
into our future together, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Response to Northerners’ Concerns 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, for the last 40 years this 
program has been graduating successful teachers who stay in 
the North. And the minister said that they are “. . . trying to 
make sure that the North has a sustainable post-secondary 
program and opportunity that it deserves.” Is her message to the 
kids in the North that we don’t deserve the NORTEP-NORPAC 
program, that we in the North deserve a cut? And, Mr. Speaker, 
we’re getting tired of the patronizing tone of the Saskatchewan 
Party government. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party say they care about the North. But I 
want to shift gears on to another aspect of northern life, and it’s 
not just a lot of talk that people are asking the Sask Party for 
leadership on. This is followed by cut after cut. And one of the 
most recent examples, in discussing some of the tragedies in the 
North, the Premier stood in this House and over and over again 
told people to call 811 if they needed help. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
people have tried in the middle of the night, and it is not 
available. How could the Sask Party recommend a service that 
isn’t there when people desperately need it? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 



November 14, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1299 

Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege to 
travel to La Ronge last week, along with the Minister of 
Government Relations, again with the Premier to visit with 
many leaders from the North and hear some of the concerns and 
some of the challenges that they do still face. And, Mr. Speaker, 
it was quite encouraging to hear a lot of the good-news stories 
that are coming. And realizing that some of the front-line care 
workers are getting tired, but what we were hearing from the 
leaders in the North is that they’re very appreciative of the level 
of care, and along with the local emergency operations teams as 
well as the ones in Stanley and in La Ronge, feeling that the 
coordination of supports is getting a lot better. 
 
[14:30] 
 
What we did hear — I appreciate the member from Cumberland 
being there as well — from one young lady was saying that 
maybe the youth helpline was a little bit onerous to use, or 
maybe the 811 number is a little bit onerous to use. But we did 
hear from Chief Tammy Cook-Searson and other leaders from 
there was that there is also First Nations phone lines that are 
available with quick access to the youth there that have people 
staffed as well. So, Mr. Speaker, more work to do, but we’re 
committed to working with our partners in the North. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, of course now we know that 
811 is only one piece of the puzzle. We still need good 
follow-up services in addition to this phone service. But when 
people tried to call the number at the Premier’s suggestion, a 
mental health worker was not available. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have called continually for the implementation 
of the mental health and addictions plan that the ministry 
commissioned. But once again, no real action from the Sask 
Party government, only after we saw six terrible suicides that 
the Premier went up North. But the question we ask, now what? 
Even after the Premier referred people to 811, it still isn’t being 
staffed all the time with a mental health worker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will the talk come to an end, and when will 
the Sask Party stop punishing the North? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, this government has 
been very focused on listening to our partners in the North, our 
friends in the North, and responding to the needs, Mr. Speaker. 
I mean I explained here, I think, in the House last week that 
even prior to the terrible tragedies in La Loche, we were up 
north and listening to some of the concerns of the people in La 
Loche and responded to those very quickly as well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
As well, we’ve expanded training for northern people from the 
North that will be better trained and have those opportunities to 
serve in their own communities, Mr. Speaker. Whether we’re 
training nurses in Ile-a-la-Crosse or mental health workers 
across the North and having them have the opportunity to 
practise in the North and support our citizens in the North as 
well, Mr. Speaker, or if it’s the expansion of psychiatric clinics, 

whether it’s remote presence technology, or people on the 
ground travelling up to the North to perform those psychiatric 
clinics, Mr. Speaker, we in fact know that those clinics for the 
most part are double. Then the access to psychiatric care is 
increased as well, Mr. Speaker. So again, more work to do. 
We’re committed to working with our partners in the North. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Supreme Court Ruling and Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, last week the BC Teachers’ 
Federation won a historic victory in a ruling that took the 
Supreme Court justices a mere 20 minutes to decide. The ruling 
affirms teachers’ ability to negotiate caps on classroom sizes 
and hold the BC government to account to make sure that their 
education system is properly funded. It was a long-fought 
victory for teachers in British Columbia, a victory for all who 
believe in properly funded education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they won despite the BC government fighting 
them every step of the way. And it wasn’t just their own 
government, Mr. Speaker, that BC teachers were up against. 
No, the Sask Party were fighting them too. The Sask Party sent 
lawyers all the way to the Supreme Court to argue against the 
teachers’ ability to limit class sizes and ensure a certain number 
of teacher specialists in schools. Why did the Sask Party waste 
legal resources and taxpayer dollars to fight BC teachers instead 
of investing in our own classrooms? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier, the Minister 
of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the situation in BC, the 
court situation, we haven’t seen a written decision on that. It 
was rendered orally. So we’ll review the decision when it 
comes down, and we’ll make sure that it’s reviewed carefully 
and applied carefully.  
 
I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, to the members opposite, that 
since we have been in government, we have increased the 
operating grant to divisions by 33 per cent when enrolment has 
gone up 9 per cent. Mr. Speaker, the members opposite all 
throw it back and say it includes capital. Mr. Speaker, it does 
not. That in fact, Mr. Speaker, is the grant to the operating . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, in 2007-2008 the operating 
grant was $1.41 billion, including the education property tax of 
$714 million. That amount increased in 2016-17 to $1.88 
billion. At the same time EPT [education property tax] went 
down to $680 million. Mr. Speaker, we’ve added 750 more 
teachers, 53 per cent more child care spaces, 104 per cent more 
kindergarten spaces, and record reductions in property tax. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps the minister will tell the 



1300 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2016 

members of the SSBA [Saskatchewan School Boards 
Association] today how rosy things are in the classroom 
because I don’t think they’re buying it, and neither are 
Saskatchewan teachers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party decided to waste tax dollars to 
meddle in legal battles in other provinces to gang up against 
teachers because they know that this Supreme Court ruling 
might mean that they’ll actually have to start investing more in 
education here at home, and they’ll have to start dealing with 
cuts that they’ve made to classrooms in this province. And they 
might have to start respecting the agreements that they signed, 
Mr. Speaker, because our children’s classroom sizes are larger 
than ever and our teachers are overwhelmed.  
 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes to education in Saskatchewan, 
Saskatchewan children should come first. So why did the 
minister decide that he needed to join a Supreme Court battle to 
undermine teachers, and why is he not focused on strengthening 
our children’s classrooms? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, members over there should 
not be talking about the record of what went on in this place. 
Their record was closing 176 schools. During their period of 
time, 32,000 students left the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s look and see where the investment was in our 
province. Regina Elphinstone-Centre, one of their members: 
Scott Collegiate, $31 million; Sacred Heart, $27 million; Seven 
Stones, $20 million. Regina Douglas Park, one of theirs as well: 
Douglas Park School, $20 million; Arcola, $18 million. Prince 
Albert Northcote: St. Anne’s, $15 million. Saskatoon Nutana: 
major renovations, $14 million. Saskatoon Centre: E.D. Feehan, 
major renovations, $6 million. Saskatoon Riversdale . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I’m having difficulties hearing the minister. 
Could we please show decorum and listen to the minister’s 
response. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Saskatoon Riversdale: St. Mary’s, brand 
new school, $16 million. Athabasca: Birch Ridge School, new 
school, $4 million, money shared with the feds, Mr. Speaker; 
Cumberland, Churchill Community High School, a major 
addition, $34 million; Regina Rosemont, Rosemont Community 
School, new roof; Martin Collegiate, new roof; McLurg School, 
new roof. And in the critic’s own constituency, Connaught 
School, something, Mr. Speaker, which she opposed, $21 
million for a school that that member did not want to see 
happen. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I wish to request leave to withdraw Bill No. 41, The 
Coroners Amendment Act, 2016 from the order paper. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has requested leave to withdraw 
Bill No. 41, The Coroners Amendment Act, 2016 from the order 
paper. Is leave granted? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Consent has been granted. The 
Government House Leader may proceed to move his motion. 
 

BILL WITHDRAWN 
 

Bill No. 41 — The Coroners Amendment Act, 2016 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, pursuant to rule 15(3), I 
move to withdraw Bill No. 41, The Coroners Amendment Act, 
2016 from the order paper. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved to 
withdraw Bill No. 41, The Coroners Amendment Act, 2016 
from the order paper. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Pursuant to rule no. 15(3), it is the 
order that Bill No. 41, The Coroners Amendment Act, 2016 
withdraw from the order paper. 
 
I recognize the Opposition Leader. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — I request leave to introduce a guest. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, 
it’s my honour to introduce someone who’s seated on the floor 
of our gallery just behind us here today, someone that’s been a 
strong and remarkable leader in our community and our 
province for many, many years, that being Ms. Louise Simard, 
MLA for Lakeview for a good period of time, and minister of 
Health, minister of the Status of Women, a well-respected 
lawyer within our province, and a lot of work from a national 
perspective as well including continued efforts in leadership on 
matters of health and wellness for Canadians and for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
It’s my pleasure to welcome Louise to her Assembly. I ask all 
members to join with me in welcoming Louise Simard to our 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, leave to introduce guests 
as well. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Deputy Premier. 



November 14, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1301 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
join with the member opposite in welcoming Louise Simard to 
the Assembly. As one recovering lawyer to another, I’m not 
sure becoming Minister of Health is a real good solution to that 
problem but would like to wish her all the best in the House. 
And I’m not sure where her career is taking her, but I know she 
had a great career in the Assembly and in the community as 
well, and want to wish her the very best and welcome her to the 
House today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 8 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 8 — The Summary 
Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure and 
honour to rise and join in the debate around Bill No. 8, An Act 
to amend The Summary Offences Procedure Act, 1990. I’ve had 
the pleasure of reviewing the comments made by my colleagues 
previous to this as well as comments by the minister opposite, 
Mr. Speaker, and it’s helped for me to have a good 
understanding of the bill. I’ve also had the opportunity to both 
read the bill as well as the explanatory notes, Mr. Speaker, and I 
found them quite helpful. 
 
This bill makes a few changes to The Summary Offences 
Procedure Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker, that will create some 
changes. But I’m looking forward to having the opportunity to 
discuss them with the minister in a more full context, Mr. 
Speaker, in committee, which I imagine will likely be 
happening relatively soon. 
 
I do want to speak to some of the changes that are proposed in 
this bill, Mr. Speaker, one of them being section 4 which is 
going to be amended to allow for the swearing of informations 
by phone. I’m assuming this is going to allow for a certain level 
of increased expediency in having informations sworn. Off the 
top of my head, I can’t think of a whole lot of issues that we 
would have with respect to that, but I would want to make sure 
that we’re fully complying with any type of issues. 
 
I know there’s sometimes an issue around informations not 
being sworn properly or there being errors in informations that 
can actually result in charges being withdrawn or acquittals, Mr. 
Speaker. So we want to make sure that when informations are 
being sworn that they’re being sworn in a . . . that essentially 
everything’s being looked at, that there’s no errors so that there 
isn’t any, like I said, withdrawals of charges because of 
something that would be largely an administrative issue, Mr. 
Speaker. 

Another change that is being proposed is — and this one’s a 
little bit beefier, I suppose, Mr. Speaker — is it’s going to 
essentially sort of change the way fines work and fine 
extensions work with respect to summary offences, matters that 
relate to that. For example, section 21(1) will change sort of the 
extension for time request. It’s removing that portion from the 
Act which . . . When that happens, it will basically mean that an 
individual who is trying to request an extension of time for 
payment, they will no longer be able to do that in front of a 
justice of peace. It’s going to actually be changing to more of an 
administrative process through the fine collection branch, is 
what it’s going to be called. 
 
So I’m going to be interested to learn a little bit more about how 
this administrative process is going to work, Mr. Speaker. I 
understand that there’s going to be an appointment of a director 
of fines and extensions, which is a new position, I believe, and 
it kind of marries into section 26 changes which will include the 
admin process for fine payment. So like I said, I’m always 
interested when things are being moved to more administrative 
in nature. 
 
[14:45] 
 
I’m assuming that this could mean potentially a more . . . It’s 
possible that this could mean an easier access for individuals 
when making requests for time extensions, for example, for fine 
payments. But it could also be more difficult. I’m not quite 
sure. So I’m interested to know what the actual process is going 
to look like — for individuals, I understand that, I believe 
they’re going to have to fill out a form — and what sort of 
policy the individual who’s making that decision is basing their 
policies on. 
 
Largely when these decisions are made in front of a Justice of 
the Peace or a judge, Mr. Speaker, there is the ability for a bit 
more discretion the judge will take into, or the Justice of the 
Peace will take into that individual’s whole circumstances. 
Perhaps there is reasons why an extension for time for payment 
is needed. Oftentimes it’s because of an inability to pay, or 
issues with other payment obligations that the individual is 
faced with. 
 
If we’re dealing with traffic safety issues, as an example, then 
there can be some issues with respect to employment. And if 
one is having difficulty finding employment, then one is going 
to have difficulty paying a fine, Mr. Speaker, and we don’t 
necessarily want to bog up the court with multiple additional 
charges that are faced if an individual is unable to pay a fine. 
 
So I hope . . . All I’m saying, in a nutshell, Mr. Speaker, is that 
there’s some sort of discretion that’s available to this individual 
who’s going to be making these decisions, and that the removal 
of the power from the Justice of the Peace or a judge to this new 
individual or this new administrative individual, Mr. Speaker, 
won’t remove the . . . essentially the level of discretion that’s 
enjoyed at present. 
 
Another thing that I’m interested to know is whether or not 
there’s an appeal process, Mr. Speaker. If there’s an individual 
who has an issue with the fine extension, what sort of level of 
oversight essentially of the decisions of this administrator are 
going to be included, and how we’re going to be able to watch 



1302 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2016 

over that to ensure that there’s no issues, that there’s no issues 
there. And if an individual or if a series of individuals are 
having issues with the decisions of this administrator, that 
there’s an avenue available for there to be some sort of an 
appeal process as well. 
 
Another interesting thing, and I’m not entirely sure based on my 
reading of the changes, Mr. Speaker, is I’m not entirely sure if 
it’s taking away judges’ discretion completely for the timeframe 
for payment. So I can tell that if an individual wants to ask for 
an extension for time they’re not able to do it, but if a judge 
automatically decides that they want to extend what I believe is 
the automatic 15-day time period for a fine payment, that there 
is an avenue there for the judge to do that. 
 
And I’m always quite concerned when we’re removing 
discretion from judges or from justices of the peace and moving 
it towards something that’s a bit more administrative or a bit 
more rigorous, that we can be . . . it actually ultimately creates 
problems within the justice system, Mr. Speaker, when we’re 
not able to account for individuals’ specific life circumstances 
for example, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So there’s a few questions that I have with respect to this bill. 
There’s a few questions that I’m going to have with the minister 
about how this is going to work. I know I will have that 
opportunity as critic at committee shortly to do that, and I look 
forward to doing that as well as meeting with stakeholders and 
ensuring there’s no issues in that respect, and essentially all the 
t’s have been dotted and the i’s have been crossed. So with that, 
Mr. Speaker, I’m prepared to let this bill go to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the member that the Bill No. 8, The Summary 
Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 
that Bill No. 8, The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment 
Act, 2016 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 19 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 19 — The Film 
and Video Classification Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

Mr. McCall: — Lights, camera, action, Mr. Speaker. Good to 
join debate this afternoon, take my place and get a few words 
on the record to The Film and Video Classification Act, 2016. 
And as pointed out by the minister in his second reading 
speech, this will repeal the existing legislation and replace it 
with new legislation. It will set up authority to “. . . allow the 
administration of the industry to be performed by an official, 
the director of film classification, and not by a board,” which is 
new, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It will “. . . allow registration of exhibitors and distributors to 
continue in perpetuity provided that annual reports are provided 
by registrants.” You know, sort of a variation of the current 
trajectory. And that the “. . . measures are consistent with other 
programs administered by [the good folks at] the Financial and 
Consumer Affairs Authority.” 
 
The minister also references the fact that Saskatchewan “. . . has 
an agreement with British Columbia film classification office to 
classify most films to be shown in our province.” And wherein 
BC collects the fee, remits half to us, we’d be interested to 
know what sort of dollars are involved there, Mr. Speaker. And 
that relates to a point that I’ll be making later on in my remarks. 
 
And that, you know, the minister reports that that arrangement 
works well and that they think that the director versus a board 
will be a positive development and will streamline the process. 
And as such, that is what they’re going forward with. So again, 
you know, we can debate the merits of that approach, Mr. 
Speaker. But the minister also stated that opening the Act or 
providing new legislation, having repealed the old Act, that it 
provides an opportunity to address a number of issues, such as 
where the director is given the discretion to limit classification 
to a specific exhibitor, time, or location, and also that the new 
Act more logically being organized. And here’s where we’ve 
got some question to raise with the minister, and this is perhaps 
best addressed through the committee process, Mr. Speaker, but 
certainly where the minister states that “Consultations 
respecting the legislation with exhibitors, distributors, industry 
association, and other jurisdictions revealed no issues with the 
proposal.” 
 
And I guess at this time, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read into the 
record a letter that was addressed this fall to the minister 
responsible for the legislation, the Minister of Justice, and it is 
dated November 2nd, 2016, and again, Mr. Speaker, keeping in 
mind what the minister had to say about consultations and how 
this letter comes to be on the public record. Anyway, to get this 
correspondence on the record, Mr. Speaker: 
 

On behalf of PAVED Arts, a charitable, not-for-profit, 
Artist-run Centre in Saskatoon, I am writing to you 
regarding the Film and Video Classification Act. PAVED 
Arts is a multi-faceted production and exhibition centre for 
artists working with photography, video, audio and digital 
media. As an organization which receives public funding 
and provides free arts programming, which often includes 
video and film presentation both in our facility and in 
public spaces and off-site partner venues, I would like to 
clarify where our activities might intersect with the Film 
and Video Classification Act. As I understand the 
definitions in the act, I believe PAVED and many other 
arts organizations in this province could be identified under 



November 14, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1303 

the following: 
 

d) “exhibition” means showing, projecting, or otherwise 
displaying of film in a theatre to the public; 
e) “exhibitor” means a person who engages in exhibition 
of films on a continual and successive basis [and] 
f) “film” means photographic moving picture film or any 
other means by which moving pictures are displayed and 
includes video tape, video cassette, video discs, or other 
similar video devices by which moving pictures are 
shown, projected or displayed; [and] 
m) “theatre” means a building or hall or any premises, 
room or place, including an open-air place, to which the 
public is admitted and where film is or is to be shown, 
projected or displayed. 

 
Carrying on with the letter and getting that on the record, Mr. 
Speaker, the author of the letter states: 
 

I understand the act is currently being reviewed, and this 
would be a good opportunity to ensure that its wording and 
application reflect its intent. There are a few reasons for 
my concern about this legislation. First, as a public art 
gallery, we help artists share their work, which can be 
challenging and thought provoking. No other aspect of our 
programming (sound art, live performances, photography) 
requires classification before it is publicly presented. If the 
video or films we exhibit fall under the classification act 
we would have an added level of administration which 
would hinder our operations, and additionally the fines 
associated with the act (Section 14) could financially 
destabilize our organization. 

 
Carrying on, quoting from the letter, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The reasons I outlined above apply to PAVED Arts and 
many other arts organizations in Saskatchewan that also 
present film and video publicly in different capacities. I 
have been in contact with many of them, and it became 
clear that there was a lack of knowledge about the film and 
video classification and its relevance to their respective 
programming. 
 
It is for the above reasons that I feel an exemption (Section 
13) would be a suitable amendment to the act that would 
offer the same protection to art galleries and cultural 
organizations as provided to religious and educational 
institutions. 
 
I would be pleased to meet with you to further discuss the 
contents of this letter at your earliest convenience. 

 
Carrying on to the bottom of the letter, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Sincerely, Alexander Rogalski, executive director, 
PAVED Arts. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Rogalski and the organization on which he 
speaks on their behalf raises some very valid concerns which 
certainly demand answers and hopefully remedy from this 
government as regards this piece of legislation. He also 
provides comments which, you know, in terms of the 
assurances that were made around the consultation that had 

taken place, perhaps that is not as complete as we would hope, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in the aim of pursuing improvements and remedies and to 
get that work done so that again folks out there operating these 
kind of organizations, oftentimes, Mr. Speaker, on not even a 
shoestring but probably, you know, a good third of a shoestring, 
that they not be encumbered by unnecessary red tape and 
bureaucratic wrangling; that you know, this should be . . . Again 
there’s that balance in terms of the classification. But this is 
perhaps a good argument for remedies to be forthcoming. 
 
And again where we see . . . You know, we’re glad to see that 
where different of these endeavours on the part of government 
have gone wrong, it’s not unimaginable that the government 
takes a step back and moves to correct the action. 
 
And certainly, Mr. Speaker, we will be looking forward to the 
government’s more detailed response that is available, that is on 
offer at the committee stage hearing of the bill. And in that 
respect, Mr. Speaker, we are prepared to see this particular bill, 
No. 19, The Film and Video Classification Act, 2016 move on 
to committee so we can engage in just that kind of consideration 
of this legislation. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the member that Bill No. 19, The Film and Video 
Classification Act, 2016 be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 
that Bill No. 19, The Film and Video Classification Act, 2016 
be committed to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice. 
 
[15:00] 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 29 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 29 — The Justices 
of the Peace Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 
sur les juges de paix be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise and add my comments to the debate around Bill No. 29, 
The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act. Similar to other bills, 
Mr. Speaker, that I’m speaking to today, I had the pleasure of 



1304 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2016 

reviewing comments from my colleagues as well as the 
comments that the Minister of Justice made when he tabled this 
legislation. And I’ve also had the opportunity to both review the 
legislative changes as well as the explanatory notes, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So this bill is . . . From what I understand, it repeals The Traffic 
Safety Court of Saskatchewan Act and then creates a regime 
where traffic safety issues can be resolved differently than the 
Act that was provided now. 
 
From what I understand, these are amendments that have been 
requested by the Saskatchewan Justice of the Peace Association 
in terms of some amendments to improve and clarify the 
commission’s processes, as well as I believe making the 
legislation a bit more reflective of what the current court 
practices are, Mr. Speaker. From what I understand, some of 
these, for example . . . I can’t quite remember . . . One of these 
. . . Oh I believe it was traffic, traffic justices that were a part of 
this Act are being removed essentially because no traffic justice 
has been appointed under the Act since April of 2006. So it’s 
really just catching up essentially, Mr. Speaker, to the court 
procedures that already exist in Saskatchewan. 
 
So it’s creating a new category of Justice of the Peace, which is 
the senior Justice of the Peace. And the senior Justice of the 
Peace is going to be able to impose fines or order a driver to 
take driver’s training for traffic offences. 
 
Similarly the bill is going to allow for the creation of an 
assistant supervising Justice of the Peace who will take over for 
the supervising Justice of the Peace if they’re not around, and 
also assist them with some administrative support or some of 
their more administrative duties, Mr. Speaker. Again essentially 
clarifying and modernizing the legislation and making it more 
in tune with practice that already exists. 
 
I believe that the bill is also going to include some payments, 
some provision payments so that these senior justices of the 
peace can get paid, Mr. Speaker — always a good thing to 
make sure that our judges and justices of the peace are getting 
paid — and some other fairly minor changes to reflect that 
change, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I understand I’ll have the opportunity to speak with the 
Minister of Justice and ask some questions with him with 
respect to these changes. So I’m going to be interested to hear 
more about the Saskatchewan justice of the peace organization 
and the recommendations that they had made with respect to 
these legislative changes. I’ll be interested to know if there were 
any legislative changes that were requested that were not made 
with respect to this Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So at this point I don’t feel I have anything else to say to this 
bill. I think this is probably more appropriate for me to have a 
conversation with the minister at committee. So with that in 
mind, I’m prepared to allow this bill to move to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the member that Bill No. 29, The Justices of the 
Peace Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, I designate that Bill No. 
29, The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2016 be 
committed to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 30 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 30 — The 
Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy 
Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure and 
honour to rise yet again this afternoon to speak to yet another 
Justice bill, this one being Bill No. 30, An Act to amend The 
Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act bill. 
 
There’s an accompanying Act, Mr. Speaker, that I’ll be 
speaking to next, another one that deals with some changes, 
some privacy changes and freedom of information changes as 
well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So from what I understand, most of these two pieces of 
legislation come from a report, a 2015 report called It’s Time to 
Update, where the Information and Privacy Commissioner 
called for a number of changes to information and privacy 
protections in Saskatchewan. I believe from what I understand 
from speaking with my colleagues, Mr. Speaker, these are 
changes that have been a long time coming, and it’s been a little 
bit of a slow process in terms of getting these legislative 
changes, despite the fact that the Privacy Commissioner has 
been calling for them and been asking for more clarification on 
their role and some broadening abilities as well, Mr. Speaker. 
So I’m happy to see that this bill includes some of these 
recommendations. 
 
Some of those recommendations include creating a new offence 
for snooping on a person’s personal information, and extending 
the rules for personal information protection to members of this 
Legislative Assembly offices as well as cabinet ministers’ 
offices. This recommendation is a little bit interesting, Mr. 
Speaker, as it came, from what I understand from colleagues on 
this side, after the Premier’s office sent an individual’s personal 
information to the media after he spoke out about poor quality 
seniors’ care in Saskatoon. And from what I remember, 
although I wasn’t an MLA at the time, Mr. Speaker, from 
seeing on the news, I believe he was subsequently fired. 
 



November 14, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1305 

So there needs to be protection for individuals who are speaking 
to their MLAs and providing information to their MLAs, and 
there shouldn’t be a chill in the air, Mr. Speaker, if individuals 
have concerns about policies of their government, that if they 
speak out against those policies that they’re going to receive 
some sort of ramification or repercussion from their own 
government, which is what happened in this particular instance. 
 
We need to make sure, Mr. Speaker, that that never happens 
again because this is the people’s Assembly, Mr. Speaker. We 
all act on behalf of the people and we need to ensure that people 
feel safe and like they’re able to approach their MLA or to 
approach any MLA if they have concerns or they have any 
issues with respect to government procedure. 
 
From reading the minister’s remarks, Mr. Speaker, it sounds 
like, and from looking at the report, there are quite a number of 
changes that had been requested by the Privacy Commissioner 
and they all are not included in these legislative changes. From 
reading the, like I said, reading the minister’s remarks, it 
appears that he approached the Privacy Commissioner and 
asked him specifically what particular legislative changes were 
priorities for this Privacy Commissioner and that those are 
reflective now in these changes, Mr. Speaker. So there are still 
important recommendations in fact that weren’t included in 
these legislative changes. And if we have one main criticism of 
these two bills, the two accompanying privacy bills, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s that these haven’t quite gone quite far enough. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand from reading the minister’s remarks 
that there is still going to be some consultation in terms of 
including — the word he used was “most” of — the 
recommendations that were requested into future legislation, or 
if legislation isn’t needed, that future changes will occur. One 
of the concerns I have, Mr. Speaker, is I’m not totally sure what 
“most” means and what specific recommendations that 
government perhaps has already decided that they’re not going 
to implement, Mr. Speaker. So I’ll be interested to having that 
discussion with the minister at committee. 
 
Some of the recommendations that we feel are important that 
weren’t included . . . Although perhaps the Privacy 
Commissioner didn’t include them as a priority for this 
particular legislation. I don’t see any reason for why it wasn’t, 
frankly, included in this legislative change, as it’s not too 
onerous on government or doesn’t cost a ton of money for the 
government to include these changes, one of them being the 
change to the maximum time for a response from a freedom of 
information request from 30 days to 20 days. That was a 
recommendation that the Privacy Commissioner made that 
wasn’t quite implemented. 
 
The other one is that the freedom of information and protection 
of privacy include a requirement that it be updated every five 
years to respond to modern technology. And that’s a really 
important recommendation, Mr. Speaker, so we essentially 
don’t get into the situation that we got ourselves into this time, 
needing this legislative change. I understand that there wasn’t 
any substantive legislative change with respect to this area for 
quite a long period of time. And it creates quite an issue, Mr. 
Speaker, when we’re talking about, for example, disclosing 
electronic documents, Mr. Speaker. 
 

And technology tends to run a little bit faster than we do, but I 
can only imagine in five years what kind of technological 
changes will be implemented that will affect this House, Mr. 
Speaker, and government and all of its various ministries, Mr. 
Speaker, in the future. I can’t even imagine what it’s going to 
look like two years from now, Mr. Speaker. So it’s important to 
make sure that there’s a legislative requirement that we’re 
always reviewing this legislation, and we’re always updating it 
because oftentimes what can be considered more pressing 
matters will sort of take the day and will push these kinds of 
things to the back burner until ultimately the legislation almost 
becomes problematic to the point of redundant, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So those were some of the changes that would’ve been nice to 
have seen in this bill. Unfortunately we’re not seeing it in this 
bill, but despite that, some of the changes that have been 
requested seem appropriate. They are requests that were 
recommended by the Privacy Commissioner who is an 
independent individual outside of this House. 
 
I understand I’ll have the opportunity to have this dialogue with 
the minister at committee, and I look forward to doing so, Mr. 
Speaker, and I hope the Privacy Commissioner is there as well 
so I can have some discussion with that individual too. So with 
that, I’m prepared to move this Bill to committee at this time. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the member that Bill No. 30, The Freedom of 
Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016 be 
now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 
that Bill No. 30, The Freedom of Information and Protection of 
Privacy Amendment Act, 2016 be committed to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 31 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 31 — The Local 
Authority Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy 
Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s yet again my 
pleasure and honour to rise and speak to this specific bill, Bill 
No. 31, An Act to amend The Local Authority Freedom of 
Information and Protection of Privacy Act. 



1306 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2016 

Mr. Speaker, as I had said earlier this afternoon, this is sort of 
the sister legislation to the other legislation I was just talking 
about, The Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy 
Act, but it does deal with some things that are a bit different. 
Instead of dealing with more government and ministry, this 
one’s dealing more with local authorities — for example, police 
forces, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This legislative change, like the legislative change I’d just 
spoken about before, comes after the Privacy Commissioner 
making several recommendations in the 2015 report. It’s time 
for an update, it was called, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as I said before, there were many recommendations and 
requests made by the Privacy Commissioner in terms of 
updating what was essentially this outdated legislation. Mr. 
Speaker, some of the requests have been implemented in this 
legislation or these bills, Mr. Speaker, but there are, like I said 
earlier, many recommendations by the Privacy Commissioner 
that still remain outstanding. So we’d be interested to know 
how much longer it’s going to take, frankly, Mr. Speaker, 
before all of these recommendations are implemented. 
 
The Privacy Commissioner plays an extremely important role in 
the function of government, Mr. Speaker, and it’s very 
important that we make sure that both the legislation is up to 
date and that the Privacy Commissioner has roles and duties 
that are clearly outlined and that are broad enough so that the 
Privacy Commissioner can maintain his mandate. 
 
So this particular bill will update the local freedom of 
information and protection of privacy Act, Mr. Speaker, and it 
includes, as I said, some of the recommendations that were 
made in his report. One of them that’s quite interesting is that it 
will include police forces under this legislation, which will now 
make police forces subject to freedom of information requests. 
From what I understand, Mr. Speaker, this is in line with 
freedom of information and privacy legislation in other 
jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker, that were sort of late to the party in 
terms of including police forces in this legislation. I haven’t 
spoken with police forces on this legislative change yet, Mr. 
Speaker, so I’ll be interested to hear the consultation that the 
minister has done with respect to this. 
 
[15:15] 
 
I imagine this will put a bit of an additional amount of pressure 
on police forces. However as I said, it keeps us in line with 
other jurisdictions that have similar provisions in place and it 
allows for a level of transparency and accountability, Mr. 
Speaker, onto police forces with members of the public, which 
is something that sometimes we hear as concerns that people of 
the public have. And when transparency is increased, Mr. 
Speaker, then typically trust is also increased in parallel. So I 
think it’s very important that this change is happening, but 
again as I said, it would be very important to ensure that 
everyone has been properly consulted and there’s no flags or 
issues here that government hasn’t quite thought through. 
 
Another change that this bill is including from the 
recommendations is it creates a new offence for snooping on 
personal information, Mr. Speaker, which is similar to one of 
the changes that will also be in the Bill No. 30. So it’s just 

basically mirroring that, including ensuring that there’s that 
extra provision, there’s that extra level of teeth essentially in 
this bill should there be anything that goes awry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I said before in my last comment there are provisions in this 
bill that should have been included that weren’t included. There 
were recommendations made by the Privacy Commissioner that 
this government has chosen to not implement at this time, one 
of those being changing the maximum time for a response from 
30 days to 20 days. It’s very important that we make this 
change, Mr. Speaker. From what I understand those who . . . I 
haven’t done any freedom of information requests on my own, 
Mr. Speaker, but from those I heard who have done them, 
oftentimes they’re getting their freedom of information request 
responses well in excess of the 30 days that’s currently required 
under the legislation. So it’s really important that these FOI 
[freedom of information] requests, Mr. Speaker, are responded 
to promptly and done in a way that creates transparency, Mr. 
Speaker, both within government as well as local authority, as 
this bill has authority over. 
 
Similar to the last bill, Mr. Speaker, one of the changes that 
should have been included in this bill that wasn’t, would be a 
requirement that it be updated every five years to respond to 
technology. As I had said in the previous bill, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
very important that we ensure that our legislation doesn’t get 
outdated, especially when we’re dealing with what is dealt with 
under these legislations, which are, you know, government 
documents, sometimes emails, and who knows what those are 
going to look like in the future. But I can’t even begin to 
imagine what sort of technology’s going to be created that 
we’re all going to be relying on five years from now, Mr. 
Speaker, but it’s very important that we don’t get into a 
situation where the legislation becomes outdated so that certain 
documents actually don’t fall within the Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it would have been good to see that legislative change, Mr. 
Speaker. Unfortunately we don’t see that legislative change. 
Like I said earlier, I’m looking forward to having an 
opportunity to discuss this with the minister at committee — 
hopefully also the Privacy Commissioner — to figure out 
exactly what legislative changes does the Privacy 
Commissioner wish would have been included in this bill that 
hasn’t been included, as well as what sort of plans are there in 
terms of consultation on legislative change in the future. 
Because I hope that the minister doesn’t think that now that 
some of the changes have been made, we can essentially put 
this piece of legislation back to the bottom of the pile, Mr. 
Speaker. So I think it would be quite good to ensure that this 
still stays top of mind in terms of legislative updates that are 
needed in the future, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
As I had said, I’m going to have the opportunity to speak at 
committee with the minister and hopefully the privacy 
commissioner and other officials on this bill. I have the 
opportunity to talk to them about the level of consultation that 
they’ve done and what their plans are with respect to this 
legislation in the future. Hopefully I may ask . . . I’ll also be 
interested in knowing what their plans are in terms of ensuring 
that the Privacy Commissioner has the resources available to 
actually make that 30-day timeframe for responses to requests, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 



November 14, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1307 

So I think with that, I don’t really have much more to add to 
debate at this time. Looking forward to that opportunity at 
committee, and with that I am prepared to allow this bill, Bill 
No. 31, to proceed to committee. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
the motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 31, The Local 
Authority Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy 
Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
designate that Bill No. 31, The Local Authority Freedom of 
Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016 be 
committed to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 26 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 26 — The Patient 
Choice Medical Imaging Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 
is a pleasure to rise into the debate on Bill No. 26. Now it’s 
interesting that we refer to it as The Patient Choice Medical 
Imaging Act, and we know those are code words, that when we 
talk about choice, and what does that really, really mean? And 
is it really an honest choice? 
 
I know that the right wing ideology likes to portray things as all 
about choice, and if we have choice then the world just happens 
to be a much better place. But it’s often not quite as simple as 
that, especially where in Canada we believe in certain principles 
around medicare that have served us well and have become well 
known around the world, around the world, in terms of 
delivering quality health care to individuals. And we are 
worried that this is a wrong step, that this hasn’t been well 
thought out, that this is an ideologically driven plan that was 
delivered in a rush. 
 
We don’t understand the unintended consequences. It may seem 
simple that, if you give people choice, that what possibly could 

be wrong with that? And of course we know that that leads to a 
much more fragmented, a much more complex system. And of 
course there’s more costs involved. 
 
I mean, it is interesting that this government, when it’s talking 
about transformational change, is actually probably making it 
more complex, more difficult. Layers and layers of services or 
options that really in the long run may not serve the individuals 
as best they might if they really took some time and thought this 
through and invested in Saskatchewan’s health care system in a 
meaningful, meaningful way. And we’ve seen the challenge 
that this government has had in working through those kinds of 
consultations in sort of a bizarre, one extreme to another, where 
you have lean and John Black approach. And then we see now 
we have the transformation changes that are out there that the 
government is wanting to create a more efficient, effective 
system. 
 
But in fact, at the end of the day we really wonder, we really 
wonder is it delivering the kind of services in our hospitals, in 
our community clinics, in our doctor’s offices, in the places 
where we expect good personal service and not be driven by 
just-in-time philosophy. And really this is the kind of thing that 
really worries us because . . . And the professionals . . . And I’ll 
take some time and quote from some of the organizations who 
have been watching this. 
 
These kind of things . . . You know, it’s interesting. We have a 
history. We have a history. And we take a lot of pride in the fact 
that it was the CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth Federation] 
who brought in medicare. In fact, actually in Swift Current was 
the number one health region, I believe, if I have my history 
right. 
 
But I think all people of all political stripes over the course of 
the years have come to understand that this is the most 
cost-effective way to deliver health care according to the 
principles that guide the medicare system, that being 
universality, that it could be transferred from one province to 
another, and that you aren’t considered a second-rate citizen just 
because of the ability to pay. 
 
Now we have this system in front of us that’s reintroducing it 
under the guise of talking about choice. And it’s such a slippery 
slope, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we get into this because we 
know this bill, actually this bill itself repeals an earlier bill 
passed by this government previous to the election that was 
introduced last year. And now it’s introducing a new law that 
includes MRIs [magnetic resonance imaging] and CT 
[computerized tomography] scans. So it’s expanding the 
concept of what medical imaging is. And of course, you know, 
we’ve all started out with the idea of the X-ray, and that was 
one of the first type of medical imaging types of procedures. 
And now it’s interesting that X-rays are pretty commonplace, 
but it was at one point quite a big deal. 
 
But under this bill, patients will be able to pay for an MRI or 
CT scan out of pocket and the clinic will need to provide a 
second scan to the public waiting list at no cost to the taxpayer. 
So the question here becomes then who does pay for the second 
scan? And of course you know this government will say well 
obviously it’s the company. The company will pay. Well 
companies, if they actually have a solid business plan, they 



1308 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2016 

won’t pay either. They don’t pay either. Somebody pays. 
Somewhere along the list, along the way, somebody pays. So 
it’s either the individual pays for two under the guise of 
thinking they’re only paying for one, but they are paying for the 
next one. I mean somebody’s got to pay. So somebody will take 
on debt because somebody’s paying for that second image. 
 
And now we’re introducing . . . The costs may be significant. 
These images are not cheap. It’s not the X-ray that we were 
once talking about. But some of these imaging processes can be 
fairly expensive. So that’s the misnomer here, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. You have a situation where somebody will pay for it. 
And whether it must be the customer or the taxpayers because 
for sure it’s not the business if they have a sound business plan 
that provides for a profit element. I mean it just doesn’t make 
any sense. 
 
And also this new feature of this bill is that it defines medical 
imaging services including MRIs, CT scans, and other 
prescribed services. And so we are deeply, deeply concerned. 
We have grave concerns about this because it gives the Premier 
and the cabinet a backdoor way to add other medical imaging 
such as scope procedures or X-rays for its two-for-one patient 
system. So who does pay? And we are deeply, deeply 
concerned about that, you know. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I know that I just want to reflect a little bit 
on CUPE’s [Canadian Union of Public Employees] concerns 
here because they’ve really . . . This was on the previous bill, 
Bill 179, which really this was the bill that was before us a year 
ago that really opened the door about this idea of a two-for-one 
and the idea that somehow you could jump the queue or get 
ahead of the queue. 
 
[15:30] 
 
But at the same time, and we’ve heard this over and over again 
by policy-makers in the health area that really it doesn’t work as 
cleanly or neatly as that. When you have somebody jumping out 
of the queue and then jumping back in, somebody has to be 
keeping track of that. Somebody has to be monitoring that. And 
if you do jump in, that is breaking the queue, and is that fair to 
the other people? It may be because . . . And then they say, well 
it’s just a matter of choice. But clearly then you are introducing 
this concept of choice which, as so many people have said, 
really isn’t choice at the end of the day. 
 
Now I want to just take a minute and read from the CUPE 
thing. And it was really interesting because I think this really 
makes a lot of good points. And it’s on page 7 of “Sustaining 
Medicare”: 
 

Some suggest that private for-profit delivery is more 
efficient than not-for-profit delivery. Given that most of 
the private facilities currently operating and being planned 
focus only on . . . a limited range of services, there are 
some important concerns that must be addressed in terms 
of how these facilities interact with the more 
comprehensive public system. In effect, these facilities 
“cream-off” those services that can be easily and more 
inexpensively provided on a volume basis, such as cataract 
surgery or hernia repair. This leaves the public system to 
provide the more complicated and . . . [inexpensive] 

services . . . which . . . [are] . . . difficult to control [at a] 
cost per case. 

 
And this is what this government will be looking at over the 
course of the budget, is trying to get a handle, trying to a get 
handle and trying to get a sense of what can we project for 
costs. 
 
Now it was interesting . . . Over the weekend I met a young 
woman who was actually applying for a job at the U of S 
[University of Saskatchewan]. She has her Ph.D. [Doctor of 
Philosophy] in mathematics. And what she does is modelling on 
HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] which is very interesting 
because she’s working now in Boston, but she is applying for 
work here. And I’m thinking boy, we could really use 
somebody like that. 
 
But when you have somebody who . . . When you have this 
interaction where you’re cutting into the system, it throws the 
system into chaos actually because you don’t know which ones 
are you losing, which ones are you keeping, which cases . . . 
And is it a matter of cost? And will there be appropriate 
research done on this? And will that research be public? It will 
be very interesting. The minister did talk about the number of 
people who’ve used it. Have they been analyzing that so they 
can make some decisions about their own needs? This is 
something that is really, really important. 
 
And I continue: 
 

But if something goes wrong with a patient after discharge 
from . . . [the public facilities] — as a result, for example, 
of a post-operative infection or medical error — then the 
patient will likely have to be returned to a public hospital 
for treatment insofar as private facilities . . . do not have 
the capacity to treat individuals on an intensive care basis. 
Thus, the public system becomes liable for the care 
triggered by a poor quality outcome within a private 
facility . . . 

 
Now interestingly with that, you might say, well we’re not 
talking about that. We’re talking about imaging. But this all 
leads down the road, and you have to make sure that there is 
quality control within these private facilities that are ensuring 
that the imaging processes are being done accurately. 
 
And I believe it was in the Maritimes where we’ve had some 
horrendous situations where the imaging processes were done 
inaccurately. And if I remember, it was dealing with cancer in 
Newfoundland. And these things . . . Mistakes do happen. And 
so if you’re having a private facility working through this, there 
is some real issues. 
 
But I just have to say that we have some real big questions 
about this. And when this goes to committee, this is going to be 
one that’s going to be very interesting because we’ve had a little 
bit of data on this but what about some of these concerns? 
 
And it goes on to talk about: 
 

Proponents of for-profit care may insist that the quality of 
care is not an issue, but there is evidence from the United 
States to suggest that the non-profit sector tends to have 



November 14, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1309 

better quality outcomes than the for-profit sector . . . 
 
And then it goes into . . . that’s nursing homes care 
organizations and hospitals. And so this is very, very interesting 
because . . . so if there is . . . If you take out the for-profit 
element, and again this is a right wing who was saying this is 
about choice. This is about choice. No, it’s about profit. It’s 
about profit. And we have to be careful about that because if the 
government is reluctant to invest in health care in 
Saskatchewan, then they should just be upfront about that and 
campaign and say, no we’re not going to do that. And this, and 
then that becomes the choice. That becomes a choice — either 
investing in medicare or you’re not investing in it. But the 
government has used the code system . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You can do both. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — I’m not sure. I’m not sure if you can. We’ll 
have some questions about this. Now the former minister will 
say, and he says, well we can do both. And I’m not sure about 
this. And we’re entering into some areas that are pretty grey, 
and there may be some grave consequences, some unintended 
consequences . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I have to tell you about a grey image here. And this 
may, and well this may be the commercial break to talk about 
Movember. I know the members across the way are supporting 
Movember in a big way, and it’s kind of related to medical 
imaging, so I’ll make a pitch here. But I just have to respond to 
that heckle. 
 
But there are several grey areas, and I think we have some 
questions about this. And as we take a look at this new twist 
that this government has introduced, and what we’ll see over 
. . . what we’ve seen in the past year and what we see in the 
future, and will the government do the appropriate research and 
follow-up to see, are they really, is it really making the 
difference that they thought it would? Or is it making it more 
complicated? Because as I said that they’ve identified situations 
where it’s fragmenting the system. You’re creaming off parts of 
the system, and are there situations that happen where you have 
unintended consequences and people are, at the end, get worse 
service than if they had stayed in the line? And so we have 
some real, real concerns. 
 
So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know we have a lot of work 
to do today, and I do want to, I did want to get that on the 
record though because we will continue to monitor this. We will 
continue. And I know the critic responsible for this bill will 
have a lot of questions about this. Did last time, will continue to 
have it. And it will be a new minister. But I know this is a very, 
very important area. 
 
So I would move adjournment of Bill No. 26, An Act respecting 
the Licensing and Operation of certain Facilities providing 
Medical Imaging Services, repealing a certain Act and making 
consequential amendments to certain Acts. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 26, The Patient Choice 
Medical Imaging Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 28 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 28 — The 
Extension of Compassionate Care Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to join on 
Bill 28, The Extension of Compassionate Care Act, 2016. I 
guess the reason why this is coming before the Chamber and 
we’re having the debate on this bill, there has been a process 
happen with the federal government under EI [employment 
insurance] and the federal government under the EI has now . . . 
And I believe there used to be so many weeks that you could 
have compassionate leave if you had a loved one who was, I 
guess, you know, on their deathbed or had a serious illness and 
you were going to be with them, supporting your loved one. 
And this was a federal bill that came forward and changes to EI 
to allow for that. 
 
So again I think from our side, you know, it’s good to see that 
people who are dealing with their loved one and taking care of 
them, whether it’s your aging, I guess your aging parents, you 
know, when we look at . . . Many of us have parents that are, 
you know, are aging. Unfortunately, some of us have lost our 
parents already, but some will have to be the caregivers of our 
loved ones and make sure . . . 
 
And this can, you know, not only affect our seniors, our 
grandparents, but our parents, but it could be children. It could 
be your spouse. It could be, you know, a brother, a sibling, a 
sister. You know, in northern Saskatchewan we have extended 
family where you have family who, members that you get to 
and you’re so close they adopt you in their family. They look at 
you and they support you and they give you the love as a 
family, and they’re willing to do that. 
 
And this provision in the Act for the EI would go to 28 weeks, I 
believe. But having said that, that process and the challenges 
and, you know, our hearts always go out to those loved ones 
that are showing care and taking care of their loved one. It’s not 
an easy task for any family member to say, you know, I’m 
going to take this on. And sometimes you might have different 
siblings or, you know, caregivers who take turns taking on . . . 
 
Now I know there’s going to be some regulations. We’re not 
sure how that’s going to work, you know. And I was thinking 
about this just when I was looking over it. If you had family and 
sometimes, you know, you have different family members who 
will take turns taking care of loved ones. And I don’t know how 
that . . . [inaudible] . . . if it’s a week at a time, two weeks at a 
time, if there’s provisions in there. And I don’t know, maybe 
we’ll talk a little bit about in the regulations, maybe there will 
be for that provision. 
 
But again I go back to saying that this came forward because 



1310 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2016 

we’re making these changes. And coming from the labour 
standards, there was a provision in there, I believe it was eight 
weeks. I’m not sure how many weeks it was provincially. 
Under the labour standards, you could apply to your employer, 
and your employer would grant you some leave. In the 
legislation, it required them to do that. 
 
What this is doing is it’s taking the employer to say that, under 
the labour standards, we’re coming in compliance, those labour 
standards with the federal ruling, EI, to say that those 
individuals who have an employer and who’re working can ask 
for leave, compassionate leave under legislation. This will give 
the power to those individuals. 
 
Now talking about that, I’m not sure what requirements are 
there. And I don’t know, I haven’t really talked to anyone. I 
don’t who we’ve consulted with and if the government has 
consulted with individuals. And I don’t know if that’s federally, 
they did it provincially. But who consulted with individuals to 
find out, you know, to bring this in that it is not . . . Will it work 
for them? Will it not work for them? And in what way? You 
know, currently right now, like I said, my understanding is the 
legislation says it’s eight weeks, and they’re extending it to 28 
weeks. So having said that, with this care, that an individual . . . 
So I don’t know who they’ve asked and who, if this was 
brought forward, to make the changes. But the overall from our 
side of it I know we support this, you know, change gets to 28 
weeks versus what it is. 
 
And I had talked about the regulations in there. And I’m going 
to talk a little bit because we don’t know exactly what will 
happen once the regulations are . . . And you know, I guess the 
government, cabinet, whether it’s the minister, whether it will 
go to the labour board that will look at this right now and 
decide, yes. 
 
So when one applies — and I had talked about that in 
regulations — if one applies, I’m assuming it’s automatic. Who 
will determine if you qualify? And I was kind of talking about 
that, that you have to apply. Is it you get something from a 
doctor? And I don’t know, and maybe it’s going to be in the 
regulations and maybe it’ll be with the federal government 
versus the provincial government. So if you apply through the 
EI and you go through that application process and you’re 
granted by EI, I’m assuming it automatically . . . The 
legislation’s being brought in to say that your employer has to 
give you the leave for the 28 weeks. 
 
So there is a process. And like I was talking about, I don’t 
know, and I’m assuming it has to do with the federal 
government because you’re applying for compassionate leave 
with the EI, so you would do that. This is just . . . and I think 
this is a process that says it’s automatic. And I don’t know if 
they can, if you can be . . . 
 
And my understanding about this — and maybe in committee 
we can ask about this — but I believe the 28 weeks would be in 
the labour standards as saying you cannot deny if that person 
qualifies and meets the requirement for the EI under the 
compassionate leave as a caregiver, that the province cannot, or 
the employer in this province now with this legislation that’s 
coming forward, when it passes, will be automatic, that the 
employer cannot deny. Because, you know, sometimes we’ll 

have people saying, it’s a small business that has very few 
employees. And I don’t know who they consulted. Will this 
create some challenges for them? But also I understand that 
from a business side, they might be challenged with that. But on 
the other side . . . So I don’t know who all was consulted and 
will be consulted as they make these regulations and the 
changes. And you know, and it’s not, at this point from my 
understanding, it’s not in the regulations, so it’s coming 
forward. 
 
[15:45] 
 
And I imagine it’s going to be the minister that will have certain 
powers at his discretion to say, yes, no, this is going to go. 
Whether he hands that over to, you know . . . And I was talking 
about when it comes to the labour standards and those 
individuals who work, whether it’s administration — we have a 
lot of people who work within the, following the labour 
standards — where I know you can call in if you have issues 
and concerns. So I imagine that will all take place, but I don’t 
know the regulations that are in there and who will determine 
that, and that’ll have to be worked out. 
 
But having said that, there’s also another part in this Act that, 
you know, gives you . . . an adjudicator will look at certain 
things. And what happens is in this, the Labour Relations Board 
has a job to do and it’s giving them the rules. Regulations are 
provided by the Legislative Assembly to the minister, and if the 
minister works out those rules, then the Labour Relations Board 
has certain things. But in that ability, they have hearings. And 
what it is, is you have an administrator that oversees things.  
 
And to me when I’m looking at this, and I know we’re going to 
have to ask some questions to be clear on it, it’s almost like it’s 
moving out some of that process from, it’s my understanding, 
from whether it’s the three-member panel or that the Labour 
Relations Board, whether it’s three . . . It gives it to an 
administrator, someone who will oversee this when it comes to 
wage assessments and determining whether one . . . And they 
can also, from this provision, set the date, the time when there is 
a hearing. So that administrator would hear the complaint 
coming in from an employee. 
 
And I’ll give you an example from my understanding. And I 
mean, again we’ll go through this in committee and, you know, 
we’ll work through this. But the understanding is if you, as an 
employee . . . And I don’t know if this is with the union, if it’s 
just strictly with, you know, some type of a contract, if this is 
verbal, that you understand you were going to be paid a certain 
hourly wage or a monthly salary to do work, that if you all of a 
sudden got your paycheque or you found that there was a 
discrepancy in your paycheque, saying, well no, this is not what 
we had agreed here. This is not what we had said. This would 
give the adjudicator an opportunity to have a hearing and to 
actually look at it and see and make a ruling saying, yes the 
employer . . . There was an agreement. You said you were 
going to pay that individual a certain amount of an hourly wage, 
or it could be like a monthly salary, but you’ve not honoured 
that. And I find . . . So they could make a ruling ordering the 
employer to pay that to the employee. So that whole process is 
there and it’s there for a . . . [inaudible]. 
 
So it looks like they’re making some changes, and I think so 



November 14, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1311 

that it’s administrative, dealing with it, and it’s not the whole 
Labour Relations Board that has to see this. I think it’s 
governed through them. So there are some changes being 
proposed in this bill as well. And we’ll have more questions, 
like I said, in committee to deal with some of this. But that just 
kind of gives you . . . You know, there’s another part I guess I 
just . . . talk about. You know, the bill allows cabinet . . . And 
there’s some changes within the cabinet that it’s referring to. 
And I’m not sure what changes that are going to come forward, 
but I know for our side, we’ll have some questions. 
 
And this is an interesting one because any time you’re going to 
make changes to legislation, especially when it comes to labour, 
labour in our province, we want to make sure that we’ve 
consulted with the right individuals, whether it’s the unions, the 
employer. You want to make sure that this legislation makes 
sense so they don’t have to withdraw it or we don’t have to 
make amendments to it right after because we didn’t do, or the 
government didn’t do the homework that the government was 
required to do, or members opposite didn’t inquire. And they 
might have some questions and make some good changes: 
we’ve seen where, you know, we can come together on some of 
the legislation. We’ve made amendments and it’s been 
accepted. So sometimes you work together to make some of 
those changes that you know are, you know, you need to do on 
behalf of Saskatchewan people, and that’s kind of what we’re 
asked to do in it.  
 
So at this point, Mr. Speaker, I know there’s going to be more 
questions and more work will have to be done in committee. So 
at this point I’m prepared to adjourn debate on Bill No. 28. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 28, The Extension of 
Compassionate Care Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 1 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 1 — The 
Crown Corporations Public Ownership Amendment Act, 2016 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 
Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
As ever I’m good to take my place in this Assembly and join 
debate on Bill No. 1. 
 
This is an interesting bill and one that’s certainly connected to 
the history of debate that has gone on in different ways in this 
province, in different, oh, different decades for, you know, 
probably back to around the time of the founding of the 
province. 
 
And the question of course is, what is a better way to deliver a 
particular service or good to the public? And in the province of 

Saskatchewan, for many years we’ve had a hybrid system in the 
distribution of liquor. And certainly that’s been provided 
oversight by the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority, 
and certainly over the last years has provided a great deal of 
involvement on the part of the government as regards to the 
very legitimate social regulator kind of questions that come 
with a substance such as alcohol. 
 
And we’ve seen different manifestations of that debate play out 
in this Assembly in different ways over the last days and 
months, Mr. Speaker, and as well as, you know, just the quality 
of that service itself, Mr. Speaker, in terms of selection, in terms 
of availability, in terms of conscientious attention to regulation 
as regards to, you know, as is considered under the law, Mr. 
Speaker, in terms of the way that people are able to access 
alcohol. And also, Mr. Speaker, the way that the licensing and 
retailing function of the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority have provided a return to the people of Saskatchewan 
in, you know, the hundreds of millions of dollars, billions if you 
go over the past decade alone, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So this particular bill is I think three clauses long. The main 
piece of action in the bill is to remove the Saskatchewan Liquor 
and Gaming Authority from the protection of the Crown 
protection Act and, Mr. Speaker, additionally, you know, not 
just removing SLGA from The Crown Corporations Public 
Ownership Act but certainly the subsequent sale of 40 existing 
liquor stores, the authorizing of 12 additional new liquor stores. 
And this in a system where again SLGA is both retailer and 
regulator, and then on top of that, Mr. Speaker, the removal of 
the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority in total from 
the protections and the auspices of The Crown Corporations 
Public Ownership Act. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, this is something that I think was a 
wrong-headed move. We’d seen different sort of tricks of 
sophistry and, you know, the . . . I don’t know a polite way to 
talk about it, Mr. Speaker, other than in previous, sort of, moves 
on this file. We’ve seen the government talk about how, well, 
we didn’t say anything about new stores, so that’s keeping up 
our promise around not privatizing things. Because of course 
this is a government that has a long and inescapable association 
with the move toward privatizing public assets and putting them 
into private hands. 
 
So the way that this came forward in the election, one of the 
key promises that, you know, again after different sort of 
attempts around closing four existing stores . . . I believe the 
Deputy Speaker would be familiar with the one in Ituna 
certainly and three others. The experience with those buildings 
is that of course the service was lost. Those jobs were lost to 
those communities and those, in the main, those buildings stand 
vacant. And you know, so did that improve access or did it 
improve the employment situation in those communities? No, it 
did not. Did it improve the revenue picture for the people of 
Saskatchewan in terms of the retailing and licensing function 
that SLGA performs? Arguably, Mr. Speaker, no, it did not. 
 
And in terms of what happens now in this, as they go forward in 
this bold new era of privatizing 40 existing stores, you know, 
providing for 12 additional new stores, and then of course 
removing SLGA in total from The Crown Corporations Public 
Ownership Act, that in itself, Mr. Speaker, rests on a claim 



1312 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2016 

made by this government that it would be somehow revenue 
neutral, revenue neutral, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I guess if 
you believe that, you’re . . . You know, this is something that 
certainly was campaigned on. 
 
And you know, I think that there were other issues that came to 
the fore in the way that people made their decision, certainly the 
kind of magic act that went on with the finances in this province 
where of course it was impossible to have a budget before the 
people of Saskatchewan so that people could be acquainted with 
the real financial picture that exists in this province. And you 
know, certainly we’re well aware that treasury board and the 
star chamber that attaches to the transformational change 
agenda, Mr. Speaker, we’re well aware that those entities are 
chugging along in their work of identifying things to cut and 
things to privatize and on and on. 
 
And I guess we see, you know, recent innovations on that front 
where the government comes forward with Bill 40 with the 
amendment to The Interpretation Act, where having run the old 
let’s privatize SaskTel flag up the flagpole, the only people to 
salute were of course, you know, diehard right wingers and 
conservatives, that ideologically when you’re a hammer, Mr. 
Speaker, everything looks like a nail. And so for these people, 
you know, it doesn’t matter the service. It doesn’t matter the 
return to the people of Saskatchewan. It doesn’t matter the fact 
that these are assets that were built up by the people of 
Saskatchewan. If it’s public, it’s got to be sold off — that kind 
of slavish devotion to a privatization ideology. 
 
So we see that, you know, where after the election . . . It was 
only this little bit of privatization; that’s all that was going to be 
considered. And then of course after the election it’s well, you 
know, the landscape has changed with the prospective sale of 
MTS [Manitoba Telephone System] to Bell Canada, so of 
course we’ve got to go out and do an assessment. And one of 
the wags, you know, commented on the assessment. In terms of 
a risk assessment for SaskTel, well what’s one of the biggest 
risks to a public utility such as SaskTel? That commentator 
came back saying that the biggest risk was a third-term, right 
wing, cash-strapped government. And we see that borne out in 
the way the games got played with. You know, is SaskTel going 
to be privatized? What does it mean? 
 
And you know, the Sask Party does a lot of things very well, 
and one thing that I’m certain of, Mr. Speaker, is that they 
polled like mad when it came to the question of privatizing 
SaskTel, to see if they got a window for opportunity. And one 
of the things that I think the Premier and the leading lights in 
that government, who of course went to the Grant Devine 
school of economics in the 1980s and learned a number of 
lessons from, Mr. Speaker, is that when it comes to 
straight-ahead questions of privatization like that, if you come 
at it straight on, in general, Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan will say no way. They’ll say no thank you. 
They’ll say where do I vote against that. 
 
And of course this is a government that didn’t have the 
intestinal fortitude to come forward in the campaign and say 
that we think that the burning issue in front of the people of 
Saskatchewan is that we need to go at that interpretation Act so 
that we can, by definition, by a stroke of a pen, click their heels 
together three times and pretend, Mr. Speaker, that 49 per cent 

divestiture of public assets is somehow not privatization. And 
it’s quite the approach, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
[16:00] 
 
But again I think this is sort of the evolution of the file that 
we’ve seen. We’ve seen them run at the question of 
privatization, you know, straight ahead, and I’m sure polled on 
it to no end, and they couldn’t come up with an answer that they 
wanted. So they needed to have another way to run at it. And I 
guess one of the things that’s at least worth, that at least holds a 
shred of merit in the piece of legislation that we’re talking about 
here today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that at least they had the 
decency to come to the people of Saskatchewan and say that’s, 
you know, this is in our platform. This is something we’re 
running on, and please give us a mandate to do it. It wasn’t this, 
you know, chicanery of, you know, we’ll go at The 
Interpretation Act so we can get at the Crown protection Act 
through the back door so that we can divest 49 per cent of each 
of those Crowns that are protected therein such as SaskPower, 
SaskTel, SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance], and the 
list goes on. 
 
But did they have the decency, did they have the guts to do that, 
Mr. Speaker? No, they did not. Instead they come, you know, 
they slide around the board in terms of what’s the approach 
going to be on SaskTel. And I’m sure, you know, we’re going 
to see . . . We hear a lot of interesting things, Mr. Speaker, as 
regards other of the Crown corporations. And we know that the 
treasury board and the star chamber that’s doing the 
transformational change trip on the civil service and on 
government operations generally, we know that they’re, you 
know, looking for every dime that’s nailed down and then some 
that aren’t, Mr. Speaker. And what they’re going to be 
searching for is, you know, quick opportunities to make a buck. 
And is that going to be good stewardship of public resources? Is 
that going to provide decisions that are made in the best 
interests of Saskatchewan people? Well no, it is not. No, it is 
not, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And again we come back to this particular piece of legislation 
where at least the government had the decency to say upfront 
what they were going to do. You know, they maybe made some 
pretty dubious claims in service of that argument in terms of 
this is somehow going to be revenue neutral. And again that’s 
right up there with this business of, you know, you can sell 49 
per cent of, say, SaskPower and that’s somehow not 
privatization. I don’t know if they think that we’re stupid or the 
people are stupid generally, that they can’t figure that out for 
what it is, but it’s quite the magic act, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 
what they’re trying to accomplish. 
 
So they come forward with this change to The Interpretation 
Act so they can get in through the back door on The Crown 
Corporations Public Ownership Act, something that they’ve 
taken the pledge on when it was introduced in the Assembly, 
which each member of that caucus voted for at that time, having 
been in opposition. And in subsequent elections, Mr. Speaker, 
in 2007, in 2011, and again in 2016, that pledge that they had 
made to keeping The Crown Corporations Public Ownership 
Act was repeated. So that they now come forward and say that, 
oh well, you know, it’s come to our attention that we need to 
change the definition of “privatization” and that somehow 



November 14, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1313 

people won’t catch onto that, is as cowardly as it is less than 
transparent, would be one way to put it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So you know, this particular bill rests on the assertion that it’s 
going to be somehow revenue neutral. And the only problem 
with contentions like that on the part of this government is that 
you only get the real picture over months and years. 
 
And in terms of, you know, something that is, on the face of it, 
kind of laughable, in that on the doorsteps that I had the 
privilege of being on in the lead up to and during the last 
election, where you’d hear from SLGA employees saying that, 
you know, they didn’t know where the minister was getting the 
numbers from, but this revenue neutral piece was going to be 
quite the bit of magic. I think that provides a fair amount of 
pause for concern and pause for consideration. 
 
But that was the plank upon which they had rested their 
platform as regards taking SLGA out of The Crown 
Corporations Public Ownership Act and on which they have 
said they’re going to sell off 40 liquor stores and authorize 12 
new ones, that it’s going to be somehow revenue neutral, that 
the people of Saskatchewan — whose resources these are — 
will be made whole at the end of the day. And again, Mr. 
Speaker, at least they had the decency to talk about that during 
the campaign. 
 
But to hear the Premier talk about how, you know, oh it’s come 
to our attention that to make the Crowns really successful is to 
sell 49 per cent of them, that we need to get into The 
Interpretation Act, Mr. Speaker, you know, speaks to the kind 
of trickery that we’d hoped was dispensed with in election after 
election after election where this Premier and this government 
promised that they would not be privatizing the Crowns 
because, of course, that is the history of this party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You don’t have to look further than the ’80s. You don’t have to 
have to look further than what they had to say in the ’90s. You 
don’t have to look further than what they had to say in the 2003 
election, Mr. Speaker. But of course here we go again. 
 
You know, it’s a real piece of nonsense, Mr. Speaker, to tell the 
people of Saskatchewan, you know, to divest 49 per cent, to sell 
from public hands into private hands, 49 per cent of something 
like SaskPower or SGI . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And 
again, you know, I hear one of my colleagues talking about “or 
to pension funds.” Well you know, it’s like here we go again, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the great professors I had the privilege of learning from 
at the University of Regina was a fellow by the name of Jim 
Pitsula, and certain of my colleagues have quoted at length from 
a book called Privatizing a Province that Dr. Pitsula and Dr. 
Ken Rasmussen wrote in the late ’90s. And that chronicled the 
efforts of the Grant Devine government of course latching on to 
the then neo-liberal, neo-conservative phase, fad of selling 
down everything that was public, selling out everything that 
was public. 
 
And of course, Mr. Speaker, they got up to some terrible things 
that again, as different from this one particular piece of 
legislation, Mr. Speaker, that they didn’t campaign on it back 
then either. But when it comes to, you know, well this is . . . 

We’re going to sell it to the pension funds, and isn’t that going 
to be great? Well, Mr. Speaker, in terms of, you know, you try 
to think about who that’s going to be great for. And is it going 
to be used to underwrite the various financial misadventures 
that this government has been up to with the billion five and 
counting on carbon capture and storage, with the smart meter 
debacle, with the kind of games we’ve seen played with 
SaskPower when it came to underwriting dubious land deals on 
the part of this government out at the Global Transportation 
Hub? 
 
You know, that’s how these things are going to get 
underwritten. That’s why there’s a burning need for capital on a 
scale that is, you know, they’re now ringing the alarms about. 
And it’s going to be underwritten by the fact that despite all 
those kind of losses, they’re going to jack up the borrowing. 
Then they’re going to, you know, keep increasing the rates, you 
know, despite the sort of slap down that we see from the rate 
review panel to the latest request on the part of this government 
to SaskPower. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they’re going to come to a place where it’s 
going to be, well you know, to save the Crowns we’re going to 
have to not privatize 49 per cent of them. And you know, how 
do we know it’s not privatization? Well we changed the law 
that says so, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
You know, I don’t know if it’s a willing suspension of disbelief 
that they’re counting on or if they think people aren’t that with 
it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but people can count. They can count. 
And on the math alone, Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan see this for the disrespectful, 
less-than-straightforward manoeuvre that it is. 
 
And so in the context of The Crown Corporations Public 
Ownership Amendment Act, where again at least they had the 
decency to come forward at election time and say, this is 
something that we’re going to do, you know. And again, maybe 
the arguments they marshalled in favour of that were less than 
sound or, you know, open to all kinds of question and relied on 
all kinds of leaps of faith, Mr. Speaker. But at least they had the 
decency and the guts to come forward to the people of 
Saskatchewan and say, this is what we’re going to do. 
 
As relates to the 49 per cent that they want to authorize 
themselves to sell off out under the aegis of The Interpretation 
Act, Mr. Speaker, like again it’s . . . You’d laugh if it wasn’t so 
pathetic in terms of the disrespect that it shows for the people of 
Saskatchewan. If this was a burning issue, if this is something 
they wanted to be straightforward about, well could they have 
come forward with it at election time, Mr. Speaker? Well the 
proof of it is here in Bill No. 1. They absolutely could have 
come forward. And if they thought it was such a great idea, Mr. 
Speaker, they could’ve told the people of Saskatchewan all 
about it and sung it from the rooftops. But they didn’t do that. 
They snuck around and counting on, I don’t know, that people 
are too disengaged or too busy putting bread on the table. 
 
But I can tell you one thing, Mr. Speaker: if this government 
gets into the 49 per cent privatization of our Crown utilities and, 
through the back door, goes after legislation that they’ve 
supported not once, not twice, not three times but four times, 
Mr. Speaker, that if they’re going to look to carve that up by 49 



1314 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2016 

per cent, I think the people of Saskatchewan see that for what it 
is. And although the people of Saskatchewan . . . As is always 
the case with the mistakes of this government, as is always the 
case when this government gets more interested in its own 
ideology than in what is in the best interest of the people of 
Saskatchewan, it’ll be the people of Saskatchewan that pay the 
price for those mistakes, Mr. Speaker, for those wrong choices. 
And it won’t be, you know, over one budget or two, but it will 
be over years and decades, Mr. Speaker. And I guess we’ve 
seen that movie here before and, you know, we didn’t much like 
it the first time. 
 
So when it comes to Bill No. 1, I’ll at least give it some credit 
in that, you know, at least, at least on the face of it, they were 
upfront about what they were asking the people of 
Saskatchewan to give them a mandate for. And there are other 
bills, Mr. Speaker, where that is most decidedly not the case. 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d move to adjourn debate on Bill 
No. 1. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 1, 
The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Amendment Act, 
2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 32 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 32 — The 
Automobile Accident Insurance (Benefits) Amendment Act, 
2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is my 
privilege to enter the debate here today on Bill No. 32, The 
Automobile Accident Insurance (Benefits) Amendment Act, 
2016, Mr. Speaker. The name of that bill is almost as long as, 
well the content of that bill. 
 
There are more than 30 changes that the minister is proposing. 
Considering, Mr. Speaker, that there are more than 30 changes 
in this bill, the second reading comments of the then minister 
are actually relatively brief, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to just tell you 
. . . I will point to some of the changes, Mr. Speaker. In 
summary, this bill increases the amount of weekly benefits for 
employed injured persons, equivalent to 40 hours at minimum 
wage for fully disabled persons and 20 hours a week at 
minimum wage for partially disabled persons or those confined 
to a hospital bed or wheelchair. 
 
[16:15] 
 
This bill, one of the things, one of the many changes, it will 
prohibit SGI from paying benefits to a person who is in prison. 
It will also prohibit SGI from paying benefits to a driver who is 
more than 50 per cent responsible for the collision and 
convicted of or charged with causing death or bodily harm by 

street racing, being negligent, or fleeing a peace officer and has 
been found guilty in the last five years of causing death or 
bodily harm by street racing, being negligent or fleeing a peace 
officer. And again there are many other changes that I know our 
critic for SGI will bring to committee, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In the minister’s second reading speech, he points out that when 
an impaired driver causes a collision and is killed, the family 
impacted will now be able to sue the estate of the deceased 
impaired driver for pain and suffering or bereavement damages. 
And he points out that the list of offences that trigger the ability 
for an innocent party to sue has also been expanded, as I’ve just 
mentioned, to cover criminal negligence causing death or bodily 
harm, criminal negligence causing bodily injury, flight from a 
peace officer, and dangerous operation while street racing, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Drawing your attention to . . . You know, I’d like to talk a little 
about the impaired driving piece, Mr. Speaker. I wasn’t able to 
be here two weeks ago when this legislature passed a piece of 
work, not this bill, Mr. Speaker, but a piece of work around 
tightening our impaired driving laws, and this bill around 
benefits and the ability for a family to be able to sue a convicted 
impaired driver I think ties into that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
For the last three years, the opposition has been looking at the 
changes the government made. I had the privilege of sitting on 
the Traffic Safety Committee in 2013, Mr. Speaker, that 
proposed many changes that this government implemented to 
some extent. But there was a minority opinion that the 
opposition members on that committee recommended, 
following good practice, very positive practice in Alberta and 
BC, where someone in the warning range, in that administrative 
penalty range of .05 to .08 would be able to lose their car for 
three days if caught in that warning range. And they had found 
actually in BC, in the very short amount of time that it had been 
implemented, that their impaired driving death rate had 
plummeted by 50 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Having had the opportunity to hear from witnesses, and prior to 
that committee we had an opportunity to chat with some of 
those witnesses, and one of them actually, Mr. Doug Beirness 
had mentioned that in his more than 30 years working in traffic 
safety, he’d never seen a law have such a drastic impact, or a 
policy change. And he did admit that there were other 
components in both Alberta and BC that helped with that death 
rate, but he was a huge proponent of that three-day 
administrative penalty of someone losing their car if caught in 
the warning range, Mr. Speaker. Because it had the ability to be 
culture changing where people realized that alcohol and driving 
do not mix and you always . . . It doesn’t matter where you live. 
You need to think about how you’re going to get home safely, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I was not in the legislature, which actually was a bit 
disappointing, Mr. Speaker, due to family circumstances just 
two weeks ago when the bill which included that change was 
passed and many others, Mr. Speaker, that I think will hopefully 
have that needed impact on our impaired driving death rate, Mr. 
Speaker. We continue to hear story after story of those people 
negatively impacted by those impaired by alcohol, and drugs 
actually are an issue as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 



November 14, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1315 

So this particular bill ties into that by: “When an impaired 
driver causes a collision and is killed, the family impacted will 
now be able to sue the estate of the deceased impaired driver for 
pain and suffering or bereavement damages.” So again I’m glad 
as an opposition that we were strong on this issue for the last 
three years and I’m glad to see the government has I think not 
just heeded our advice but the people of Saskatchewan who 
were calling for tougher legislation when it came to impaired 
driving. There are enough families have been impacted 
negatively by losing loved ones or having loved ones severely 
injured because of impaired driving, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One thing that I would’ve liked to have seen enhanced though, 
having conversations with those who have been impacted by 
impaired driving, Mr. Speaker, is the piece around treatment, 
Mr. Speaker. So many people . . . Accidents often happen when 
people are impaired and in the high, high impairment range. 
The severity of the accident increases the more impaired you 
are, Mr. Speaker. Not to say that you’re not impaired at a lower 
rate, but the severity of the injury and the possibility of death 
increases exponentially the more impaired you are, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But I had an opportunity, when the Premier this summer posted 
on his Facebook page saying that we had an impaired driving 
problem in Saskatchewan and asking for people’s input, I 
responded to the Premier and also posted that on my Facebook 
page. And I had lots of people responding, Mr. Speaker, but 
someone with whom I went to high school who said that the 
only thing that stops impaired drivers from driving impaired is 
dealing with the underlying issue — the alcohol itself. 
 
So I think, Mr. Speaker, he was talking about addictions and the 
reality that alcoholism is an illness. And it’s one thing to put a 
Breathalyzer in a car and interlock so you can’t drive away, but 
I think we’re doing a disservice to all people in Saskatchewan if 
we don’t try to help and support those who suffer from 
alcoholism, Mr. Speaker. As I will reflect upon that comment 
that my former high school colleague had mentioned is that the 
only thing that got him to stop driving drunk was to stop 
drinking altogether, Mr. Speaker. So when the bill was passed 
just a few short weeks ago, I didn’t see mention of beefing up 
or enhancing alcohol and addictions support. I think that that 
would’ve been a place that the government could’ve also gone, 
but I’m glad that these changes were made, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But with respect to Bill No. 32, The Automobile Accident 
Insurance Act, I think one thing that’s really important when 
governments bring in legislation is that they do a full and robust 
and meaningful consultation. I want to draw your attention to 
The Auto Injury Insurance Review, which was SGI’s report and 
recommendations on this very issue in October 2015. And on 
June 22nd, 2016 when this bill was first introduced, Mr. 
Speaker, there was some public commentary and some concern 
about something that was missing from the bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So on June 14th . . . I’m just reading from a CBC [Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation] article posted June 22nd of 2016. So 
the former minister introduced all the changes to this 
automobile accident insurance Act, and these particular 
amendments, the news story goes on to say, “. . . were informed 
by recommendations made by SGI after consultations with 
stakeholders, including . . . [this] injury review committee.” So 

it’s interesting though, because “. . . personal injury lawyer Ken 
Noble from the Saskatchewan Trial Lawyers Association . . . 
[sat] on the committee, said the new changes ignore a key 
recommendation to repeal part of Section 203.” 
 
I’ll just digress again here, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll get back to this 
section 203. This is like the government back in 2013 ignoring 
a key piece of evidence when it came to impaired driving that 
could have potentially . . . one never knows for sure, but could 
have had the potential to save many peoples’ lives, Mr. 
Speaker, in the intervening years. 
 
But going back to what Ken Noble said about section 203, that 
this report actually was looking to have repealed. So this 
particular section, 203, Mr. Speaker . . . Of course now I’ve lost 
the page. But the point, Mr. Speaker, he makes is that if 
someone was injured and if their injury was considered severe 
and prolonged, they can apply to CPP [Canada Pension Plan] 
and part of the coverage that you pay for an employee and 
working in Canada is those Canada Pension Plan disability 
benefits. He points out that if you qualify, then what happens is 
the Government of Canada, CPP will pay you a disability 
benefit, and it varies depending on how much you’ve earned in 
your lifetime. And Noble points out that section 203 currently 
allows SGI to deduct that amount from what they would 
normally pay to victims, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That is recommendation . . . That is found on page 26, that were 
one of the recommendations and it was on page 26 of the Auto 
Injury Insurance Review: SGI’s Report and Recommendations. 
I’d like to read into the record the recommendation: 
 

1. Excluding Canada Pension Plan (CPP) disability 
payments from income benefit calculation (No Fault 
Coverage): To be eligible to receive CPP disability 
benefits, the customer must have a physical or mental 
impairment that is both severe and prolonged, as defined 
by CPP. If a No Fault customer is entitled to an SGI 
income benefit and a CPP disability benefit, SGI reduces 
the income benefit by the amount the customer receives 
from CPP disability. This was done to prevent 
over-compensation (i.e. receiving more in income than 
they would have had they not been injured) and is 
consistent with the practice of private disability insurers 
and other no-fault jurisdictions. Based on feedback from 
the Injury Review Committee and customers, SGI is 
recommending it no longer reduce income benefits by the 
CPP disability amount [Mr. Speaker]. 
 

So that was a recommendation that was ignored, Mr. Speaker. 
And the minister touches on it in his second reading remarks. 
He says that: 
 

. . . two of the more financially significant injury programs 

. . . the CPP . . . [plan]. Mr. Speaker, I want to emphasize 
that these changes remain a priority for our government 
and will be implemented when it is financially prudent to 
do so. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I know people . . . I think we’ve all, as MLAs 
have people come into our office who are on CPP disability or 
any other disability program. They are not getting rich, Mr. 
Speaker, by any stretch of the imagination. Quite the opposite 



1316 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2016 

They go from leading full and productive lives sometimes to, or 
most times, Mr. Speaker, to living in poverty, barely able to pay 
their bills, Mr. Speaker. So it would’ve been nice to see the 
minister implement that. There are many, as I said, many 
changes that our critic for SGI will discuss in committee. 
 
I think one provision that was interesting to me as a former 
at-home mom, Mr. Speaker . . . In a former life when my oldest 
daughter was little, I was home for seven years with her, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m a big believer in parental care where that’s a 
possibility, Mr. Speaker, and for many people that isn’t. But 
this was an interesting . . . So I come from the dialogue that 
those who work at home are working at home, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
interesting the language people often use around those who are 
at-home parents or homemakers. I often would tell someone I 
was home with my daughter Hennessey and they would say, oh, 
you don’t work. It’s interesting to me because I think, including 
this job, Mr. Speaker, being home with my daughter was the 
hardest job that I have ever had. It was incredibly rewarding, 
but it started at 6 in the morning and didn’t end until about 10 
o’clock, 11 o’clock at night, a few hours after she had gone to 
bed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So there was a provision in here, Mr. Speaker, around 
homemakers. I’d just like to . . . So one of the sections, an 
insured is entitled to a weekly . . . The existing provision was: 
 

An insured is entitled to a weekly benefit pursuant to this 
section if: 

the insured is a homemaker. 
 
And one of the changes was: 
 

. . . [Ensuring] that the weekly benefit in the first 104 
weeks following an accident, for a homemaker, if that 
person elected tort and is fully disabled, will at least meet 
the amount a full-time employee would receive for a 
minimum wage employment. 
 

Which is a positive change, Mr. Speaker. The amount before 
was considerably lower. 
 
There’s another existing provision around insured, or around 
homemakers, where the amount of a weekly benefit payable 
pursuant to this section was $150.” So the change in that section 
was ensuring: 
 

. . . that the weekly benefit in the first 104 weeks following 
an accident, for a homemaker, if that person elected tort 
and is partially disabled from performing an important 
household duty, will at least meet the amount of a 
part-time employee working 20 hours per week would 
receive for minimum wage employment. 

 
So that will be more money than the $150 that was payable 
previously, Mr. Speaker, but I just would like to give a 
shout-out to all of those who are at home, Mr. Speaker, with 
children, recognizing that their worth, I would argue, is worth 
a lot more than minimum wage of a part-time worker, Mr. 
Speaker. It is more than a full-time job but I’m glad to see 
that there is at least an increased recognition of the financial 
value of a parent staying at home, Mr. Speaker, if that is an 
option and something that someone wants to do. 

But with respect to the bill that’s before us, Bill No. 32, The 
Automobile Accident Insurance (Benefits) Amendment Act, 
2016, as I had mentioned at the start of my remarks, there are 
more than 30 changes. There are too many . . . I know we have 
a big agenda before us here today, Mr. Speaker, so there are too 
many changes to talk about specifically in my remarks this 
afternoon. But I know the critic will address those in 
committee, probably line by line, Mr. Speaker. So with that I 
would like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
[16:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Riversdale has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 32, The Automobile 
Accident Insurance (Benefits) Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 33 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 33 — The Child 
and Family Services Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise and join in the debate regarding Bill No. 33, The Child and 
Family Services Amendment Act, 2016. I had the pleasure of 
being in the Chamber during what I think was the last time our 
side had the opportunity to speak with respect to this bill, and 
the member from Saskatoon Nutana gave a very long and very 
poignant set of remarks with respect to this bill and spoke to her 
personal experience in terms of giving a child up for adoption. 
And I say that in just that it’s a very difficult act to follow, Mr. 
Speaker. The member from Saskatoon Nutana’s comments 
were extremely eloquent and very touching, Mr. Speaker, and I 
have a feeling that my comments won’t even come nearly close 
to touching that level of quality, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But with that I will give a few remarks with respect to this bill. 
 
There’s a few different changes that this bill is presenting. 
Some of them just simply involve and . . . It’s kind of a 
common theme, I’d say, to this legislative session in terms of 
the bills that we’ve seen tabled for the most part, with the 
exception of a few bills that have major changes and the 
exception of a few bills, including Bill 41, where they actually 
. . . government hadn’t even consulted before tabling the bill 
and then had to quickly turn on their heels and change their 
minds and withdrew a bill after hearing from stakeholders that 
it was actually a very problematic decision to make and not one 
that was supported within the community, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But in saying that, as I had said, a lot of the legislative changes 
we’re seeing are, could be I suppose defined as housekeeping, 
but there are some points of substance in terms of this bill that 
definitely deserve discussion. And I know that the critic for this 



November 14, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1317 

bill will give a very eloquent . . . and will do a very good job 
discussing this, both in the debate and later on at committee, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So most of the amendments that are included in this bill involve 
modernizing the language, for example, eliminating 
“department” and replacing them with “ministry,” which is 
something that we’ve seen in other bills, Mr. Speaker, and 
something that we continue to see — a simple, just, 
modernization of language. It’s quite innocuous, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But there are a few other changes, Mr. Speaker. One of them 
changes the length of time for an individual who’s giving a 
child up for adoption to have a longer length of time to 
essentially change their mind, I suppose. I think it was a longer 
time or a shorter time now. I can’t quite remember, Mr. 
Speaker. In any event, it changes the time, and it’s changed in a 
way to keep us more in line with some other jurisdictions and 
other things that we’re seeing in other places. 
 
It also allows for the ministry to enable the termination of 
existing agreements with First Nations Child and Family 
Services agencies and other prescribed agencies that do not 
include a fixed contractual term or termination provisions if the 
minister believes that it is in the public’s interest to do so. And 
then it also requires a 90 days written notice of intent to 
terminate any existing agreement, Mr. Speaker. So I’m sure that 
the critic for this file is going to have a lot of questions with 
respect to why this change is taking place and what this is going 
to mean with respect to existing agreements that the 
government has. 
 
Another one that’s somewhat interesting is it changes, or it 
identifies that the circumstances in which information may be 
disclosed without written consent will be specified in the 
regulations. And there’s actually several portions of this bill, 
Mr. Speaker, that speaks to providing more details within the 
regulations. 
 
And I understand, and I’ve said in several debates actually this 
session, Mr. Speaker, that I understand the importance of 
moving decisions to the regulations. Sometimes it makes more 
sense in terms of expediency and efficiency. Regulations are 
significantly easier to change than legislation. 
 
But it can also . . . On the reverse side of that, it’s a bit of a 
double-edged sword, Mr. Speaker, that it also creates a situation 
where it’s more difficult for this Chamber and for members 
opposite to have some oversight over those regulatory changes, 
and also makes it a bit more difficult for us in terms of ensuring 
that proper consultation has taken place before these changes 
occur which can be kind of a problem, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 
always a little bit concerning when we create that sort of 
situation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it’s really important that when anything is moving from a 
legislative power to a regulatory power that it’s being done so 
in a way that is expedient and efficient, or creating expediency 
and efficiency, but is not unduly removing oversight that’s 
necessary and important in terms of our ability as legislators, 
Mr. Speaker, to be monitoring and . . . I guess, opposition 
members, Mr. Speaker, to be monitoring changes that are 
occurring within government, Mr. Speaker. 

There’s some questions as to the circumstances in which 
information may be disclosed. It’s hard for us to speak to it and 
to comment on it when it’s of course going to be set out in the 
regulations and has not quite been explicitly set out here. 
 
I understand the process and I know that regulations are usually 
drafted after the legislation has been tabled and sometimes after 
it’s received Royal Assent. Hopefully that doesn’t happen in 
this case as it creates confusion and some gaps in terms of 
understanding what the legislative process and requirements 
are. 
 
But it’s hard for us as an opposition to be able to comment on 
any of the requirements that are going to be specified in the 
regulation when we don’t even know what those requirements 
are going to be yet, Mr. Speaker. So I’m hoping . . . And I’m 
sure that at committee that there will be some questions around 
this, what that’s going to actually mean and what that’s going to 
look like, at least a ballpark figure of what that’s going to look 
like. 
 
Because it’s very important that information is being disclosed 
— especially when we’re talking about children, Mr. Speaker, 
especially when we’re talking about children that are subject to 
ministry care — is being done so in a way that is, I would say, 
as little as possible. That we’re doing as much as we can to 
protect that child’s autonomy and that child’s confidentiality, 
Mr. Speaker. But I do know that there are some instances where 
it’s actually important, for example, for ministries to be 
working together. 
 
I’m guessing that this could be a change that’s being required as 
a recommendation out of the Hub model, Mr. Speaker, which is 
essentially a gathering of several different ministries working 
together to ensure that people aren’t falling between the cracks. 
And I know that the Ministry of Social Services is involved in 
that, and the child services branch of that would likely be 
requiring some clarification as to what their allowance is in 
terms of participating in these discussions and disclosing 
information that’s necessary. 
 
Although from what I understand, you know, when we’re 
talking about some of the Hubs that are in smaller centres, it’s a 
small community, Mr. Speaker, and it usually doesn’t take too 
much for individuals to know who they’re talking about when 
they’re maybe talking with an educator and there is a child 
who’s having some issues. When it’s in a small centre, that’s, I 
guess, a little less surprising when that information gets 
disclosed. But it’s important for us to have clarity and for those 
who are working in this area to have clarity in terms of what 
information they can and cannot disclose, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Hub model is, it’s a fairly newish model, and from what I 
understand it’s met with some successes and some challenges. 
One of the main challenges, Mr. Speaker, is these organizations 
working together and trying to figure out ways of, for example, 
helping children. As another example, helping a child escape 
potentially having to go through the justice system, trying to 
provide them the supports that they need so that they don’t end 
up going through that process. 
 
However some of the main concerns that I’ve heard is that there 
is insufficient resources in terms of organizations to refer these 



1318 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2016 

individuals to. So when someone is sort of flagged as an issue, 
as a person of concern that requires some wraparound supports, 
unfortunately what I’ve heard is that there’s many communities 
that don’t have organizations that they can then refer to. So it’s 
quite frustrating for those who are working within the Hub 
model and those who are watching to see how depleted 
community-based referral sources are, and how difficult it is for 
individuals who are flagged as needing extra supports to be able 
to then obtain that support. And that’s something that this 
government seems to continually forget. When they’re looking 
for ways of cutting, Mr. Speaker, they always seem to look at 
organizations like community-based organizations that are 
doing front-line work and that are really providing supports to 
people who are in need in our community, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So that’s a long-winded way of saying that I hope that the 
information being disclosed subject to this provision is being 
done so in a way that’s — like I said, we don’t see the 
regulations yet, so we don’t really know what it’s going to look 
like — but is being done so in a way that’s minimal, but is done 
so in light of the best interests of the children, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I understand that there’s going to be more opportunity for 
debate on this bill. I know I have other members who are going 
to want to join in on this debate as well, and I know our critic is 
going to be eager to provide her two cents on this important 
piece of legislation. 
 
What I will add before I move on though, Mr. Speaker, is I 
know that there’s been some work with respect to amending 
The Child and Family Services Act. For a while, I think about 
five years ago, when I was working for a charity, we provided 
some legal representation for children, Mr. Speaker. So as such, 
we were a part of a consultation, a very, very large-scale 
consultation in terms of amending The Child and Family 
Services Act and The Children’s Law Act as well. And that 
consultation was quite broad, and there was some very 
important recommendations that were made, I know, at the 
small group that I was a part of. And we essentially haven’t 
really seen anything come out of it ever since, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So when I see these changes I think, well okay, here’s some 
changes that are being made — but what happened to those 
large-scale consultations? And what happened to the plan of 
redesigning child and family services in a way that is more 
beneficial and actually provides the supports that children are 
needing today, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And that’s a frustrating thing when you . . . It’s very frustrating 
actually as a community-based organization when your 
resources are very scarce, when you dedicate weeks, frankly, 
weeks to consultation, the consultative process, and you really 
want to commit and give your two cents and work to improve 
legislation and work to improve the system, that that 
consultation . . . I don’t know if it’s collecting dust in the 
Minister of Social Services’s office in a binder somewhere, but 
it’s very frustrating for a community-based organization when 
you get called into a consultative process and you dedicate 
hours and hours of time, when resources are very scarce, to 
doing that work, and then none of your recommendations ever 
see the light of day, Mr. Speaker. It’s very, very frustrating. 
 
I think that concludes the remarks I have with respect to this 

bill. As I said, I know other people will want to weigh in on this 
important piece of legislation. And as I said earlier, I was very 
honoured to be here when the member from Saskatoon Nutana 
was talking about this bill and spoke very, very eloquently and 
poignantly with respect to her personal experiences. And as I 
said, and I’m sure I delivered accordingly, I can never live up to 
that very, very impressive set of remarks that she gave, Mr. 
Speaker. But I still did my time and I was happy to do so, and I 
hope I served her well, but I know I could never compare, Mr. 
Speaker. So with that, I’d like to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Regina Douglas Park has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 33, The Child and Family 
Services Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 34 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 34 — The 
Provincial Lands Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
[16:45] 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m really 
honoured today to stand and talk about Bill 34, The Provincial 
Lands Act, 2016. This was brought forward by the Minister of 
Agriculture in the spring session. This is a very important bill, 
an important piece of legislation. I think anything that talks 
about our provincial lands is something that we really have to 
look into and ensure that everything is right on there, because 
that’s what we have, and that’s our bread and butter. 
 
I have to admit, Mr. Speaker, that I’m going to join my friend 
here when she also indicated that when we have a new piece of 
legislation and there’s no background information, it’s really 
quite frustrating because you don’t have any explanatory notes 
to go off of. And it’s kind of expected that you go from the old 
Act and the new Act and go line by line and determine what 
exactly has been taken out and what’s been left in and not 
changed. So it’s really difficult when you’re trying to examine 
that, but my understanding is that there was a lot of changes that 
needed to be done here due to the fact that it’s kind of outdated 
legislation. 
 
So according to what the Minister of Agriculture said was: 
 

In 1930 Canada transferred the responsibility for Crown 
lands, mines, and minerals to the province but, as you 
know, a lot has changed since then and parts of this 
legislation have been living in the past. The entire 
provincial lands Act is largely unchanged from 1978, with 
clauses and language dating back to the 1930s. Portions of 
it are no longer used and some are inconsistent with other 
pieces of legislation. As the legislator, government is held 
to a higher standard by the courts. The new Act ensures we 



November 14, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1319 

reduce any potential risk by clarifying language and 
standards. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I agree with regards to updating legislation. I 
could imagine the language was quite a bit different from dating 
. . . especially the 1930s but never mind the 1970s. We used a 
lot different language at that point, and we have to look and 
ensure that legislation kind of matches the type of language 
we’re using at this time, so that when we’re comparing different 
pieces of legislation that it’s comparable with regards to 
language. And also some of the language used back in those 
days would be deemed as being disrespectful in this day and 
age. So when I did look at the old Act, I noticed some of that 
language in there, and so I think that it’s important to do that 
housekeeping and ensure that language is up to date. So also, 
the minister said: 
 

Across government we are committed to modernizing 
legislation for the people of Saskatchewan. That is good 
government. We need The Provincial Lands Act to reflect 
today’s uses of Crown land. We need it to be efficient and 
accountable to protect the land for generations to come. 
Revising The Provincial Lands Act will allow our province 
to benefit from an improved investment climate. The 
legislation will have the potential to increase investment 
and economic development in Saskatchewan. Where 
appropriate, longer term leases would be allowed on 
Crown land. This would ensure potential investors — 
whether in oil and gas, potash, or wind farms — have the 
opportunity to create long-term projects. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I think we all agree that we have to diversify our 
economy and that we have to look at different ways to have 
investment, but I also want us to err on the side of caution that 
we respect the lands that we have, we respect the treaty rights 
that are here. And we need to look at the environmental 
consequences that might occur with having some of the 
potential investors. And so I think we want longer-term 
projects, but we also don’t want to have long-term 
consequences with regards to that. So we’ve got to outweigh all 
the potential risks and benefits with regards to these deals. 
 
So I’m going to provide a little bit of background with regards 
to this legislation. Saskatchewan is approximately 161.1 million 
acres. That’s 65.2 million hectares in size. Responsibility for 
the Act is shared between the Ministries of Agriculture and 
Environment, with the Crown land portfolio divided as follows. 
So the Ministry of Agriculture has 6.9 million acres, 2.9 million 
hectares of Crown land located throughout the agricultural 
productive areas of southern Saskatchewan. The Ministry of 
Environment has 93.2 million acres, which is 37.7 million 
hectares, and of Crown resource land largely found in central 
and northern Saskatchewan with small parcels disbursed 
throughout southern Saskatchewan. 
 
So it’s another area which is really tricky when you have two 
ministries that are kind of falling underneath the same piece of 
legislation. And I think that we have to keep that in mind when 
we’re thinking about this. 
 
So also the Minister of Agriculture, he indicated that the 
purpose of this legislation was to “. . . ensure Crown land was 
protected and productive for generations to come.” And I really 

hope that we keep that, like in our mind, that that is the main 
point: is we want to make sure that our Crown land is protected 
and productive for generations to come because we need that 
for our grandkids, our great-grandkids. We want to keep this 
land for them. 
 
So they want to ensure, like I talked about, you know, having 
longer term contracts, potentially increase access to Crown 
land, adjust rates and lease terms. That’s some of the motivating 
factors for the changes to this legislation and “. . . the ability to 
respond and take action when land is being misused . . . the 
government could step in immediately and issue a stop work 
order.” Apparently the previous legislation was unable or the 
language wasn’t specific enough in order to do that. 
 
And I think that I’m, you know, happy that we’re adjusting this 
now, but after like almost 40 years, we’re now going to be 
talking about, you know, taking action when land is being 
misused? I think that should have always been forefront in our 
mind. But I would like to learn more about how that’s going to 
be progressed and how that’s going to be monitored. 
 
Well the minister also said that this will not impact 
communities and their ability to exercise their treaty or 
Aboriginal rights or carry out traditional use. Mr. Speaker, I 
think this is a really important aspect. And I really hope that this 
is followed through because when we had a meeting with some 
chiefs the other day, they talked about how they’re really 
concerned about some of the legislation in this Act and how that 
might be an impact for them. Because the way things have been 
progressing, sometimes people have been getting contracts in 
areas of the province and that has been preventing them from 
being able to pick berries in those areas, collect medicine in 
some of those areas. And it also has been moving animal and so 
it causes conflict with, you know, their hunting rights. And so 
those are all very important things that are important for First 
Nations and Métis communities, and we’ve got to respect that 
as well. We can’t make decisions that are going to impact these 
communities. 
 
And so I think that needs to be looked into when we’re making 
some of the changes within this legislation. And I know the 
critic that we have with regards to Environment will — and 
Agriculture; she has both portfolios so that works out good for 
her — but that she’ll really take that into account too when 
she’s discussing this in committees. 
 
We also want to make sure that we have some guidelines and 
make sure that we’re really consistent with regards to those 
guidelines because that’s ethical way of doing business, not 
having a special way to do business with one person and maybe 
a different way of doing business with another person. I’ve 
heard that there has been some of that kind of dealing, 
especially with our Crown land, and that concerns me. And so I 
hope that we can make sure that things are done consistently, 
that there’s proper measures to go with regards to it, and that 
there’s appropriate guidelines, and that we have best practice 
and regulations that are being implemented, and that we look at 
ways to enforce these regulations. Because we could have all 
the regulations we want, but unless we enforce them, that’s not 
going to do any good for anybody. 
 
So we need to come up with a way to have that, because we 



1320 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2016 

know, like if . . . I know the minister was talking about, you 
know, wanting, like there’s parts in here that talk about 
expediating services and the progress and flexibility on types of 
agreements. But we also again need to really focus on best 
practice and ensure that regulations are there so, like the 
minister said, that we have this land for future use and it’s “. . . 
protected and productive for generations to come,” I believe is 
exactly what he said. 
 
So I also want to kind of go over some of the deficiencies of 
this current Act: 
 

The language of the current Act is outdated and includes 
provisions that are restrictive, [so that are] better suited to 
Regulation, and divided according to which ministry is 
responsible for oversight. These result in the inability to be 
flexible as well as in differences in how ministries operate, 
which creates confusion. 

 
Another thing that’s a deficiency is: 
 

The current Act is subject to inconsistent or inaccurate 
interpretation because it includes unnecessary or redundant 
sections, is silent on key issues, lacks clear regulation 
making authority or is written in a manner that may be 
confusing. 

 
The existing legislation requires that policy is determined 
according to how or when the province assumed 
responsibility for the land . . . This results in policy 
inequities and the need to always remember the source 
before providing policy interpretation. 
 
There is a need to ensure clear linkages to other 
appropriate legislation that impact how Crown land is 
managed and a more clear connection amongst them is 
important. 

 
The ability to use modern land-use planning principles and 
approaches are absent in the existing Act and will be 
beneficial when dealing with complex multi-use conflicts. 

 
So again, like I said before, Mr. Speaker, this is a really 
complicated piece of legislation. I think there’s a lot of 
stakeholders that need to be consulted and want to be consulted 
with regards to the process here, and that we need to look at it 
basically line for line because it is a new piece of legislation. 
And I’m sure, like my colleagues will have a lot more 
information, but they’ll want to add with regards to discussion 
of this bill. And so, like I think there’ll be a lot of discussion in 
committee with regards to the bill and that there will be a lot of 
questions to ask with regards to the agriculture component of it 
and the environment, environmental component of it. And since 
our critic has both areas, she’s well knowledgeable in both, and 
so I’m sure she’ll have some questions for the ministries that 
are involved. 
 
And so with that, I think, Mr. Speaker, I think I added all the 
information that I wanted to with regards to The Provincial 
Lands Act. I know there’s a lot of people who have information 
they want to add, and so I move to adjourn this debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert Northcote 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 34, The Provincial 
Lands Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this House 
be now adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that this Assembly do now 
adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly now stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1289 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1289 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1289 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1289 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1290 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1290 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1290 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1291 
  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 1291, 1300 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1291 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1301 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1291 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1292 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1292 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1292 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1292 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1293 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1293 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1293 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1293 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Air Ambulance Marks 70th Anniversary 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1294 
 Diabetes Awareness Month and World Diabetes Day 
  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1294 
 University of Saskatchewan Student Makes Innovative Discovery 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1294 
 Raising Awareness of Childhood Cancer 
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1294 
 Saskatoon Hilltops Win Canadian Junior Football League Championship 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1295 
 Breweries Granted Court Injunction 
  Buckingham ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1295 
 Liquor Markup Structure Supports Beer Industry 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1295 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Auditor’s Report and Details of Land Transaction 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1296 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1296 
 Support for the Northern Teacher Education Program 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1298 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1298 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1298 
 Response to Northerners’ Concerns 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1298 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1299 
 Supreme Court Ruling and Funding for Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1299 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1299 
BILL WITHDRAWN 
 Bill No. 41 — The Coroners Amendment Act, 2016 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1300 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 8 — The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2016 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1301 
  Harrison (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) ........................................................................ 1302 
 



 

 Bill No. 19 — The Film and Video Classification Act, 2016 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1302 
  Merriman (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) ...................................................................... 1303 
 Bill No. 29 — The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur les juges de paix 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1303 
  Merriman (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) ...................................................................... 1304 
 Bill No. 30 — The Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1304 
  Merriman (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) ...................................................................... 1305 
 Bill No. 31 — The Local Authority Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1305 
  Merriman (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) ...................................................................... 1307 
 Bill No. 26 — The Patient Choice Medical Imaging Act 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1307 
 Bill No. 28 — The Extension of Compassionate Care Act, 2016 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1309 
 Bill No. 1 — The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Amendment Act, 2016 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1311 
 Bill No. 32 — The Automobile Accident Insurance (Benefits) Amendment Act, 2016 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1314 
 Bill No. 33 — The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2016 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1316 
 Bill No. 34 — The Provincial Lands Act, 2016 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1318 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


