






















































Hansard: November 07, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 37A  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 7, 2016, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (Ind.) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10; Independent (Ind.) — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1141 
 November 7, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to you and through you to all members of the Legislative 
Assembly, it’s my honour to introduce a number of leaders 
from northern Saskatchewan that are seated in your gallery. If 
they could give a wave as I say their names.  
 
First we have Chief Lawrence McIntyre of the English River 
First Nation. We have Chief Coreen Sayazie from Black Lake 
Denesuline First Nation. We have Chief Rudy Adam from Fond 
du Lac Denesuline First Nation. We have Mayor Mike 
Natomagan from the northern village of Pinehouse. We have 
Geoff Gay, who is the CEO [chief executive officer] of the 
Athabasca Basin Development; Anne Robillard, Chair of the 
board for the Athabasca Basin Development; Vice-chief Joe 
Tsannie Jr. of the Prince Albert Grand Council; Victor Fern, 
chairperson of the Six Rivers Fund; Jeff Hryhoriw, director of 
government relations for Cameco; Jonathon Huntington, 
director of community investment and corporate responsibility 
for Cameco; and Darrel Burnouf, manager of corporate 
responsibility in Cameco. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the great pleasure of having lunch with these 
great leaders here today and was able to hear some of their 
concerns and also about some of the good work that is 
happening in northern Saskatchewan. These leaders have done 
great work in partnering with industry, and industries like 
Cameco have equally been great partners for northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I certainly want to thank them for travelling here today, and 
hope they had great meetings because they had the opportunity 
to meet with a number of cabinet ministers. So, Mr. Speaker, I 
ask all members to join with me in welcoming them to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition, I want to join with the minister across and 
welcome everybody to the Assembly here, all the chiefs, all the 
northern leaders, and Cameco. It’s really great that you guys 
were all able to attend today. Look forward to meeting with 
everybody. 
 
I really look forward to meeting with FSIN [Federation of 
Sovereign Indigenous Nations] Chief Bobby Cameron. And 
I’ve worked with Vice-chief Tsannie; we’ve had some meetings 
together. Geoff’s wife, Lori, works with my partner, Darren, at 
Prince Albert Grand Council, and I look forward to officially 
working with you also. So thank you and welcome to your 

Assembly. And if everybody could join me in welcoming them. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to join with the minister and the member in welcoming this 
delegation to their Legislative Assembly today and thank them, 
Mr. Speaker, for their leadership, not just in northern 
Saskatchewan but province wide.  
 
And I think we should also introduce to you and through you to 
all members of the Assembly, I believe Chief Bobby Cameron 
from the FSIN is also here, as well as Vice-chief Heather Bear 
from the FSIN, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank, on the record, 
Chief Cameron for his leadership and work with respect to the 
tragedies that have unfolded in the North. I look forward to 
travelling this week and having Chief Cameron participating 
and leading in the work that we’re going to be doing there. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, he is a stalwart leader for our First Nations 
and indeed a Saskatchewan leader, and I’d ask all members to 
join with me in welcoming Chief Bobby Cameron to his 
Legislative Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, it’s my honour to join with the Premier to 
welcome certainly all these northern leaders to their Assembly 
here today, but specifically Chief Bobby Cameron of the FSIN. 
It’s an honour to have you here in your Assembly, Chief. 
 
And the official opposition is grateful for your leadership and 
your efforts, as is the province of Saskatchewan on so many 
fronts: currently your engagement and leadership on youth 
suicides and the tragedy that we must resolve and deal with; but 
as well, matters of pipelines, for which you’ve been focused on 
being constructive in finding security and better oversight and 
management; and as well just all those efforts focusing in on 
education and our economy for First Nations people across 
Saskatchewan, ensuring that we’re building hope, opportunity, 
and strength for the long term. So it’s my honour to welcome 
Chief Bobby Cameron to his Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would ask leave 
for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today, along with 
the member from Cannington, I had the privilege of honouring 
15 of this year’s Scholarship of Honour recipients. And this 
scholarship provides returning soldiers or family members of 



1142 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2016 

injured or fallen soldiers with funding to pursue post-secondary 
education. 
 
And I would like to welcome in their legislature, in the west 
gallery, Corporal Jody Salway — if you can give a wave — and 
his wife, Carole; Master Corporal Jordan Donohue and his dad, 
Chris; and Melanie Rustenburg, the spouse of Retired Corporal 
Joseph Rustenburg. Also in attendance is Joseph’s service dog, 
Vixen, if you can catch him there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as it happens, Melanie and Joseph Rustenburg 
were featured in a Globe and Mail piece over the weekend. And 
Melanie was credited by her husband for helping him deal with 
post-traumatic stress, an injury following his three deployments 
to Afghanistan. He calls Melanie his rock. She kept me alive, he 
says, when I gave up on life. I am so immensely thankful. 
 
I understand that Melanie wants to become a police officer, and 
I cannot think of a better candidate. The same goes for all the 
other recipients, Mr. Speaker. We wish them all the best in their 
post-secondary studies. It was an honour to spend time with 
these great people this morning, and I would like to thank them 
again for their service and sacrifice. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with the 
minister opposite in welcoming and congratulating the 15 
winners of the Scholarship of Honour. Thank you to all the 
service people for your service, and also we know that when 
soldiers serve, their families also sacrifice. So I welcome all of 
those soldiers and their families here today. Thank you for your 
service, and congratulations on winning this scholarship. And I 
would join all members in joining me in those sentiments. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of this Assembly, I want to join 
with the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition in 
welcoming Chief Bobby Cameron to this Legislative Assembly. 
As well, we have Vice-chief Heather Bear from Ochapowace, 
and we have Rory MacLean, Mr. Speaker, from the 
communications with the FSIN. 
 
As well, I do want to acknowledge, Mr. Speaker, Mark Dietz 
and Kevin Schoepp, who are conservation officers that joined 
with us here today to witness a memorandum of understanding, 
an agreement that Chief Cameron and I signed with respect to 
access for our conservation officers into First Nations 
communities. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ll hear more about that 
from the member, I believe, from North Battleford in a member 
statement. 
 
But I want all members here today to welcome Chief Cameron, 
Vice-chief Bear to their Assembly and thank them for the effort 
that they make on so many files and their engagement with the 
provincial government. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join the 

members that have welcomed the leadership from northern 
Saskatchewan and those chiefs that are from the South FSIN. I 
just want to acknowledge Chief Bart Tsannie — welcome to 
your Legislative Assembly — and the great work you’re doing 
on behalf of your people and your nation. To Vice-chief Smy 
Tsannie, I just want to say welcome. Welcome to you to the 
Legislative Assembly, and keep up the good work.  
 
I know that you have many obstacles as First Nations, and I 
hope someday you can deal with governments nation-to-nation 
and do the true meaning of the spirit for our people back home 
that need the help and the great work that you guys do to try to 
partnership. So I want to say, continue your partnerships and 
continue the work you are doing. We are there to support you. 
And I know both sides of this Legislative Assembly will have 
no choice but to one day deal with you in the true meaning of 
nation-to-nation. So with that, I honour you to your Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you and through the Legislative Assembly, up on the west 
gallery I’d like to introduce long-time friends from my 
hometown of Canora, Saskatchewan. Nine-year-old Lila 
Wilson, give a wave. She was one of my biggest fans when I 
was mayor of the town of Canora, and then she was very 
excited when I decided to jump into politics provincially. And 
then earlier this spring through my campaign in Canora here, 
we had the Premier come through our town and meet with our 
people and do a little campaigning. It was then when little Lila 
met the Premier, Brad Wall, and questioned and interviewed 
her. From then on, I was the second favourite politician in that 
group. 
 
With her today is her father Terry, mother Alissa, brother 
Jackson, Abby and Aubrey. It’s their first time here, and I’d like 
to welcome them to our legislature. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
join with the minister in welcoming Joe and Melanie to their 
Assembly here today. I had the distinct pleasure of sitting with 
them and spending some time with them on Saturday night at 
the Wounded Warriors fundraiser in North Battleford. And they 
did an excellent job of recounting Joe’s trip and Melanie’s work 
that they’ve done to get back to where they are today. I think 
they did an awesome job that night, and I know it wasn’t easy 
for them. And it certainly was my pleasure to meet with them. 
Welcome to your Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to introduce to you and through you to the rest of the 
House, a special guest up in your gallery, a young man by the 
name of Austin MacNally. He is a strong New Democrat, a 
Young New Democrat who helps an awful lot on the west side 
in Saskatoon. And he’s here to observe the proceedings, and I’d 
ask all members to join me in welcoming him to his gallery. 
Thank you. 



November 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1143 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to this Assembly, it’s my pleasure to introduce a 
number of people, representatives from the Alzheimer Society, 
in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have with us today, from their board of directors, Ian Rea, 
president. We’ll just get you to give us a wave. Van Isman, 
vice-president; Jennifer St. Onge, board member; and board 
members Donna Milbrandt; Charlene Callander; and Gary 
Mearns. We also have some staff members with us, Mr. 
Speaker. We have Joanne Bracken, CEO We have Joanne 
Michael, director of programs and operations. We have Leslie 
Quennell, communications and marketing manager; and Harry 
Huebner, a family caregiver. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleague the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health and I had the privilege earlier today of meeting with Ian 
and Joanne to discuss a number of issues, appreciated that 
meeting very much. And the society is having a reception later 
today in the building for all members of the Assembly on both 
sides, and we’re looking to that very much as well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I’d ask all members to please give these great 
representatives from the Alzheimer Society a warm welcome to 
their Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
join with the minister opposite in welcoming these folks from 
the Alzheimer Society of Saskatchewan. I want to thank you for 
all that you do, the direct support you provide to families, to 
caregivers, and those living with Alzheimer’s and other 
dementia. I want to thank you for your willingness, the 
advocacy that you do in helping us understand issues so much 
better. 
 
[13:45] 
 
I had an opportunity last week, or a week and a half ago, Mr. 
Speaker, to hear some of the work at a dementia summit in 
Saskatoon. There’s some wonderful research and projects going 
on here in Saskatchewan. So thank you for your involvement 
with all of that. And to Joanne Bracken and Joanne Michael, 
thank you for the time that you’ve taken to share the work that 
you do, the challenges that you experience as an organization in 
how we could do things better, but also the successes that 
you’re having. Those are always wonderful to hear. 
 
As a daughter of someone who is living with dementia, this has 
always been an important issue I think for my constituents, but 
in the last couple years as a family we’re grappling with those 
issues as well. So I’m extra grateful for all the work that you do. 
So I’d ask all members to join with me in welcoming these 
guests to their legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 
 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join with my members opposite and on this side of the House in 
welcoming the northern leaders, but specifically I wanted to 
point out Mayor Mike Natomagan. Congratulations on being 
re-elected to mayor of Pinehouse Lake. 
 
As most of you know, Pinehouse is where my family members 
live, and we’re so proud of the leadership of both Mike and that 
whole community, that they have just stepped outside of the 
box. They’ve led the northern communities in all sorts of really 
adventuresome ideas in business planning but also in social 
programs and in educational programs. They really are not 
afraid to step off the sidelines and become real leaders. So 
congratulations to Pinehouse and that whole community. Their 
elders complex that they are building by local construction 
workers is just a testament to the work and the dedication that 
that whole community has in making lives better for each and 
every person who resides within that community. 
 
So congratulations to Mike and to all of the leaders in 
Pinehouse Lake for being such a role model for each and every 
member of your community. So thank you very much for 
making the long trip down here today and sharing your time and 
energy with the members of this House. So thank you very 
much, Mike. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 
to rise today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed 
to the federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on 
the province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Yorkton and 
Foam Lake. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition to reverse the cuts to the 
Lighthouse program in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. The petitioners 
point out that in April 2014 the Minister of Social Services said 
the Lighthouse in Saskatoon would “. . . take pressure off 
existing detox facilities, hospitals, and police cells, while 
keeping people safe, especially in our brutally cold winters.” 
That same day, Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that the 
Minister of Health said, “We want to ensure that individuals 
with mental health and addictions issues have a safe place to 
stay.” 
 
The petitioners point out that this government has repeatedly 



1144 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2016 

indicated that the Lighthouse stabilization unit keeps 
individuals out of hospital emergency rooms and jail cells. And 
this should be extra relevant these days, Mr. Speaker, as the 
Saskatoon Health Region has reached record over-capacity 
levels in our hospitals, Mr. Speaker. And clearly the 
stabilization unit isn’t the whole issue, but making these cuts 
certainly doesn’t help. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately reverse 
their recent cuts to funding that allows extremely 
vulnerable people to access the services of the Lighthouse 
stabilization unit in Saskatoon, and revisit their imposition 
of a strict and narrow definition of homelessness in 
November of 2015 which forced the Lighthouse to cut 
back its hours of essential services in February 2016, and 
take immediate steps to ensure that homeless people in 
Saskatchewan have emergency shelter, clothing, and food 
available to them before more lives are lost. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens of Regina, 
Dalmeny, and Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 
to present a petition regarding the Sask Party sell-off of 
SaskTel. The residents want to bring our attention to the 
following: that after nearly a decade of wasting the economic 
boom and blowing through the savings, the government is now 
forcing Saskatchewan people to pay for Sask Party 
mismanagement; that in the recent election campaign, the Sask 
Party promised they would not privatize SaskTel, and instead of 
looking at their own waste and scandal, the Sask Party is now 
talking about breaking their promise and looking to sell off 
SaskTel to make a quick dollar — but SaskTel is owned by all 
of us and was built with Saskatchewan hard work, innovation, 
and pride; that SaskTel creates thousands of good jobs, enables 
service to parts of the province that other providers ignore, and 
offers the lowest mobile phone rates in Canada. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Sask Party government to keep their promise, stop their 
plan to sell off SaskTel, and keep our valued Crown 
corporation in the hands of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens from the cities of Moose 
Jaw and Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition in support of Wakamow Valley Authority. And we 
know that as a result of the passage of The Wakamow Valley 
Authority Amendment Act, 2016 on June 30th, the Wakamow 
Valley Authority lost its statutory funding of $127,000 from the 
Saskatchewan government in addition to the $30,000 in 
supplementary funding. This loss of annual funding negatively 

affected the ability of Wakamow to maintain its lands and 
repair its facilities and provide services to the Moose Jaw 
community. This funding cut resulted in the layoff of one-third 
of the park staff which included two summer students and two 
regular employees. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, on June 21st, 2016, the provincial 
government voted in favour of this bill, resulting in the cuts to 
Wakamow and subsequent job losses. I’d like to read the 
prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to immediately repeal The Wakamow Valley Authority 
Amendment Act, 2016 and reinstate statutory funding to the 
Wakamow Valley Authority. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
the city of Moose Jaw. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to 
present to you a petition condemning the Sask Party’s cuts to 
the SAID [Saskatchewan assured income for disability] 
program. After nearly a decade of wasting the economic boom 
and blowing through the savings, the government is now 
forcing the province’s most vulnerable people to pay for the 
Sask Party mismanagement. 
 
The Sask Party’s latest cold-hearted cut will take money away 
from people who are unable to work due to a disability; the 
people who are being hurt by this Sask Party cut live with 
serious illnesses such as multiple sclerosis, cancer, autism, 
among other illnesses; and that contrary to the Minister of 
Social Services’ claims, the government underfunds clients in 
regards to shelter allowance and that shelter allowance should 
be reflective of the current rental costs. I will read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to stop their plan to cut 
the SAID funding and immediately restore funding for 
those living with a disability; that shelter allowance should 
be reflective of the current rental costs; and that the 
Saskatchewan Party government implement the 
recommendations of the advisory group on poverty 
reduction. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing these petitions are from 
Saskatoon. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 



November 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1145 

petition in support of child care centres in Saskatchewan. Those 
signing this petition wish to draw our attention to the following: 
across Saskatchewan, licensed non-profit child care centres are 
taxed inconsistently. Many of our licensed non-profit child care 
centres pay commercial property tax, and this is not done in 
Alberta, Ontario, B.C. [British Columbia], or New Brunswick. 
 
Child care is essential to our economy, yet most centres struggle 
just to balance their budget. This issue threatens both the quality 
and the number of child care spaces. Quality child care has an 
enormous positive impact on a child’s future outcomes and 
yields high rates of economic return. Child care centres are 
institutions of early learning and childhood development, and 
it’s appropriate that they have the same tax treatment as 
schools. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan recognize 
that licensed non-profit child care centres provide 
programs that are foundational to a healthy society by 
including them in the Saskatchewan education Act and 
exempt all licensed non-profit child care centres in 
Saskatchewan from property tax through changes through 
appropriate legislation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those citizens signing this petition today reside in 
Moose Jaw, Swift Current, Spruce Home, and Saskatoon. I do 
so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present another petition calling on the government to reverse 
the cuts to the Aboriginal court worker program. The 
Government of Saskatchewan cut the budget for the Aboriginal 
court worker program in the 2016-2017 provincial budget. And 
those on this side of the House know that Aboriginal court 
workers play an important role helping Aboriginal people in 
criminal and child apprehension cases. Aboriginal peoples are 
disproportionately represented in Saskatchewan’s correctional 
centres, and Aboriginal court workers successfully help to make 
our communities safer through reduced recidivism rates. I’d like 
to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan reverse its 
short-sighted and counterproductive cuts to the Aboriginal 
court worker program. 

 
Those signing the petition today are from Regina. And I do so 
submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
to stop the redirection of funding of the Northern Teacher 
Education Program Council, Inc. A recent report shows that 94 
per cent of NORTEP [northern teacher education program] 
grads found employment in the North. NORTEP has improved 
teacher retention rates in northern Saskatchewan. NORTEP has 
a positive economic impact in northern Saskatchewan. 
NORTEP provides high-quality, face-to-face instruction and 

services to students. The province’s financial deficit cannot be 
fixed by cutting indigenous education in the North and a 
program that has served the North for over 40 years. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to immediately restore the 
five-year agreement to fund the Northern Teacher 
Education Program Council, Inc. and to continue to fund 
NORTEP-NORPAC programs in La Ronge. 

 
It is signed by many good people of northern Saskatchewan. I 
so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Prince Albert Receives Saskatchewan Municipal Award 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to stand today to 
congratulate my city, Prince Albert, on receiving the 
Saskatchewan Municipal Award for innovation for its actions 
during the oil spill crisis this summer that tragically caused the 
city’s water to become contaminated. This award recognizes the 
efforts of municipal staff in responding to this crisis swiftly, 
calmly, professionally, and efficiently. Jim Toye, city manager 
for Prince Albert, points out that the success of the response 
was due to quick enactment of the emergency operations centre. 
Because of their collaborative work, the municipal staff was 
able to assess the situation, make a plan of action, and mobilize 
hundreds of people to implement it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the city of Prince Albert’s municipal staff held 
daily briefings and I sat in on most of them. There are no words 
to express the gratitude that I and the residents of Prince Albert 
felt as our mayor, council, and staff ensured that we were kept 
informed of the process being made. 
 
On behalf of my constituents, I wish to wholeheartedly thank 
Jim Toye and his staff for their dedication and their many, 
many hours of work. I know that a great deal of staff members 
postponed holidays and gave up precious time with their 
families to deal with this crisis. I’m so thrilled that they are 
being acknowledged with this award. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in 
congratulating the city of Prince Albert on receiving the 
Saskatchewan Municipal Award for innovation for its work 
during the oil spill crisis. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 
 

Scholarship of Honour Recipients 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was my 
pleasure earlier today to emcee the Scholarship of Honour event 
that recognizes the brave individuals who have laid their lives 
on the line to protect our country and our freedom, a 
scholarship which I had the honour to propose. This scholarship 
was announced in 2009, was created to honour the sacrifices 



1146 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2016 

made by members of the Canadian Armed Forces. It gives 
returning soldiers and family members of injured or fallen 
individuals a chance to pursue post-secondary studies. The 
scholarship is $5,000 and is available to all eligible candidates 
who apply. Saskatchewan is the only province to offer this type 
of scholarship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there have been 162 Scholarship of Honour 
recipients to date. Today we celebrate 15 of those heroes. Three 
of them are in the House today. Mr. Speaker, I believe I can 
speak for all of us here in saying that we are eternally grateful 
for the sacrifices our men and women in uniform have made for 
our country daily. I ask all members to join me in thanking the 
Scholarship of Honour recipients who are here today and in 
wishing them the best of luck in their studies. Thank you. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Paramedic Association Donates to Food Bank 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
members of the Saskatoon Paramedic Association IAFF 
[International Association of Fire Fighters] Local 3270 include 
paramedics, emergency medical dispatchers, mechanics, and 
ambulance technicians providing emergency services to 
Saskatoon and area residents. Their goal is to provide a strong 
voice for members in discussion with MD Ambulance, the 
Saskatchewan Health ministry, the federal government, and 
other emergency services colleagues. And when their busy 
workdays are done, they continue to contribute to the 
well-being of their community. 
 
The Saskatoon Paramedic Association members are strong 
supporters of various organizations in Saskatoon, committed to 
serving their community through service and charitable work. 
For several years, the Saskatoon Paramedic Association and 
MD Ambulance have worked together to encourage local 
businesses, schools, and citizens to fill a city bus with donated 
food items for clients of the Saskatoon Food Bank & Learning 
Centre. The annual food drive continues to result in significant 
donations to the Saskatoon Food Bank & Learning Centre. 
 
This year the Saskatoon Paramedic Association decided to 
focus their charitable support to make it as meaningful as 
possible, so they purchased the food bank a much needed new 
delivery truck. They presented keys for the truck to the food 
bank at a barbecue and Stuff the Truck event at the 8th Street 
Saskatoon Co-op in October. The delivery of the truck was 
perfect timing, said the food bank’s executive director, Laurie 
O’Connor, as their much used old truck had broken down just a 
few days earlier. 
 
I ask all members to join me in thanking the Saskatoon 
Paramedic Association, including president Paul Hills, for its 
long-standing dedication and service to community, and for its 
support of the Saskatoon Food Bank who fills a tremendous but 
unfortunately growing need in our city. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 
 

Mosque Opens in Lloydminster 
 
Ms. Young: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I had the pleasure of 
attending and speaking at the inaugural reception of Baitul 
Amaan Mosque which opened on Saturday in Lloydminster. 
 
Also in attendance was His Holiness Hazrat Mirza Masroor 
Ahmad; The Respectable Lal Khan Malik, national president of 
the Ahmadiyya Muslim Jama’at; Jason Kenney, former MP 
[Member of Parliament] for Calgary Midnapore; Gerald 
Aalbers, mayor-elect for the city of Lloydminster; Ian 
Hamilton, former mayor of North Battleford; and John 
Gormley, NewsTalk host. 
 
It was an honour to have the Caliph in Lloydminster for the 
opening of the new mosque while on his six-week tour across 
Canada to celebrate the 50-year anniversary of the Ahmadiyya 
Muslim community in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this event was a wonderful opportunity to bring 
together people from the world of faith, politics, and civic 
society. We can see and feel in our province how the 
Ahmadiyya Muslims are engaged in our communities and are 
working to help educate people about their religion. 
 
I have had the opportunity to attend two of these educational 
workshops: Je Suis Hijabi, which was a nationwide campaign to 
remove the misconstrued notions surrounding Muslim women’s 
identities; as well as Stop the CrISIS, a campaign to counter the 
rise of youth radicalization. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the Ahmadiyya Muslim 
Jama’at for the invitation and congratulate them on the 
wonderfully successful event. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 
 

Support Our Troops Gala 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 
Saturday, I, along with the Premier, the military liaison, the 
MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] for 
Humboldt-Watrous, MLA from Regina Northwest, and the 
MLA from Saskatoon Northwest, had the pleasure of attending 
the national Support Our Troops Gala. 
 
Held at the Queensbury Centre in Regina, this gala helps raise 
funds for organizations that support military personnel and their 
families. Mr. Speaker, the Military Families Fund and the 
Soldier On program are the beneficiaries of the funds raised at 
this event. These organizations provide funding and program 
supports to veterans with serious physical and mental injuries, 
the families of these veterans, and the families of fallen 
Canadian Armed Forces members. 
 
Canadian Armed Forces members in attendance included the 
Chief of Defence Staff, General Jonathan H. Vance; 2 Canadian 
Air Division Commander Brigadier-General D.B. Cochrane; 
and command team members from HMCS [Her Majesty’s 
Canadian Ship] Regina: Commander Colin Matthews, 
Lieutenant-Commander Andrew Graham, and Chief Petty 
Officer 1st Class Dexter Goulding. 



November 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1147 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 
Support Our Troops Gala organization on such a successful 
event, and in thanking all the brave men and women who have 
served and continue to serve. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 
 

Joint Agreement Regarding Conservation 
Officers and First Nations 

 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise in the 
House today to inform members about a joint agreement signed 
today between the Government of Saskatchewan and the 
Federation of Sovereign Indigenous Nations. This agreement 
relates to entry onto First Nations reserves by our conservation 
officers. The agreement formalizes guidelines already in place 
between the ministry and a number of First Nations, and 
outlines a process for conservation officers following when 
accessing First Nations reserves to conduct law enforcement 
duties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this agreement will result in several outcomes, 
including enhanced communication and co-operation between 
First Nations and the Ministry of Environment, as well as 
shared support for the conservation of renewable resources and 
the environment. Mr. Speaker, our government respects First 
Nations treaty rights to hunting, fishing, trapping, and 
gathering. 
 
The guidelines in this agreement speak to a shared commitment 
to protecting and respecting our natural resources and to the 
committed co-operation between First Nations and government. 
By sharing information, working together, and respecting the 
authority of each other’s jurisdiction, we will ensure the 
ongoing success of this relationship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government appreciates our good working 
relationship with the FSIN, and we are looking forward to 
continuing to work together. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 

Firm Moves Head Office to Moose Jaw 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning I 
had the great privilege of attending an exciting announcement 
made by the Premier and some directors of Agrocorp 
Processing. Mr. Speaker, it’s official: Agrocorp will be moving 
its headquarters from Vancouver to Moose Jaw in 2017. 
 
Our government has made it a priority to create an environment 
where business can prosper, and as a result we are seeing 
business from around the world come to invest in 
Saskatchewan. Managing Director Colin Topham has this to say 
about their company’s decision, and I quote, “Agrocorp is 
proud to be moving its headquarters to this growing province.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, since Agrocorp Processing’s inception in 2009, it 
has expanded to four processing plants and 50 employees 
Canada wide. They already have a major investment in Moose 
Jaw. It is a state-of-the-art, $20 million, high-speed, 
gentle-handling pulse facility that opened in 2013. 

Mr. Speaker, as the transition to Moose Jaw takes place over the 
next three years, 20 new employees will be calling my city 
home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in thanking 
everyone who has worked hard in seeing this happen and thank 
Agrocorp for being a part of keeping Saskatchewan strong. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Rulings on Points of Order 
 
The Speaker: — On Thursday, November 3rd, 2016, two 
points of orders were raised by the Government House Leader 
and one further point of order was raised by the Opposition 
House Leader. I will address each point of order in separate 
rulings. 
 
On the first point of order that was raised by the Government 
House Leader, he alleged that the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana used the phrase “making stuff up.” In response, the 
Opposition House Leader indicated there is no list of words or 
phrases that are not able to be said, rather a question around 
what motive is imputed with the phrase itself. 
 
I have reviewed Hansard and on page 1124 the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana stated and I quote, “they’re making it up as 
they go along.” Language similar to this has been found to be 
unparliamentarian on numerous occasions in recent years. 
 
This comment is part of what I think has been a steady erosion 
of decorum in recent days because of inflammatory and 
provocative comments hurled across the floor, both on and off 
the record. I’ve asked to review the record and, in doing so, I 
am sorry to say I found many instances of language that are of 
concern. On Thursday, I found that members have accused each 
other of misrepresentation and mischaracterization. Members 
have come very close to questioning the truthfulness or the 
forthrightness of each member. On the very point the 
Government House Leader raised with respect to language of 
the member of Nutana in question period, a government 
member accused an opposition member and I quote, “. . . 
they’re making this up in their pretended mind . . .” during the 
75-minute debate. 
 
Members, this has to stop. I am asking all members to tone it 
down. The member for Nutana isn’t the only member who has 
contributed to the erosion in decorum, so on this occasion I will 
not single her out to withdraw and apologize. 
 
I would strongly urge members to choose their words wisely as 
it is possible to effectively debate opposing positions, criticize 
statements made by members as being contrary to the facts, or 
offering alternative versions of the facts. This can be done 
without calling into question the integrity of other members. 
 
Further, I would also like to bring attention to all members that 
in recent days members are not following the rules of debate as 
outlined in rule 51(c) which states that members should be 
referred to by title, position, or constituency name. An example, 
on Thursday, members referred to other members as 
“scandal-plagued former minister” or the “junior minister from 



1148 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2016 

Meadow Lake” and the “old grim reaper.” Members should not 
follow their own rules. 
 
In the second point of order, the Government House Leader 
raised the issue that questions asked during question period 
relating to the Saskatchewan Party political donations should be 
found out of order. To support this point of order, the 
Government House Leader quoted rule 20(2), which states: 
 

Questions relating to any matter with the administrative 
competence of the government or on matters related to the 
individual ministerial responsibility may be asked of the 
Minister of the Crown. Questions on issues not officially 
connected with the government, of a private nature, related 
to Board of Internal Economy, caucus, party or political 
responsibilities are prohibited. 

 
The Opposition House Leader indicated that questions relating 
to electoral finance laws are a matter of responsibility and 
competence for the Government of Saskatchewan and should be 
found in order. 
 
I have considered the matter and reviewed the record. The 
exchange in question can be found on page 1125 of Hansard 
where the member asked the question about political funding, 
and in turn a response was given relating to political campaign 
expenses. Everything the Opposition House Leader said is true, 
but the problem is the member did not directly connect his 
question to electoral finance law or any other matter within the 
government responsibility. The previous day the member asked 
a similar question, but on that occasion he did connect it to 
campaign finance laws. 
 
I find that the question on Thursday was out of order. Members 
need to directly connect the question of administration of 
government in accordance with rule 20(2). I find that the point 
of order is well taken. 
 
Final point of order. The third point of order raised in the 
Assembly on November 3, 2016 was made by the Opposition 
House Leader. He stated, and I quote: 
 

. . . at the start of question period, the Minister of 
Economy, while the Premier was speaking, shouted over 
that, quote, “That’s an absolute lie.” 

 
The Government House Leader responded that he did not think 
there was anything on record and that he did not hear the 
comment. When the Speaker must consult with both the written 
and video recording before a matter is addressed, it illustrates 
the difficulty caused by excessive noise and members shouting 
across the floor. It also prevents me from dealing promptly with 
questionable language. 
 
I’ve reviewed Hansard and listened to the video recording 
closely. I did not find nor did I hear comments alleged to have 
been said by the minister. Accordingly I am not able to rule on 
this particular instance. However I’d like to clarify that the 
unparliamentarian remarks are out of order, whether they are 
recorded or not. This is consistent with the ruling made by 
Speaker Kowalsky on April 11th, 2007 when he stated, I quote: 
 

I wish to conclude by cautioning all members to be 

temperate in their remarks, both while recognized to speak 
and while speaking from their seat. Many of these 
unofficial comments or heckles are intentionally 
provocative and inflammatory. The course of last 
Thursday’s debate is illustrative of how such remarks are 
unhelpful. The fact that Hansard may not be able to 
attribute them to a particular member does not make them 
acceptable language. 

 
As Doreen would say, you’ve been told. So let’s respect each 
other. 
 
[14:15] 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Role of the Global Transportation Hub 
in Land Acquisitions 

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, today marks the ninth 
anniversary of that government. 
 
[Applause] 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — They can cheer all they want, but so 
much has changed. Years pretending and telling Saskatchewan 
people — get this — that they’ll be the most open and 
transparent government in Canada. And meanwhile their 
mismanagement has been piling up, and they were plotting in 
backrooms to push through their GTH [Global Transportation 
Hub] land scandal. Now they won’t even answer the simplest 
and most straightforward of questions. 
 
So on this anniversary: why did the Premier allow this bad deal 
to go through the GTH instead of having Highways acquire the 
land, as they were planning to do and which would have saved 
millions of dollars? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for his 
question. It has been nine years since our government had the 
good fortune, the humbling honour to serve in government in 
the province of Saskatchewan, and much has changed in 
Saskatchewan. There are now over 100,000 more people than 
were here in 2007, and we’ve had $6 billion worth of tax 
reductions for Saskatchewan people. We’ve made $8 billion in 
additional infrastructure investments, including the GTH. We 
have paid off the operating debt of the province to the tune of 
over 35 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we have sought to grow the economy. Part of our plan to 
grow the economy was to do what members opposite failed to 
do, and that was to help create and facilitate the Global 
Transportation Hub in and near the capital city. And, Mr. 
Speaker, since then we’ve seen millions of square feet 
constructed in terms of logistics and warehousing and hundreds 
of jobs created, thousands in the construction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With respect to the land acquisition, I repeat again: the 
Provincial Auditor was given full licence to look at any matter 
related to the transaction including cabinet documents. She 



November 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1149 

highlighted that there was a problem with respect to 
communications between the Ministry of Highways and the 
Global Transportation Hub, and a number of other very 
significant recommendations made by the auditor which we 
accept fully. She also, in the press release that accompanied the 
report, indicated clearly that there was not fraud; neither was 
there a conflict of interest nor wrongdoing on the part of the 
board which included at the time the minister responsible. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Not a single answer again from the 
Premier here today. A bit of a brag-fest that Saskatchewan 
people have grown to be accustomed. You would think that the 
Premier would be just a bit contrite about the 20-some million 
dollars wasted in this GTH scandal. And of course he knows it 
wasn’t a forensic audit, and in fact the audit that was there was 
scathing and exonerated no one. 
 
We know that Highways wanted to buy the land all the way 
along. We know that the GTH and Highways were working 
under that assumption and that plan. So a simple 
straightforward question to the Premier: what changed? Why 
did he use the GTH to pay way too much for that land? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, one of the challenges 
identified in the auditor’s report is that the assembly, the 
acquisition of the land was occurring at a time of rapidly 
escalating land costs, Mr. Speaker, and those rapidly escalating 
land costs led to the final price tag. 
 
But I fundamentally disagree with the preamble to my hon. 
friend’s question. No money has been lost in this project. In fact 
acres of land have been sold at a higher price than the price 
purchased . . . than the purchase price of the land in question in 
this debate. That’s the bottom line. 
 
And do you know what’s happening, Mr. Speaker? People are 
wanting to invest in the Global Transportation Hub at those 
higher prices. Even when you account for servicing those lots, 
Mr. Speaker, the price is higher than the government paid. They 
are investing in those lots. They are locating businesses there. I 
think we’re going to have more good news actually at the 
Global Transportation Hub in the months ahead in terms of 
being a premier and preferred place to be on the prairies for 
industries involved in logistics, Mr. Speaker. And I look 
forward then at that point to the full support of the Hon. Leader 
of the Opposition. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Only this Premier can think that 
somehow wasting tens of millions of dollars is somehow a good 
deal for Saskatchewan taxpayers, Mr. Speaker. I guess it’s the 
same Premier that’s added $7 billion of debt in seven years, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We know that this issue was discussed at cabinet at least twice. 
The first time the Minister of Justice told his colleagues that it 
was a bad deal; it had a concealed identity of course. A year 
later it came back again. This time the land was even more 

expensive. $25 million had conveniently arrived from 
SaskPower and the former minister that had been plagued by 
scandals, and a Sask Party supporter’s name was now attached 
to the land. And the cabinet okayed the deal. To the Premier: 
why, and what changed? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well of course, Mr. Speaker, the 
preamble is wrong again from the Leader of the Opposition. 
The money was not wasted; in fact, we’ve sold land at the GTH 
for more than which we purchased it in the transaction in 
question. 
 
You know, as far as the auditor’s report, the auditor had full 
authority to canvass all matters related to this transaction. She 
had access to all of the documents and all of the individuals to 
which she wanted. 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the context 
of the audit that was done, the auditor identified a number of 
challenges. She made 10 recommendations, eight of which 
related to the Ministry of Highways and Infrastructure, two of 
which related to the Global Transportation Hub Authority. 
 
We’ve fully accepted those recommendations. We’re working 
diligently on the implementation of those recommendations. 
And I know the auditor is going to have the opportunity to 
address the recommendations tomorrow at committee. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Public Accounts Committee Meeting 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Refusing to give answers day after day 
is offensive to Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so the Chair of the Public Accounts Committee has called 
a meeting, as has been referenced, to get to the bottom of this. 
That PAC [Public Accounts Committee] is of course chaired by 
the opposition, and its role is to review the actions of 
government. But we can’t call witnesses like the DM [deputy 
minister] of the Minister of the Economy without the support of 
the Sask Party Deputy Chair and the Sask Party majority. 
 
So will the Premier instruct his members on the committee to 
support being fully open . . . or to fully open and transparent 
committee hearings starting tomorrow into issues arising from 
the auditor’s report, so we can get the answers that we can’t get 
here on the floor of this Assembly? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition referenced getting to the bottom. The Provincial 
Auditor got to the bottom of the matter and her conclusion was 
that . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh they’re heckling, Mr. 



1150 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2016 

Speaker, so they don’t agree with the Provincial Auditor’s 
conclusion. They clearly don’t. We know that they don’t. They 
profess support for the work that the Provincial Auditor has 
done and then they constantly, constantly stand up and question 
the conclusion that she came to which there was no 
wrongdoing, there was no conflict of interest, and that there was 
no fraud. 
 
As far as the Public Accounts Committee, Mr. Speaker, the 
Leader of the Opposition should know that executive 
government does not direct what members of a legislative 
committee do. That’s a question of privilege, Mr. Speaker, and 
the Leader of the Opposition should be aware of that. If he isn’t 
aware of it, I know that the Opposition House Leader most 
definitely is aware of that. 
 
So the committee will do their work, Mr. Speaker. The 
Provincial Auditor will have the opportunity to discuss her 
report, present her recommendations. I know those 
recommendations will be dealt with very seriously by the Public 
Accounts Committee, as they’ve been dealt with very seriously 
by the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, on both fronts, what an 
outrageous and weak response from that government. The 
question was to the Premier. The minister can yell all he wants, 
or he could try to answer a question here too. 
 
The DM to the Minister of the Economy is identified 
throughout the auditor’s report as a key player in the deal that 
led to the scandal. In the report he is unnamed, but it’s clear 
who it is. He’s still responsible to the Minister of the Economy. 
So will the Premier do all he can to ensure that he shows up and 
testifies to that committee? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Just to be clear, what the Leader of the 
Opposition is encouraging the government, asking the 
government to breach the privileges of members of the House. 
That’s what the Leader of the Opposition is . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . And he thinks it’s funny, but that is what the 
Leader of the Opposition is doing. 
 
Of course, Mr. Speaker, you well know, as does the Opposition 
House Leader and others in this Assembly, that committees 
have the ability to determine their own, well their own rules for 
one thing, but also they have the ability to determine questions 
of process. The executive branch of government does not direct 
committees to do things or members of committees to do things. 
That is a breach of privilege, and that’s exactly what the Leader 
of the Opposition is counselling. 
 
At the Public Accounts Committee tomorrow though, the 
Provincial Auditor will have the opportunity to discuss the 
recommendations that were made in her report. And I’m sure 
her conclusion, which she indicated when that report was 
issued, was that there was no wrongdoing, there was no fraud, 
and there was no conflict of interest. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the question was to the 
Premier. Not only has he hidden from providing answers on the 
floor of this Assembly, now he’s hiding witnesses who are key 
to this very land scandal. And you know, we also look forward 
to speaking to all three of the CEOs of the GTH who are 
involved in this deal. 
 
Of course there was the long-serving public servant that was 
booted right before the Sask Party’s bid to buy the land was 
brought to cabinet. Of course we know he questioned this, and 
we know that he was recommending that Highways be the one 
to proceed to save millions. Then there’s the long-time Sask 
Party operative who was around as this deal was brought 
forward to cabinet the first time and right there up until the 
second pitch. And of course we should also have the current 
CEO there as well. 
 
Again, will the Premier instruct his members to ensure these 
witnesses come before the committee as soon as they are 
available? Or will he simply play political games and hide from 
answering questions? Will he delay substantive witnesses? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well who’d know you’d go to question 
period, Mr. Speaker, and a debate on committee procedure 
would break out? But let me explain it again to the Leader of 
the Opposition. The executive branch of government does not 
direct committee members or committees to do things. That is 
up to the committee. I’m happy to go through that again, Mr. 
Speaker, but the Leader of the Opposition, the Leader of the 
Opposition clearly didn’t listen to the response. He’s got a very 
clear response which is that the committee can determine how it 
wishes to proceed. And frankly it would be a breach of 
members’ privileges if the executive branch were to direct the 
committee to proceed in a particular manner. 
 
But we know that the Provincial Auditor is going to have the 
opportunity tomorrow to present her recommendations to that 
committee. We know the committee will deal with those 
recommendations seriously, as the government has taken those 
recommendations very seriously. And that’s been our focus on 
implementing those recommendations — eight 
recommendations to the Ministry of Highways and 
Infrastructure, two recommendations to the Global 
Transportation Hub. We’re going to continue to move forward 
on implementing those recommendations, and we look forward 
to the Provincial Auditor’s report tomorrow. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Employment and Provincial Economy 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — This is a weak . . . The question was to 
the Premier. No, no answers from that Premier, not even a 
willingness to ensure the proper witnesses to committee. 
 
But if we can’t get a question answered there, what about the 
terrible job losses that keep mounting under this government? 



November 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1151 

4,200 jobs were lost in the last month alone; almost all those 
were full-time jobs. Mr. Speaker, 11,000 fewer Saskatchewan 
people are working now than a year ago. Unemployment is 
almost seven per cent. Month after month the Sask Party has 
tried to spin this as good news. Through nearly a decade of 
record revenue, the Sask Party never missed an opportunity to 
boast and claim credit for everything, almost including the sun 
rising in the east, Mr. Speaker. But on Friday the silence on that 
side of the House was deafening. 
 
We need to take action right now before this situation gets any 
worse. Will the Premier admit that he wasted a historic 
opportunity for Saskatchewan people? Will he now take action 
and implement a strategy to create jobs for Saskatchewan 
people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the job numbers show what 
we have known for some time, and that is that the record low 
commodity prices, at least in contemporary history, have cost 
jobs for Saskatchewan people, for Saskatchewan families. They 
have cost investment into this economy, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
why two budgets ago we introduced new-growth tax incentives 
for processing jobs to be created, for corporate office jobs to be 
created, Mr. Speaker. I note that just this day a company that 
was previously headquartered in Vancouver has announced 
their intention to move to Moose Jaw, in part to take advantage 
of the policies of the government. 
 
I would also point out this to my hon. friend: Mr. Speaker, 
notwithstanding the challenges today, even with these current 
numbers included, it’s fair to say that between now and nine 
years ago when the Saskatchewan Party government was 
elected, since then, even including these latest numbers, 
Saskatchewan has the second-best job creation record in the 
country. Mr. Speaker, in fact, if you take a look at that, 60,000 
more jobs today, even with these latest numbers, than when we 
were first elected, Mr. Speaker. We’ve created jobs at double 
the national rate of job creation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t very long ago when members opposite 
were presiding over some pretty healthy times from a 
commodity price perspective, and their job creation record in 
the country, while they were in office during good times, was 
dead last, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ll continue to implement the growth plan of this province, 
to continue to diversify the economy, and create opportunities 
in the face of difficult commodity prices, Mr. Speaker. That was 
what we campaigned on, Mr. Speaker, and we will carry 
through with that plan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

SaskTel Call Centre 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve just heard of an additional 21 
jobs being cut in Moose Jaw, this time at SaskTel. So while the 
Sask Party is celebrating announcements, well they’re kicking 
even more workers out of work in the same city. These jobs are 
being cut from a call centre, and that means that Moose Jaw is 

losing these jobs at a time that they can ill afford the loss. 
 
Are more workers in other rural locations going to lose their 
jobs as well? These jobs provide an essential service and benefit 
local economies, and this is especially important in tough 
economic times. Mr. Speaker, is this the beginning of mass 
SaskTel job cuts out of rural Saskatchewan communities? And 
if the minister won’t answer my question about these jobs, can 
he tell us this: why the members from Moose Jaw did not stand 
up for their own community again. 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 
Resources and SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, these decisions are never easy ones to make. What 
SaskTel is doing is ensuring that they are reducing their costs so 
that they can, in fact, increase their efficiencies to remain 
competitive in a very competitive environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to be clear. There are no job losses 
associated with this. Mr. Speaker, there are no layoffs 
associated with this decision. The reality is, is that this is a call 
centre. Call centres are seeing reduced volume, about a 5 per 
cent reduction in calls on a yearly basis as people are engaging 
with SaskTel in other means — online and in other ways, Mr. 
Speaker — and so this is a way for SaskTel to ensure that they 
can remain competitive well into the future. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Health Services for Northern and Rural Communities 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, this weekend we heard from the 
president of the Saskatchewan Medical Association, who spoke 
out on the lack of funding and services in our northern 
communities. After talking to northern health care providers, 
Dr. Pillay, president of the SMA [Saskatchewan Medical 
Association], said:  
 

We were saddened to learn of the lack of services that exist 
in terms of an adequate number of counsellors . . . Mental 
health services are lacking. They do have specialists who 
provide care, but . . . [it is] on a sporadic basis. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the SMA, like the rest of us, are shocked at the 
lack of services, especially in light of recent events in La Loche 
and the ongoing epidemic of youth suicides. We see time and 
time again that the Sask Party does not prioritize services in the 
North. Does the minister agree with the SMA president, or does 
he deny there is a lack of services in the North? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, the member referenced 
some of the recent tragedies in the North, and of course as any 
parent or grandparent would feel the pain of loss, especially the 
loss of a child, Mr. Speaker. 
 



1152 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2016 

But I would like to point out to our record. We have been 
paying close attention to the North prior to even these local 
events. She referenced La Loche, Mr. Speaker. I was actually at 
La Loche three days before the tragic events of last January, 
listening to the community to hear what some of the input that 
they had to say, some of the challenges they were facing, Mr. 
Speaker. And in light of that, there had been, even prior to that, 
continuing increases to the North in response to some of the 
challenge they do have, Mr. Speaker. 
 
She had referenced some of the medical professionals. Mr. 
Speaker, when it comes to physicians, we know that under our 
government we’ve increased 62 per cent in investment to 
northern medical services which is the provider for the majority 
of doctors in the North. And I’d be happy to speak more in 
depth of our record and some of the other supports in place in 
the ensuing questions. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not just mental health 
services that are lacking in the North. It’s medical care in 
general. And it has been made clear that the lack of services is 
due to a lack of funds. Allow me to quote the SMA president 
again: “. . . they don’t have a budget to support more sessions at 
that particular clinic.” Mr. Speaker, he went on to say that, 
“Dillon is just one example. Ile-a-la-Crosse and La Loche could 
do with another physician they don’t have funding for.” Mr. 
Speaker, the lack of services in the North are a direct result of 
this government’s mismanagement, scandal, and waste. 
 
Now the Minister of Health and the other Health minister will 
say they are focused on the North, but doctors and patients tell 
us that simply is not the reality. So, Mr. Speaker, why is the 
Sask Party refusing to provide adequate health care in the 
North? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, as with any other 
region, through our Ministry of Health, we’ve increased 
funding to all regions by approximately 50 per cent to our 
health care budget. We’re investing heavily not only in 
physicians but nurses and other practitioners, Mr. Speaker. In 
fact, we’ve been training them in more northern, remote, and 
rural areas to make sure that they get that experience, that we’re 
more likely to retain them and attract them to those areas, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But in response particularly to Dillon, Mr. Speaker, we don’t 
want to get jurisdiction in the way of serving those in our 
northern areas around the province, our citizens. But, Mr. 
Speaker, we have to remember that Dillon is a First Nations 
community. But we do rely heavily on the federal government 
and the First Nations communities to help us in delivering 
health care to these communities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Northern medical services to Ile-a-la-Crosse support six 
resident physicians, five administrative staff, and also serves the 
communities of Dillon and surrounding, Mr. Speaker. Keewatin 
Yatthé Health Region also has one mental health worker that 

sees clients from time to time. Meadow Lake Tribal Council 
also supports services, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I would also point to Dillon in particular. Aside from the 
one physician that they do have, they have three nurses, one of 
which is a practitioner that offers appointments and community 
programs five days a week, two community health 
representatives, a TB [tuberculosis] worker, and other supports 
I’d love to talk about in ensuing questions. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan children are 
losing their lives. It does not matter in which community they 
call home. This is a minister whose only job is to handle rural 
and remote health. That is all he is responsible for, but we have 
no idea what he does. He certainly isn’t improving rural and 
remote health. Mr. Speaker, as in most things, the Sask Party is 
going in the wrong direction, including in health. A doctor in 
the North said, “Our services seem to be getting cut rather than 
enhanced.” To the Minister of Rural and Remote Health, a 
simple question: when will this change? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, again I’ll point out to 
the member, we do support medical services in surrounding 
areas off-reserve, but she’s speaking about on-reserve. But, Mr. 
Speaker, we still invest, through northern medical services, all 
those practitioners that do practise on-reserve which is 
normally, or is a federal responsibility. But again, Mr. Speaker, 
we have increased funding to northern medical services by 62 
per cent since the members opposite were looking after it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I’d also point again to the many other services and supports we 
have put in place when it comes particularly to the recruitment 
and retention of professionals, whether it’s physicians, which 
now we see training in rural areas which previously weren’t. 
We have 60 more positions, almost double the positions of 
medical training in the province for physicians, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ve increased residency positions, many of those in rural 
areas. We’re training nurses for the North, Mr. Speaker, as far 
north as Ile-a-la-Crosse and as far south in rural areas as 
Yorkton, to serve our rural and remote populations, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

Donations to Political Parties 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The numbers speak 
for themselves. A recent poll of Saskatchewan residents found 
that nearly 70 per cent of Saskatchewan people think that 
out-of-province companies should not be able to donate to 
political parties. And polls from earlier this year have shown 
that a majority of Saskatchewan people think that corporate and 
union donations should be banned altogether. Mr. Speaker, we 
agree. But still the Premier chooses not to listen. He says that 
Alberta companies are Saskatchewan people too, and that it’s 



November 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1153 

just fine for his party to rely on corporate donations so they can 
top up his salary every year. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan democracy is for 
Saskatchewan people. So will the Premier take the people’s 
advice and work with us to pass legislation to get big money out 
of Saskatchewan’s politics? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the member opposite says Saskatchewan democracy is 
for Saskatchewan people, and we agree with that, Mr. Speaker. 
The majority of donations that come in from out-of-province 
companies come from companies that have substantial interests 
in this province, both by way of employment, Mr. Speaker, and 
by way of investment. So, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day, 
we have Saskatchewan companies that have interest, Mr. 
Speaker, they have an interest in moving forward with having 
some position with respect to public policy, Mr. Speaker, for 
the very reason that there’s a number of those people, those 
companies, Mr. Speaker, that have substantial investments in 
the province, employing substantial people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Well not perfect today, but improving. I think 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Would the member from 
Saskatoon Centre come to order. I was in the process of saying 
not perfect, but improving. But unfortunately, I think at the end 
we went a little sideways. Let’s try again tomorrow to do a 
better job in respecting each other. I recognize the Premier. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 61 
 

Well Completion Program 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
going to be seeking leave and consensus of the House to move a 
motion under rule 61 which sets out the cause for a debate in a 
motion presented to the House on an urgent matter, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In question period today, the Leader of the Opposition quite 
rightly pointed to the recent job numbers as of serious concern, 
as they have been for some period of time. Mr. Speaker, the 
motion that I’m about to read would ask the Assembly to 
provide unanimous consent and unanimous support for our plan 
to call on the federal government for a well completion program 
that would immediately put . . . well almost immediately put 
1,000 energy workers back to work if we could get federal 
support for this program. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to be moving this motion, and I 
would ask for unanimous consent for the debate: 
 

That this House supports a call to the Government of 
Canada to implement a national well completion program 
that could put over 1,000 energy workers back to work. 

 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The opposition has not 
granted leave. The motion will not move forward. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 6 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 6 — The Statute 
Law Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure and 
honour to finally rise today to speak to Bill No. 6, The Statute 
Law Amendment Act. Being critic for this bill, I’ve heard the 
discussion from the minister opposite as well as my colleagues. 
With respect to this bill, from what I understand, the gist of it is 
to make a number of grammatical and spelling changes to 
various Acts, including, for example, changing “department” to 
“ministry.” 
 
I understand that I’ll have the opportunity to speak about this 
bill and ask questions to the minister at committee. I think at 
this point in time, Mr. Speaker, we’re prepared to let this bill go 
to committee. So at that I’ll conclude my comments. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved the bill to committee. 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
[14:45] 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed to? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to 
designate that Bill No. 6, the statute amendment Act be sent to 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has assigned 
Bill No. 6 to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 



1154 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2016 

Bill No. 7 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 7 — The Statute 
Law Amendment Act, 2016 (No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2016 modifiant 
le droit législatif be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure and 
honour again to rise today to speak to Bill No. 7, The Statute 
Law Amendment Act (No. 2). I’ve had the pleasure of hearing 
my colleagues’ thoughts on this bill in adjourned debates as 
well as the comments from the minister opposite. 
 
I understand, based on my reading of the bill and comments 
from the minister, that this bill, similar to Bill No. 6, is largely 
grammatical changes and things of that nature. I have the 
opportunity, I believe, to speak about this bill and ask questions 
about it in committee, so I think at this moment I have no other 
comments other than to move this bill to committee at this time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 7, The Statute 
Law Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall the bill be 
moved to? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
designate that Bill No. 7 be committed to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that Bill No. 7 be committed to the Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 10 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cox that Bill No. 10 — The Forest 
Resources Management Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
pleased today to stand and talk about Bill No. 10, The Forest 
Resources Management Amendment Act, 2016. This legislation 
was brought forward by the previous Minister of Environment 
in the spring sitting. And so I’ve had some time to review this 
bill, and from my understanding some of the things that are 
going to be going on with this bill would be that this bill will 
expand “. . . the minister’s authority to enter into agreements 
with clients for the purpose of developing, improving, 
maintaining, closing, reclaiming, and managing new and 
existing roads, road allowances and rights of way” rather than 
just the location, clearing, closure and reclamation of roads. So 
that’s really important to review that. 
 
And I think it’s also going to be very important that we look 
into some of the potential amendments to this Act with some of 
the stakeholders that might have issue with regards to this. So 
they were saying, the Minister of Environment was saying that 
the purpose of this is so that we could reduce the ecological 
impacts and the public safety issues created by the lack of 
maintenance of these roads, which I think those are two 
important factors. We have to consider that when we’re 
reviewing this. And so I’m looking forward to having a lot 
more discussion in committee with regards to what was maybe 
some previous issues with the roads and why this came about 
and how they plan on making these changes and having this 
follow-through.  
 
So again, you know, it’s about talking with some of the 
stakeholders and also talking within committee with the 
ministry to see what their plan is going forward. It would be 
good to ask some questions with regards to that. 
 
Another section here talks about paying of dues: 

 
The dues system is established in regulation. The 
transitional provisions and the setting of dues rates by 
licence are no longer applicable. 

 
So it seems like this is going to be an amendment to align with 
the Act, with the provincial dues system that came into force 
July 2014. And so this would apply to all licences with regards 
to the forest management agreement. So again it’s really 
important if we have previous legislation, that our current 
legislation kind of aligns with that as well. So I plan on taking 
some time to review that also. 
 
It also talks about ensuring that fees owed are paid. So 
apparently there’s been some history with regards to collecting 
some of the fees that might be owed. So some of the changes in 
here is supposed to streamline and make it a timelier process to 
have the forest management fees rates implemented and 
ensuring that people are enforced with regards to that. 
 
Again I have more questions on how that’s going to look and 
who’s going to do that process. And we could put it in the 
legislation but is it going to be followed through? And so I plan 
on asking more questions with regards to that in committee as 
well. 
 
This bill also acknowledges that people who want a licence, that 



November 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1155 

they be required to submit a forest management plan. And I 
think that’s very important as well because we want to know 
exactly what the contractor’s plans are with regards to where 
they’re going to be going and such. And the forest management 
plan is a really important part of that. And my understanding is 
that the forest management plans often take a couple of years. It 
could take a long time to implement because it’s quite a lengthy 
process but a very important one, and so it involves 
considerable investment and financial and human resources. So 
we want to ensure that that plan, like I said before, is very 
important and that it’s implemented, and that people who are 
going for licences, that they have that plan established. We need 
to make sure that we have the proper legislation so that we can 
enforce that as well. 
 
Again I’m going to talk to some of the stakeholders with 
regards to what their view of this particular amendment is and 
also have that discussion in committee with the ministry. And I 
think it’s important that we have that discussion on why these 
changes are coming forward and what they’d like to see 
progress in the future with regards to them. A lot of the 
language has been changed in this bill, and it’s more so for just 
to modernize the language. We’ve been seeing that in a lot of 
the other bills, and that’s again important. I think we need to 
take the time to review a lot of the legislation that we have and 
ensure that the language is appropriate for, you know, the times 
right now. I’m sure we won’t spend a lot of time discussing 
those language changes, but again I do believe that they’re very 
important to recognize that we’ve made those changes going 
forward. 
 
This bill also acknowledges that following the second renewal 
of a term supply licence, the licensee must submit a forest 
management plan for the full renewal term of the licence. So 
again, when they originally apply for the licence, they’re going 
to need to have the forest management plan. And it looks like 
with this legislation they’re wanting to also have it so that if 
you’re going for a renewal term, that also your forest 
management plan reflects that and any changes that might be in 
there. So this amendment will: 
 

. . . address situations where proponents are negotiating for 
multiple renewals of a 5 year licence essentially 
circumventing the requirement to prepare a forest 
management plan. 

 
So again, if we’re providing these licences to individuals, we 
need to ensure that they have a plan that correlates what our 
plan is with our forestry. So that’s very important as well. It 
establishes: 
 

. . . the authority for the minister to prohibit a person from 
obtaining a licence for a period . . . [of] 3 years for 
offences including failing to comply with the Act. 

 
I think this is a really important aspect to draw attention to. If 
this is passed, this amendment will allow the minister to have 
the authority to prohibit people from obtaining licences if they 
have breached any of their contracts. So again it will be 
something that we need to discuss in committee on, you know, 
if there’s some history with regards to this and the purpose of 
why they are implementing this. 
 

Also there’s some more language about having . . . if a judge 
can prohibit a person from obtaining a licence up to a period of 
five years. And it also has some language in here too saying that 
if for some reason a person happens to get a licence but they 
were prohibited in some other form, that it is no longer valid. 
So I think this is better enforcement of our forest management. 
 
So I’d like to learn a little bit more about what the history of 
this was and some of the rationale for this. And it’ll be 
interesting to talk to some of the individuals in the ministry with 
regards to that, and some of the stakeholders too, and how they 
see this being implemented. 
 
Also this also has some . . . They changed the language in here 
so they can add “contractor” also, so that a person deemed as a 
contractor would also have some liability with regards to if 
there’s any infractions. So licence holders are responsible for 
the actions of their contractors, and that has to be . . . It sounds 
like this is going to be consistent with the provisions of The 
Wildfire Act. And so again this seems like it’s taking another 
piece of legislation and ensuring that it relates with this piece of 
legislation. So that’s important when the two legislations kind 
of correlate. 
 
So again I want to talk about when this might be an issue and 
talk to the stakeholders that might be involved. So I think again 
we’re going to be really concentrating on the forest 
management plans. That’s very important to ensure that those 
are created and approved because again that’s the aim to protect 
our forests, and that’s very important. And so some of the 
things that I think are going to be really highlighted with 
regards to this bill will be: better enforcement of the rules and 
regulations that we have, clearer guidelines so that people who 
are applying for licences know exactly what’s expected of them 
— the minister has exact expectations as well — and it seems 
like there’s higher expectations, which I think in some ways can 
be a good thing because these are our forests and they are very 
important to us; increases to the minister’s authority, so 
ensuring that the minister’s office is able to have that authority 
of people to breach that; and modernize the language. 
 
So again I’m going to take some time to consult with 
stakeholders, ensure that this legislation respects the First 
Nations treaty rights, and talk to people who might be invested 
and interested with regards to this, and have that discussion 
within committee, and I’m looking forward to that. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
the motion by the Minister of Environment that Bill No. 10, The 
Forest Resources Management Act, 2016 be now read a second 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
[15:00] 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 



1156 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2016 

Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
designate that Bill No. 10, The Forest Resources Management 
Amendment Act, 2016 be designated to the committee on the 
Economy. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The bill stands committed to the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 11 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cox that Bill No. 11 — The Forestry 
Professions Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m proud 
to stand here and talk about Bill No. 11, The Forestry 
Professions Amendment Act, 2016. This was brought forward in 
the spring session by the previous Minister of Environment. 
This legislation, I’ve been having some time to review it, and 
my understanding that it really relates to having financial 
penalties for people who unlawfully engage in the professional 
practice of forestry without registering as a forestry 
professional. And so as we know that the forestry professionals, 
they are educated in Canada and they are educated at accredited 
forestry programs. So that is their background, and it’s very 
important that we respect their profession. I think it’s really 
important that we look into this and see how we can keep the 
integrity of the professional practice of forestry. 
 
But also we have to take into account of talking to our 
stakeholders and people who might be impacted by some 
changes within this legislation. It’s important that before we 
make any serious considerations on changing language in 
legislation that could result in individuals getting some fines, 
who will this impact? And are they aware that this legislation 
might be going through? And so I think it’ll be important for 
me to contact some of the stakeholders, and I hope the ministry 
has also. 
 
And I think also it’s important to look into how this respects the 
First Nations treaty rights and also that all people are aware that 
this will be going through, and so they can have whatever 
concerns that they may have or even if they have some really 
positive feelings about this legislation, that they are able to send 
that information in before we finalize things. 
 
So I know I’m going to have a lot of questions within 
committee with the ministry with regards to the reasons and 
what they plan on doing with the changes with this legislation. 
And so I look forward to having that discussion in committee. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Environment that Bill No. 11, The 
Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
designate that Bill No. 11, The Forestry Professions 
Amendment Act, 2016 be committed to the Standing Committee 
on the Economy. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 14 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 14 — The 
Horned Cattle Purchases Repeal Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. As always it’s my honour to rise in the Assembly to 
enter into debate on the Legislative Assembly. And this is an 
interesting bill. The minister actually gave fairly considered 
comments on the history of this particular legislation here in 
Saskatchewan, and certainly it’s not unique to Saskatchewan, as 
he pointed out. This legislation is in place across the Western 
Prairie provinces, and I would assume also in the United States 
as well, because the history of the Texas Longhorn is an 
interesting one and an extensive one, Mr. Speaker. And in fact 
as the minister indicated, there’s still around 17,000 head of 
cattle in Saskatchewan that are being penalized for their horns 
at $2 a head. And we’re not clear how many of those, how 
many others there would be if they weren’t dehorned or 
debudded prior to entering the marketplace, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But just for a little bit of background here, and this is a very 
interesting breed of cattle. I’m not sure how many people know 
that the Texas Longhorn really came across to the New World 
from Christopher Columbus and the Spanish colonists. That’s 
where the Texas Longhorns were introduced in the New World, 
in North America. And one of the features of this cattle is that 
they have a high drought stress tolerance. So as you can 
imagine, in the plains of Texas when these cattle first started 
being bred in larger numbers — this would be a very useful 
attribute — is the fact that they were a 
high-drought-stress-tolerance cattle. Also what’s very 
interesting is that they have very diverse colours, and there’s all 
kinds of different colours, blue or any mix of colours. But as the 
Wikipedia article that I’m quoting from points out that dark red 
and white are the most dominant colours right now. There’s 
different registries for these cattle, and they’re still currently in 
place at Texas Longhorn Breeders Association of America, 
amongst others. 
 
And so the genetic analysis shows that they came from an 
Iberian hybrid of two ancient cattle lineages, which I find very 
interesting: taurine which came into domestication from the 
wild aurochs in the Middle East, and indicine, which descended 
from the domestication of the aurochs in India. So they were 



November 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1157 

kind of bred from the Middle East and from India. And that’s 
the history of the longhorn cattle. 
 
The Texas ones are direct descendants of the first cattle in the 
New World, and they were brought over probably around 1493, 
starting off in the Caribbean island of Hispaniola. And then they 
started bringing other cattle and different . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — There are a number of conversations 
taking place in the Assembly, particularly on the government 
side. I would ask that those members perhaps go behind the bar 
or perhaps outside. I’m having a great deal of difficulty hearing 
the member from Nutana. I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and I know that . . . I appreciate your attention as I raise these 
comments here in the House. This is a very interesting, hearty 
form of cattle breed and certainly has a very relevant and 
interesting history in terms of cattle in North America. 
 
So the Texas Longhorn eventually moved north as the Spanish 
moved their forces north as well. And many of them . . . This is 
interesting. The cattle, some of them escaped and “. . . were 
turned loose on the open range . . . [and] they remained mostly 
feral for the next two centuries.” So for 200 years many of these 
cattle were running wild in the Plains of North America. It’s 
pretty scary when you . . . I wouldn’t want to come across a 
herd in the middle of the night, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure that 
would be kind of a dangerous thing for a number of reasons. 
 
But anyways these feral cattle were then obtained by US 
[United States] settlers, so they started domesticating them 
again in the borderland between Texas and Mexico. And the 
result was a rough, rangy animal with long legs and long horns, 
horns that could extend up to 7 feet, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
if you can imagine the span of that, that’s a very large span. 
Anyways they also . . . these descendants, you know, as the 
years went by, they became the high-feed and 
drought-stress-tolerant cattle that they were well known for. 
 
Now what happened to the breed? Eventually as Texas became 
more settled and the frontier gave way to established farms and 
ranchlands . . . One other interesting fact about the longhorn, 
they were much leaner than other cattle, and so they weren’t as 
attractive in an area where tallow was highly prized. And as you 
know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, tallow was used for all sorts of 
things, but particularly lamps, for the lighting of lamps before 
electricity came along. And also they could survive on the very 
poor vegetation that was in the open range. So that was no 
longer as much of an issue as the fences went up and the 
pastures started being developed and irrigated. Also other 
breeds demonstrated traits that were more highly valued by the 
modern ranchers, such as the ability to gain weight quickly. 
And as you know, Mr. Speaker, that’s still something that’s 
very highly valued by modern and current cattle breeders. 
 
So it was actually almost extinct in 1927, but a number of 
enthusiasts continued to breed the cattle and so they have 
survived extinction. So this is just some of the background of 
the Texas Longhorn. 
 
There’s also a Longhorn Cattle Society in England. And in this 

case, the horns of these cattle actually curve inwards. They 
don’t actually point out as we think of when we think of the 
Texas Longhorn, but they actually curve and point inwards. 
These are cows that are known very much for their qualities of 
milk, calving ease, longevity, docility, length, and the leanness 
of their bodies, unrivalled in any other breeds. So this is a very 
active society in England that is choosing these longhorns. As I 
say, the horns curve inwards, so it’s a different, different kind 
of cattle, but milking qualities, calving ease, longevity, docility, 
and the length, and leanness. So these are another breed of 
longhorns that are being currently bred today. 
 
Now one of the things you wonder, Mr. Speaker, is when you 
drive by . . . The member from Carrot River refers to us as only 
driving along the highway between Saskatoon and Regina. 
When we do drive down that highway, we actually see cattle, 
and you don’t see a lot of cattle with horns. So you have to ask 
yourself, for us urban dwellers, why don’t we see a lot of cows 
with horns or where are these 17,000 head that were being 
penalized? 
 
So what happens, Mr. Speaker, is either they’re using other 
breeds and then . . . And this is a term that maybe a lot of 
people in the cities don’t know, but they’re described as polled 
livestock. So polled livestock are livestock without horns in 
species which are normally horned. The term refers to both 
breeds or strains which are naturally polled through select 
breeding and also to naturally horned animals which have been 
dehorned. 
 
Natural polling occurs in cattle, yaks, and water buffalo, and 
goats, which is interesting. And in those breeds, it affects both 
sexes equally. But in sheep, both sexes may be horned, both 
polled, or only the females polled. And the history of 
dehorning, Mr. Speaker, starts about 6,000 years BC [before 
Christ]. So this has been going on for a very, very, very, long 
time — longer than many of us could probably imagine. 
 
So we know that there’s either polled cattle which have been 
bred . . . There’s a specific gene. They call it an allele, which is 
the gene that is dominant to that for horns. So this is something 
that I know cattlemen have been doing, as I indicated, for 
probably eight or nine centuries at least, pardon me, millennia; 
eight or nine millennia. So 8 or 9,000 years where cattle have 
been selectively breeded for this. 
 
Now just going to a little bit of what the minister had to say, 
and I find this very interesting. There’s a few comments of his 
that I find very interesting. First of all, he says that 
Saskatchewan’s not the only province to repeal horned cattle 
legislation. Both Alberta and Manitoba have repealed the 
legislation several years ago, and British Columbia is the only 
other province with horned cattle legislation at this time. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m just thinking maybe the Minister of 
Agriculture might want to talk to the Minister of Justice 
because, if we’re following suit of other provinces, it would be 
interesting to know why this Minister of Justice is changing the 
definition of “privatization” in The Interpretation Act when no 
one in the modern world has ever, ever done that kind of 
change. And it’s . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I’m really 
pleased to know that the member from Martensville is actually 
listening today and has complimented me on my segue. I’m 



1158 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2016 

honoured by that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So that’s the first question. And I know this government has a 
habit of changing definitions such as “double-dipping” which is 
what they were referring to the cuts for the people in the 
Lighthouse and all kinds of creative use of language. But in this 
case, this minister is actually following suit from what Alberta 
and Manitoba have done in indicating that it’s time to repeal 
this legislation here in Saskatchewan. 
 
[15:15] 
 
The other thing I think that is very interesting is the consultation 
process that the minister referred to in his comments, and in 
particular he indicated that some of the industry stakeholders, 
when this bill was looked at just before the 2003 election, 
actually supported amending the Act and not repealing it. So the 
amendments in that case were to raise the fee from $2 to $10, 
and it was supported particularly by the Saskatchewan Stock 
Growers Association. But then the minister goes on to suggest 
that because the government-created Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s 
Association has some different views on this, that he’s actually 
following their views rather than that of the stock growers. 
 
So these are questions I think that we need to ask of the industry 
and just to sort of follow up with the minister to see why he 
would rely on the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association 
primarily, when we know that that was a government-created 
body. And certainly there are a number of issues with that 
organization in relation to its governance and, you know, some 
of the affairs of the Cattlemen’s Association here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So I think it’s important for us to be able to ask these questions 
in committee and get some very clear understanding of the 
consultation process. For example he said in his comments on 
May 30th that “The first step in modernizing means repealing 
the existing legislation.” That may be so. I think there are other 
options, and certainly amending is one of those options, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And he did indicate in the same comments that there were 
concerns about repealing the legislation, so I think those 
concerns are ones that need to be heard, and we need to 
understand why the minister is choosing a different path when 
individuals in the cattle industry are concerned about the repeal 
of this legislation. And you know, I think there’s a general 
agreement that the existing legislation is outdated. That seems 
to be very clear from the minister’s comments in terms of what 
consultation he did do. It’s also clear that it was up for 
amendment in 2003. 
 
And a large part of the question is the fee itself for these horned 
cattle. It’s only $2. It was $1 in 1939, and then it was doubled in 
1949 but hadn’t been increased since. And as you can imagine, 
Mr. Speaker, the whole process just for collecting the fees, 
doing inspections and all that, actually requires some money. 
 
So you know, the question is whether or not this kind of 
protection for producers needs to be within legislation. The 
minister seems to indicate that it really would be more 
appropriate outside of legislation, but we don’t see anything yet 
from the minister in terms of the industry-led consultations. 

What will be the substitute for this regime that we find in this 
piece of legislation? So I think there’s a few open-ended 
questions here that raise legitimate concerns on the part of the 
industry. 
 
And certainly we know that the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s 
Association is prepared to be the professional organization to 
lead the industry discussions around penalizing horned cattle. 
Again I’m not sure about the full confidence in the Cattlemen’s 
Association to be able to do that kind of work. And there are 
questions about the democratic processes in that particular 
agency. But if this is where the minister feels it needs to be, I 
hope that producers will take full advantage of that. 
 
And for those who are impacted by the change in the bill, you 
know, the question is: how much are they going to have to pay? 
It’s not like these fees are going away, Mr. Speaker, and when 
we have it fixed in legislation at least the industry knows what 
the deal is. But here we are creating a void because once the 
legislation is repealed then we don’t know. And producers who 
actually have these cattle and will be liable for the penalties 
won’t know what the fees are going to be. So I think there’s a 
bit of a cow before the cart, if you allow me to say, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and perhaps that we need some more information from 
the minister. And I guess if the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s 
Association is going to be leading this that there should be more 
information available. And certainly that’s something that we’ll 
want to quiz the minister about when we get into the committee 
process. 
 
So again a very storied history, a very interesting part of 
agriculture and cattle producing here in Saskatchewan, a long 
and proud history. And you know, as we go through we see the 
ingenuity of breeders, cattle breeders, to produce animals that 
meet the needs of the modern market. And that certainly hasn’t 
stopped in the last 8,000 years, Mr. Speaker, and I would 
suggest it will continue in full force here in the future. But as 
we go through these changes, we need to make sure that the 
appropriate regulations are in place, the appropriate legislation’s 
in place, the appropriate oversights are in place, and the 
appropriate market conditions are made available to the 
producers. 
 
So at this point, I think we’ll certainly have a number of 
questions for the minister when we get into the committee 
stage. And that would be the extent of my comments today, Mr. 
Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Agriculture that Bill No. 14, The 
Horned Cattle Purchases Repeal Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 



November 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1159 

Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
designate that Bill No. 14, The Horned Cattle Purchases Repeal 
Act, 2016 be committed to the Standing Committee on the 
Economy. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 40 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 40 — The 
Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 
sur l’interprétation be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to rise today and enter into the debate on Bill No. 40, An Act to 
amend The Interpretation Act, 1995. And it’s been an 
interesting journey this bill has taken in the few short days it’s 
been with us. 
 
But I find it very interesting, you know, what the members 
opposite have tried to minimize the importance of this by 
saying they just want to get a definition out there; they want to 
clarify it. And I’ll have some more to say about that. 
 
But I found it passing strange that as well, that the bill gets into 
section 30, amending the following subsections: 
 

If the reigning sovereign is a Queen, a reference to any 
enactment to ‘the King’, the King’s’, ‘His Majesty’, ‘His 
Majesty’s’, ‘the Court of King’s Bench’ . . . [and so on and 
so forth, that] unless the context otherwise requires, is to be 
interpreted to mean . . . [respectfully] ‘the Queen’, ‘the 
Queen’s’, ‘Her Majesty’, ‘Her Majesty’s’, ‘the Court of 
Queen’s Bench’ or ‘The Queen’s Bench Act’. 

 
And it goes on with this kind of thing. And then section 37 is 
repealed: 
 

In the English version of an Act, the enacting clause may 
be in the following form to indicate the authority by virtue 
of which the Act is passed: 

if the reigning sovereign is a Queen: 
‘Her Majesty, by and with the advice . . . 

 
It sets it out it like that. And I find it very interesting after some 
63 years and a few months that the Queen has been with us, and 
in fact the longest reigning sovereign since the Queen Victoria, 
that this all of a sudden becomes an issue, that this needs to be 
straightened up right away. And clearly you know, as we know 
that the Queen . . . And we wish her long life, and I don’t want 
to speak ill or, you know, go down some sort of path that 
suggests that she might pass away very soon, but we are all 
mortal, and it looks like the successor will be a male that it just 
seems like in the passing months that we’re getting caught up 
with that part of the legislation. That is passing strange, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. I just want to comment on that. Of course I 
think we should be prepared for both the situation. If reigning 
over the Dominion of Canada is a king or a queen or a prince or 

a princess, we should be prepared for all those circumstances. 
But I think we have seen to have been able to make do with the 
legislation as it exists. So on that count it doesn’t seem to be a 
pressing necessity to have that piece before us. 
 
But what does seem to be a pressing necessity that these folks 
across the way have put forward is the idea around a definition. 
And they will say that is for clarity. And this is the reason, for 
clarity’s sake, and so that is that they want to amend section 27. 
I’ll read it for the folks at home because this is a very, very 
important piece of legislation. And as we debate this back and 
forth, it is so clear that we understand, that we consider all the 
possible consequences and whether they be positive or negative, 
unintended or fully intended, that we really understand what’s 
before us today. 
 
And I would think that many of the members as we’ve asked 
questions . . . And I do want to take a moment to recognize the 
good speech of my colleague from Saskatoon Nutana last week 
that really laid out the case. But even more forcefully was in 
question period, when she raised the issue about the fact that as 
far as the federal government is concerned, that is if a Crown 
corporation has 10 per cent or more ownership is private, then 
it’s considered to be a private entity and will be taxed 
accordingly. 
 
And when that question happened in the House, it was amazing 
to look across the way and see the folks over there very 
surprised as if they had never considered this. And clearly you 
can tell, often by body language, when something comes up 
how they respond, how they respond. And clearly that had not 
been discussed amongst many of the members opposite who 
really were quite surprised by this turn of events. 
 
But I want to read into the record what Section 27 says. And it 
says: 
 

Section 27 amended 
 

3(1) Subsection 27(1) is amended by adding the 
following definition in alphabetical order: 

 
“ ‘privatize’ means, with respect to a Crown 
corporation, the transfer to the private sector of all or 
substantially all of the assets of the Crown 
corporation, the controlling interest of the Crown 
corporation or the operational control of the Crown 
corporation through one or more transactions that use 
one or more of the following methods: 

 
(a) a public share offering; 
(b) a sale of shares through a negotiated or 
competitive bid; 
(c) sale of the assets and business of the Crown 
corporation as a going concern; 
(d) a management or employee buyout of the Crown 
corporation; 
(e) a lease or management contract; 
(f) any other method prescribed in the regulations; 

 
but does not include a winding-up and dissolution of the 
Crown corporation or other restructuring of the Crown 
corporation . . .” 



1160 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2016 

Now what’s interesting about this, and today we had in question 
period . . . We noted the anniversary of the election of the Sask 
Party to government. And we noted that one of their key tenets 
when they were first elected was an open and accountable 
government. Now right away that seemed to be one of the first 
things they jettisoned. We know that was the case because 
many, many times and we can go through example after 
example of the times they did not consult and how very, very 
difficult it is to get a straight answer from this government. And 
to this point we have asked when . . . The minister who brought 
this forward, the Minister of Justice, he says quite simply that 
it’s a World Bank definition and he’s quite proud of that. He’s 
quite proud of that. But we’ve asked that they table that 
definition because we can’t seem to find it anywhere. Now 
maybe they have it somewhere, and if we can’t find it we’re not 
looking in the right place. Fair enough. And we’re okay to 
admit that we didn’t see it, but we sure would like to see that 
definition. We sure would like to see it in black and white. 
 
Because it’s one thing for that Minister of Justice to stand up 
and make this claim when we know that he’s had to retract on 
many times a statement that he meant one thing and said 
another thing. And even the newspapers will say that this 
minister is confused about some of the information that he has. 
We think in many ways he has a lot of skills, a lot of talent. But 
one thing, it seems clear that he doesn’t get the briefing notes as 
quickly or as to the point that he might. In fact, I think last week 
he blamed himself on briefing himself on the wrong . . . 
[inaudible] . . . because he didn’t quite understand what the 
point he was making in terms of the coroner’s report, reporting 
out. 
 
[15:30] 
 
But here is a situation that is very important, that people across 
the province are hearing one thing where we have a minister of 
the Crown saying that he is quite comfortable with this 
definition, because it’s a World Bank definition that is very 
common and is out there, except for we can’t seem to find it. 
We can’t seem to find it. And where is it? And you know, it 
should be quite easily found with a Google search or online if 
it’s that common, but we do challenge the government to come 
clean on this, to table this and not just read it into the record. 
 
We know we’ve seen this government get up with a lot of 
hoopla and say, oh we’ll table this. We’ll table this. And in fact 
they read it; they do not table their documents. They’re very 
slow and hesitant about doing that. If this is just a photocopied 
piece of paper out of an index or the back of the book, we’re 
fine with that. We’re fine with that. But we need to see this 
definition, and I think the people of Saskatchewan need to see 
the definition from the World Bank. They could run out right 
now and grab it. I mean, maybe it’s on the minister’s desk, and 
if that’s the case, then fine. That would add to this debate in a 
big, big way, because clearly we’re not seeing it. And so this is 
the question before us. 
 
Now we’ve seen, and I have to thank the member from . . . 
[inaudible] . . . Nutana . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, just 
the definition. Just the definition. That’s all, you know. 
 
And I assume it’s no longer, no shorter than the definition that 
is before us in this Act. It shouldn’t be if it’s the same 

definition. It’ll be just a short paragraph talking about the 49 per 
cent. But this is really, this is something that we do need to see. 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we need to see it out there, because 
clearly when we come to this bill before us, you know . . . The 
government, when they heard about the 10 per cent number, it 
was amazing to look across the way and to see the surprise on 
the looks of the ministers and the backbenchers who clearly 
weren’t sure what were the implications. Because here we have 
in Saskatchewan a situation where the Crowns provide an 
outstanding service for the people, but also for the province in 
terms of dividends that do come forward for the many years that 
they have been able to operate and they . . .  
 
For example, in 2015-16, the Crown corporations returned 
some $297 million in dividends. And of course we know that 
that pays for schools. That pays for roads. That pays for 
hospitals. And so it’s very, very significant. But if then all of a 
sudden you bring into the picture the obligation to pay 
corporate tax to the federal government, then that changes the 
picture. Then that changes the picture. That’s a lot of money out 
the door to the federal government. And we don’t think that’s 
right. We don’t think that should be the way it should be 
operating here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And if it’s because of a lack of foresight, a lack of fore-thinking 
and projecting by this government, then we have some grave 
concerns. Because here is what we do here, and that is think 
about unintended consequences. And clearly this would be one 
of the worst unintended consequences for a simple Act like this, 
and not thinking it through. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, you know, and the minister who’s been put 
in responsible for the examination of whether SaskTel is up for 
sale or not has often said, no, no it’s not. No it’s not, but if 
there’s a really good deal we’ll look for it. And I was thinking, 
it’s sort of like I have in my mind this image of, you know, it’s 
like when you’re painting a for sale sign or getting a for sale 
sign ready in the front porch of your house. And all your friends 
are coming over and they say, it looks like your house is for 
sale. Looks like your house is for sale. You’ve got this for sale 
sign in the front porch. And you keep saying, no, no, no. It’s 
only there, you know, just in case, just in case somebody makes 
me an offer. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it doesn’t 
quite work that way. You’re giving all the signals. You’re 
giving all the signals. And maybe that for sale sign isn’t out on 
the lawn but it’s in the window, and anybody walking by or 
driving by can see that sign. They go, well looks like they’re 
thinking about selling their house. Maybe it’s not on the front 
lawn, but it sure looks like it. And they’re sending all the 
signals to investors and large corporations around North 
America and throughout the world that they probably would 
consider selling the Crowns. Now they say, if the price is right. 
But we know that this government has a funny way, you know; 
when they clarify things, they say one thing but they mean the 
opposite. They mean exactly the opposite, and they’re not really 
thinking about the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan 
right upfront. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I think that you will 
remember this. You will remember when the women’s team, 
the Canadian women’s hockey team won the gold medal in Salt 



November 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1161 

Lake City in the Olympics. And one of the things they did, they 
went . . . And it was really, I thought this was absolutely 
wonderful. What they did is they spent a weekend up in a 
retreat and they thought of all the things that could go wrong, 
all the things that their competitors would throw at them. And 
they made a list. No matter how bizarre, how silly, how small 
the challenge might be, they said, we’ve got to get it all out 
there even if it seems not important, not big enough. We’ve got 
to get it all out there so we can plan, so we can plan for being 
the best that there is. 
 
And this is what this government should be doing. It should be 
making a plan. But instead we have the Finance minister 
saying, oh we don’t want to go down that rabbit hole, I think is 
his expression. And then I think, well what does the Finance 
minister do but deal in scenarios? 
 
Now he may consider scenarios rabbit holes, but that’s what he 
does. What is a budget? What is a budget if not a series of 
scenarios, looking forward? But this is what’s been the problem 
with this government, is it’s not been able to look forward and 
anticipate, anticipate what might happen. I mean we all know 
what we would like to happen. And I think of the minister 
opposite, one of his favourite sayings is, he loves shouting over 
to us, oh that’s rich. That’s rich. And then I’m thinking, you 
know what? I bet he goes back to his office and says, if only I 
was rich. If only we were rich. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, you have to think of all scenarios. 
You have to think of all scenarios. And this is what’s the 
problem with this bill before us. Clearly they have not thought 
through all their scenarios, except they’re into this issue of 
deny, deny, deny, deny. That they are not up . . . They are not 
going to sell. They are not going to privatize. They are just 
going to clarify. They are just going to clarify. And that has a 
whole lot of problems with it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I just want to keep going back, as I look at this Finance minister 
who talks about rabbit holes and I think about . . . And this is 
maybe why we’re in a problem today, is he doesn’t know the 
difference between a rabbit hole and a scenario, you know. And 
this is an issue, because this is why . . . And I know the folks in 
Finance, they do great work. But their issues are to look at the 
price of potash, look at the price of uranium, look at the price of 
oil, natural gas, look at what’s happening in Saskatchewan, and 
they build possible scenarios. That’s not a bad thing. That’s 
forecasting. That’s what they do. That’s what they do so we all 
can plan, so the government can make plans and then they can 
anticipate. 
 
And that’s really what the issue here . . . [inaudible] . . . You 
have to anticipate and you have to think about what might 
happen, what might happen. And here for them to suggest that 
if 10 per cent of a Crown corporation were to be sold that it 
might become privatized in the eyes of the federal government, 
and therefore pay corporate taxes, is outlandish. There’s no 
possible way . . . It’s giving money away. That there’s no basis 
in fact, is outlandish. That’s not going down a rabbit hole; that’s 
a realistic scenario that these folks over here must have 
considered. 
 
They must have considered the range between when they 
privatize or sell, because they need cash. They are looking for 

cash. They are looking for cash. They are working hard in 
treasury board as we speak, and we know that they are, and 
they’re desperate for money. And they’re looking for as much 
of it as they can possibly get, that maybe 10 per cent just won’t 
cut it. They really do want to get into the 40, 45, 48 per cent. 
And that will be a problem, because then it’s like cutting off 
your nose to spite your face because you haven’t anticipated. 
 
And I would think somebody must have told somebody over 
there about the 10 per cent rule. Somebody must have said 
something to somebody over there. But as we’ve . . . and this is 
what . . . you know, Mr. Speaker, it is such a sad tale of what 
we see, you know, when we ask questions about the GTH, the 
Global Transportation Hub scandal, and how nobody seems to 
know anything about anything over there. And they can’t 
answer any questions, and yet they say it’s all been answered. 
 
Well then, tell us the answers. Tell us the answers. Stand up and 
be forthwith and upfront with the people of Saskatchewan. But 
they answer no questions. They answer no questions in this 
House about it. And I think it’s just, I think it’s just the way 
these folks do business. They were planning to be transparent 
and accountable, but they’re anything but. They’re anything 
but. And this is what this bill is, very much the way it is when 
we see a situation where we’ve put forward a very reasonable 
scenario and the Minister of Finance calls it a rabbit hole. 
Unbelievable. Unbelievable. 
 
You know in sports, in sports they have this thing called 
evidence-based thinking, evidence-based thinking. You know 
where you use evidence? To base your thinking on. It’s not very 
complicated. And it’s gone a long way to improve performance 
of athletes. And I think it might go a long way to improve the 
performance of this government if they started using some 
evidence to base their thinking on, their planning on, but they 
call it rabbit holes. They call that rabbit holes. And I cannot 
believe it when you have a Finance minister who . . . and of 
course we don’t have much to judge him on. I mean we saw 
what happened in the election where he delayed and delayed a 
budget until he finally had to get one out. We’ll see what 
happens next spring. 
 
And we’re waiting for the first quarter report, and he said, not 
to see here, not much to see here. And yet we’re seeing dribs 
and drabs come out about the mid-term report, so they must 
have it. They must have it because of some of the claims he’s 
making, he must know what’s going on. So at any point we 
assume that we will be seeing it, but in my experience with this 
government, we won’t see it until November 30th in the 
afternoon after we’ve risen for the Christmas break. That’s 
when we’ll see it. And that’s what the evidence has been with 
this government — to leave it until we are not in the House. I 
mean if it gets out in the morning that day, you know, it will be 
a one-day question period, unfortunately, unfortunately, on that. 
 
So this is the problem: when we have this interpretation Act 
before us, when they say, clarify, I think they need to have a 
definition of what clarify means because this is not clearing up 
the waters at all. This is muddying the waters, and when we 
challenge them on this, it doesn’t help at all. It doesn’t help at 
all. 
 
[15:45] 



1162 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2016 

And as I said, you know, if the minister were to simply table his 
definition from the World Bank, it would go a long way. I have 
a lot of respect for the minister, and I know when he is quoting 
from a source that has some merit . . . But clearly we actually 
need to say that we can’t find it. We don’t know if it exists. We 
absolutely don’t know if it exists, and he went to great length 
and continues to go to great length to say that it exists. 
 
Now we don’t know. We don’t know if he’s actually seen it. I 
mean, he hasn’t said it. He hasn’t said . . . And I’m reading 
from page 451 of the World Bank’s report 2016. He’s not 
quoting. He’s not quoting; he’s referring to. So that would give 
me the impression, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that he’s not got a 
page or a document in front of him that he’s quoting from, but 
he’s just got a reference, an uncited reference other than the 
source, but not when the source . . . Was it a book? Was it a 
speech? Was it an interview? Was it speculation? Was it a wish 
maybe that the actual quote is that someone at a World Bank 
conference wished that the definition was this, or thought it 
should be this, or in no way should it be this? We need to see 
this page. We need to see the context from which the minister 
speaks of because, as we’ve been trying to determine, it just 
doesn’t seem to be in existence. But as I said, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, if the members want to challenge us and get up and do 
a point of order, we’d be very happy to say, you know, fair 
enough. We need to make sure that it exists. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as I said, you know, we go on and we go on, 
and I do think about this evidence-based thinking and the gift of 
anticipation. You know, I remember in evidence-based thinking 
. . . I just remember I heard the member from Carrot River 
speaking earlier and talking about some of his great predictions. 
And one of the best predictions the member from Carrot River 
ever did . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . You said it. It’s just a 
gold quote: “The best budget in the universe.” The best budget 
in the universe, back in 2008 or 2009, and they ended up paying 
back a couple of hundred million dollars to the Potash 
Corporation. I’m sure the member from Carrot River didn’t 
have to pay. 
 
But my point is, here we have a government who doesn’t 
believe in evidence-based thinking, doesn’t believe in 
anticipation. They just seem to be willing to go into a situation 
full steam, full steam, thinking, you know . . . They’re broke. 
They need money. We’ve seen the situation. 
 
And we go through the scandals, the $25 million that we don’t 
know, we need to know more about in terms of the GTH. 
Where did all that money . . . Well we know where it went. We 
have a really good idea where it went, but where it should be 
going, where it should be going. And we’re seeing the cuts, 
we’re seeing, you know . . . As I’ve myself raised petitions after 
petitions, how this government has been so mean-spirited, 
whether it’s the heritage language schools, some $230,000, 
$230,000 a year, teaching over 60 heritage languages in 
volunteer situations, but no, that had to go. That had to go. But 
paying 25 million for land, that’s a deal. And we heard that, we 
heard that from the Premier today, you know, and I just am 
amazed at how he can put things in a different light, if I can say 
it that way, how that was a steal of a deal for that land at 25 
million, how that was just a really good deal, a really good deal. 
 
And you know, we have a situation — and of course I’m 

currently presenting petitions about the issue of Wakamow 
Valley Authority — where we had both members from Moose 
Jaw vote in favour of job cuts in their city, just over the 
amounts of money. That’s just over a couple of hundred 
thousand dollars a year. But instead what did we get? Buying 
land for some $25 million. And we need to know more about 
that. We need to know more about that. 
 
But again it’s this evidence-based thinking that I think is a 
problem. It’s a real problem here. Nobody over there seems to 
be able to, or will own up to what is the real game plan. As I 
said, when you’ve got the for sale sign in your front porch and 
everybody can see it as they’re driving by or walking by — and 
you’re telling your neighbours no, no, no, our house isn’t for 
sale, isn’t for sale — it sure looks like it’s for sale. It sure looks 
like it’s for sale. And you’re setting up all the details and the 
agreements just clarifying, just clarifying as if I were to sell my 
house, but I’m not really going to sell my house. Yes, I think 
you really are going to sell your house. And this is the issue 
that’s before us today, is why are we debating this bill leading 
up to a budget that we know these folks over here have a lot, a 
lot of problems. A lot, a lot of problems. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, when we think about the Crowns, you 
know, I want to say my colleague from Nutana really made the 
case, both quoting from Allan Blakeney but also from the 
Manning Centre in terms of the follies of going ahead with 
privatization and some of the pitfalls, but has really clearly 
identified, laid out how this government here has set up a 
situation, set up a situation where clearly it looks like they’re 
lining it all up. 
 
The parallels that are so common between now and what 
happened in the ’80s, that many, many, many people in 
Saskatchewan . . . And this is what we heard over the weekend. 
What we heard this weekend, you know, it was amazing, Mr. 
Speaker — whether it was a funeral or whether it was a medical 
appointment or a dinner — people were all talking about, yes 
what’s happening to the Crowns. We’ve got to keep them. 
We’ve got to keep them, especially in these tough times we find 
ourselves in because of mismanagement. This is not the time. 
This is not the time to be selling our communications company. 
This is not the time. You know, if there’s . . . I mean I would 
suggest there’s not a time to. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it’s so short sighted for these folks to be 
putting our best companies in so many ways on the block, on 
the auction block. And they’d say, well we’re just having some 
clarification. We have some real, real concerns about that — 
whether it’s SaskTel or SaskPower or SaskEnergy; the bus 
company, STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company]; and 
SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] — and you go 
down the list. 
 
Clearly you know, the deal that they’re hoping to get some 
quick cash are really going to put a lot of people in some tough 
times, as we know that the Crowns have served so well to 
deliver services. And whether that’s to keep our homes warm; 
whether it’s to keep the lights on in our farms, in our homes, 
our businesses; drive the machinery in our industry; and 
whether it’s SGI in making sure that we have a way of 
protecting ourselves from injury, and when those injuries do 
happen that we can have some security — these are things that 



November 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1163 

are so critically important. Once we start seeing them leave the 
province, they aren’t going to come back. 
 
And so we have been innovators. These Crowns have been 
innovators, and they’ve been with us for many, many years, 
many decades. And it would be so incredibly short sighted for 
us to be going down this road, to be going down this road. And 
so, Mr. Speaker, as I said, that when we have a government that 
doesn’t, you know, doesn’t seem to believe in evidence-based 
thinking or the gift of anticipation or working with scenarios, 
this is why they get caught up in the situation that they are. 
 
And clearly when we have a situation here where they are 
talking about, oh they’re anticipating that they’re going to need 
to clarify what does it mean to privatize, I have to say that 
there’s all sorts of red flags that go up to say, yes you’re 
thinking an awful lot. You’re thinking an awful lot about some 
things that are up for sale. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s just not 
right. 
 
And I know that some of the folks here who are just joining us 
here on TV, you know, I’ve been talking a bit about how the 
folks over there seem to be caught off guard, caught off guard 
when we raise the issue about when a Crown corporation is put 
up for sale and 10 per cent of it becomes sold to a private 
corporation, therefore they’re liable for corporate taxes from the 
federal point of view. And you know, in the federal point of 
view, they have to be fair. They have to say, you know what the 
rules are; everybody knows what the rules are. And they can’t 
be playing favourites. 
 
And I know this Premier loves to get in a good tussle with the 
federal government. But the problem is, he hasn’t been able to 
have the stamina to really fight it through. And we saw that 
with the equalization issues back in 2006 and ’07 and ’08 where 
he was standing with us, and we were so proud to have him 
alongside when he was in opposition, saying that he would 
continue that good fight. He would continue that good fight 
with the federal government. But as soon as they were elected, 
they were soon talked out of that. They were soon talked out of 
that, and he backed away from it. And so here we have a 
situation where we could tell that these folks were caught off 
guard. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, you know, I do have to say that, you know, 
there is a reason for us to be deeply, deeply concerned about 
this kind of move by this government. You know because, as 
my colleague said, these are all the signs they were giving in the 
’80s about privatization and all the kind of work they did, all 
the kind of signals that they were sending, both to their base 
within the province and how they were sending signals that 
maybe was time that the Crowns weren’t meeting their need, 
that we could sell. And it sure sounds like the . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Fired 31 people today. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Yes, and you know, we see that kind of work 
that they’re doing, moving people around, layoffs that are 
happening. The situation in Moose Jaw is drastic. But we aren’t 
really talking about, we aren’t really talking about the social 
good of the Crowns here in Saskatchewan. And here we have a 
situation where we saw layoffs in Moose Jaw for our Crown. 
And the word may be rightsizing or amalgamating or whatever. 

But here we have a situation . . . The wonderful thing about 
Crowns in terms of the social good that they mete out 
throughout the province is they’re delivering services 
consistently at an affordable price to everyone in this province. 
And that’s what we need to have in a province like ours where 
we have such a widespread population that, in many ways, 
wouldn’t make sense for a completely profit-driven corporation, 
you know. 
 
And SaskTel or Telecommunications company would be a 
perfect example of a company that would look at Saskatchewan 
and say, you know, it really doesn’t make a lot of sense. Maybe 
that Moose Jaw-Regina-Saskatoon-Prince Albert corridor might 
make some sense, but really the challenges would be meeting 
the needs of people in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And here you have them already starting to line it up to say, 
well we’re going to start moving some of these folks around, 
and we’re going to start laying off some folks. We’re going to 
start rightsizing this thing even though we know that this is how 
we deliver good, consistent services right across the province. 
And amazingly we can do it well, and we can deliver a 
dividend. We can deliver a dividend, some almost $300 million 
last year. 
 
[16:00] 
 
And if we lose that either by an outright sale or by paying 
federal taxes, then that’s a huge hit. That’s a huge hit. And if 
these folks haven’t anticipated this, if they haven’t thought this 
through, if they haven’t thought this through . . . And we’ve 
seen it when they haven’t really thought things through like the 
GTH where you have Highways, who usually does the 
appropriation for land, who usually . . . And they have the 
skills. And everybody in the province knows Highways does 
that kind of thing and they do it fairly and they have a process 
that’s been tried throughout Saskatchewan. Then all of a sudden 
another corporation gets involved and they say, well we have to 
act quickly. Mr. Speaker, that’s just not good government at 
work. That’s not good government at work. And that’s why 
want to get to the bottom of that. 
 
But here if we have that same process applied to the 
privatization process in Saskatchewan, I think people do have a 
right to be worried, have a right to be really worried about 
what’s going to happen. What’s going to happen to the big 
Crowns? We’ve seen it. We’ve seen it already happening with 
the liquor board stores where we’ve argued, you could 
modernize and make it attractive and be able to meet the needs 
of customers. But they went ahead and they said they were 
going to sell some 40 stores. Now we’ll see over the next four 
years whether it stays at 40 or whether it’s more. And they say 
that it’s revenue neutral, that in fact this is an ideological thing, 
that they just believe in good competition. We’ll see if that’s the 
case. We’ll see if that’s the case, and throughout the province 
whether people are getting equal access to a wide variety of 
brands and types of liquor. 
 
And also are people following the rules? We’ve seen this issue. 
In fact we’ve gone through this with the bill that was passed last 
week in terms of driving while impaired. And both sides moved 
very quickly even though we . . . And I do have to say that the 
members who were on that committee some three years ago 



1164 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2016 

worked really hard to convince the government that it was 
short-sighted not to include the recommendations at the time. 
They didn’t. So here we are again, some more unintended 
consequences. 
 
But this is what happens when you become too ideologically 
driven, and we worry about this over here with these folks 
because they’re clearly not listening to some of the things they 
should be. And we have a Finance minister who talks often 
about rabbit holes and he should be really talking about 
scenarios and really thinking through what are the unintended 
consequences that may be happening there. 
 
So did the Minister of Justice, as he has been shown to do once 
or twice before — but not consistently though, that’s the 
problem, at least according to the auditor — warn his 
colleagues of the unintended consequences? And this has been 
an issue and so this has been a real problem, Mr. Speaker. So 
we worry about this, and we worry about the impression that 
people might be seeing across Canada. 
 
And as I said, that when you start talking and everybody knows 
the financial situation in Saskatchewan, and I mean they get the 
signs. They see when you don’t deliver the first quarter budget, 
or first quarter report, that in fact people start to wonder what’s 
up in your house. What’s up? How come you aren’t doing the 
work that you should be doing? It’s something that we have a 
good standing tradition here in Saskatchewan, for many years, 
and it should be continued and shouldn’t be dismissed by 
simply saying, by simply saying that there’s nothing to see here. 
Nothing to see here. This is just not good enough, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so on top of that we have a situation where we have a 
government that really — and they’ve shown this to be the case 
— don’t think an awful lot of Crowns, aren’t really impressed 
by Crowns. And I talk about the social good that Crowns can 
have in our province, and interestingly when we brought this 
forward a few years ago, the Crown protection Act, they were 
all there. Now not many of them spoke to it and some of them 
who were in the House at the time in opposition had the 
opportunity to speak in favour and give their own impression 
about why they thought Crowns were so important chose not to, 
but did in fact vote in favour of protecting them. 
 
But here we are these years later, 10 years later, and they’ve 
chosen to take another go at Crowns in a couple of different 
bills here that are before us. And you know, of course, the bill 
that we’re debating is Bill No. 40, An Act to amend The 
Interpretation Act, 1995 — a relatively new bill, just a few days 
old. I don’t know why at this time of the legislative agenda that 
they felt that, oops, they’ve forgotten about this. And for the 
folks at home or in the gallery, would be interested to know that 
they’re also changing the references from kings to queens. Now 
interestingly now, we’re now in the 63rd year of the reign of 
Queen Elizabeth, and nobody has felt that pressure to change 
the legislation in those 63 years . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
Right. And so, Mr. Speaker, it’s rather striking odd that we are 
in this situation that we have before us. 
 
But you know, as I said, we have a Finance minister who 
doesn’t want to talk about scenarios. And you know this is a 
situation that we find ourselves really in an interesting 
circumstance, and whether it’s Lighthouse, cutting funding for 

Lighthouse and knowing the implications of when you cut 
funding for the Lighthouse project in Saskatoon, you’re going 
to see emergency costs go up. You’re going to see all sorts of 
costs go up, you know. 
 
And then I wonder, Mr. Speaker, how they feel about 
firefighting in the summer. Is that going down a rabbit hole? Is 
that going down a rabbit hole when the Minister of 
Environment says we should be talking about firefighting, 
preparing for that? Is that going down a rabbit hole, or is that a 
scenario that we should be talking about? 
 
Now I know, I know that in some ways climate change is 
throwing a wrench into this whole thing. I know that’s . . . You 
can’t completely predict that. But you cannot say we’re going to 
turn completely away from evidence-based thinking, such as 
that if you sell more than 10 per cent . . . We know, we know if 
you sell more than 10 per cent — and they can all join in with 
me if they want. I’d get this fact straight — if you sell more 
than 10 per cent of your Crown corporation, then you could be 
paying corporate federal taxes, federal corporate taxes. They 
know . . . They should know that by now. 
 
And if I’m repeating myself, Mr. Speaker, it’s only because 
some people say you have to say it not once, not twice, not 
three times, not four times — up to seven times you have to say 
something before some people get it, before some people get it. 
And I’m going to say it again. I think these folks haven’t 
thought it through. They have not thought it through at all about 
the unintended consequences of The Interpretation Act. 
 
And I think that the people of Saskatchewan expect better, 
expect better from the government of the day. They expect them 
to think it through, to think it through, to use evidence-based 
thinking, evidence-based thinking like they . . . And you know, 
we’ve seen several, whether it’s corporations or athletes or 
others, achieve great results. Not so much these folks, not so 
much these folks, but others have. When they’ve used evidence 
such as the corporate tax laws, the corporate tax laws, they can 
achieve great things. 
 
But this type of thing where we have seen them flippantly 
dismiss, flippantly dismiss people because it doesn’t fit into 
their narrative, into their narrative . . . They would like this to 
be simple and straightforward, but it doesn’t fit into their line of 
thinking. And this is, this is an issue for them, Mr. Speaker, 
because this is our job. We challenge them and we do research. 
 
Now as I’ve said — and I don’t know if the minister is looking 
for that document from the World Bank — we have yet to see, 
we have yet to see the actual definition of privatization that he 
is so fondly, so fondly quoting in the House. Now maybe we 
are missing it, and if that’s the case, we’re fine with that but we 
would like to have it tabled in the House. This government has 
often said that they table stuff, they table things. They like to do 
that, but not so much, actually. They’ll get it onto Hansard, but 
will they actually deliver the paper to the table is a question. 
And we’ve seen that with written questions, the appalling rate 
of answers to written questions. 
 
You know, as we’ve said, this is a government that was elected 
to be accountable and transparent except for written questions, 
except for question period, except for committees. And we’ll 



November 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1165 

see tomorrow; we’ll see what happens in PAC whether or not 
. . . And the members over there say, oh it’s hands off, and we 
can see the members from PAC, they’ll be able to decide on 
their own, on their own, who they can call. That’s going to be 
very interesting to see what happens in PAC tomorrow 
morning. We sure hope that they can decide on their own and 
make sure we do get some answers to GTH and what’s really 
happening there. And if this government has the courage to 
actually do that, then they’ll have gone a long way. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, it’s a bit of past actions are often 
an indicator of future behaviour, and I have some things to 
worry about. And this is why, this is why Bill 40 before us is 
such a big question mark. It may be only a couple of pages and 
it may be talking about translations into French, and it may be 
talking about the fact that we want to have clarity around when 
a king is a king then it’s a king, and when it’s a queen it’s a 
queen. It’s a queen. Even though for the past 60 some years 
we’ve been fine, we’ve been fine with Queen Elizabeth and . . . 
Now I don’t want to get into that debate about the monarchy. 
That’s another debate for another time, but the fact of the matter 
is we’ve been fine. We’ve been fine. And so why all of a 
sudden this rush to get this bill in here? 
 
And so again, as I’ve talked about, this government often loves 
to use Trojan horses, loves to use Trojan horses. And here we 
see a bill come in all, you know . . . I am surprised. I am 
surprised. I would have thought the queen’s part and the king’s 
part should have been further up the amendments than towards 
the back because, you know, in terms of a Trojan horse, this 
doesn’t quite work out the way . . .  
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot, a lot of questions about this. But 
I do want to say that, you know, if this really is the issue before 
us, that this government is bent on privatization and quick 
bucks over the winter so they can have some money in hand for 
the budget. Then we have some real concerns. We have some 
real concerns. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, we saw today the situation that 
happened in SaskTel in Moose Jaw. We had, on one hand, the 
member from Moose Jaw Wakamow is celebrating the fact that 
they created some new jobs, and we can all get behind that, 
especially when we had the news — and you would have seen 
the Saskatoon StarPhoenix, the headlines on their front page, 
“Over 10,000 jobs lost,” “Over 10,000 jobs lost.” And only the 
Premier can turn that around to say, yes, but look at all the other 
things, look . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . yes, yes, he really 
does want us to look at all the other things. He really does want 
us to look at all the other things. We have some real concerns. 
 
But the same day as those 20 get announced, then we hear about 
some 20-plus being laid off in Moose Jaw and the members 
from Moose Jaw are silent on that, silent on that. And 
ironically, one of them is a former Unifor member and who 
should be really raising the charge or leading the charge to say 
this is not right; this is not right. Moose Jaw needs all the jobs 
they can get, not just 20 jobs. It needs all the jobs. 
 
[16:15] 
 
We see Meewasin, Wakamow. We saw the loss in . . . Now 
we’re seeing these jobs moving. We’re seeing them move. And 

while the minister responsible says they’re not, they’re not cuts. 
They’re not layoffs. But to the people in Moose Jaw, they sure 
look like they are. They sure look like they are. So, Mr. 
Speaker, yes, there’s been 10,000 jobs lost in this province. And 
I appreciate the members opposite, you know, who are finally 
waking up to the fact that we have had job losses in this 
province. 
 
But you know, the Crowns really can deliver on head offices. 
They can deliver on good solid careers. It’s not only the clients 
and the consumers, the customers who are well served, are well 
served by the Crown corporations, but it’s also our kids. And 
now, I mean, like many of them have retired out, for sure. I 
think some of my colleagues’ parents have retired out of 
SaskEnergy, you know. These are good solid jobs. 
 
When we can have a win-win-win situation with Crowns being 
competitive in costs, delivering dividends, and people paying 
fair rates for their communications, their cellphones, their 
services. And yet we get almost $300 million in dividends. It 
does seem like something you don’t want to mess with. And it’s 
that old saying: if it ain’t broke, then don’t fix it. Simply move 
away from it. Move away from it. Let it work. Let it work. 
 
And you know, the government, to its credit, at least went to an 
election up front about the 40 Liquor Board stores. Now it will 
be interesting to see how much further . . . Yes, it will be 
interesting to see how far down the road we go because they 
didn’t take that out of . . . they did take it out of the Crown 
protection legislation. And so we need to see where they will 
end up with this. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said, and I am really amazed at some 
of the ministers over there when one can’t produce a document, 
can’t produce a document about a definition and probably 
won’t, probably won’t. I mean we know there are . . . You 
know, it’ll be interesting to see what they do. And then we have 
another who, the Finance minister, doesn’t believe in scenarios. 
He calls them rabbit holes. And I don’t know what a budget is if 
not a series of scenarios, if it’s not a series of scenarios that 
professional people work with. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this is really alarming when we have a 
Finance minister so dismissive, so, so dismissive, dismissive, so 
dismissive of evidence-based thinking, so dismissive of that and 
so dismissive of his responsibilities. And so you know, Mr. 
Speaker, clearly I’ve hit a nerve with the Finance minister 
because he really clearly needs to get a handle on what his job 
is, what his job is. You know, we have someone who is taking, 
putting at risk so much of what we hold near and dear here in 
Saskatchewan. And he can be simply flippant, flippant about 
the whole thing, flippant. And so, Mr. Speaker, I have some real 
concerns about this, real concerns. And they’re hiding behind 
this interpretation Act, this interpretation Act, and clarification, 
clarification. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, this is really rich coming from those 
folks over there, those folks over there who clearly haven’t 
done their homework and are going to lead us down a very 
dangerous path, not thinking through all the unintended 
consequences. And as we’ve said, this simple one that just is 
mind-boggling that the Finance minister clearly hadn’t thought 
about, the federal corporate taxes. He calls that a rabbit hole, a 



1166 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2016 

rabbit hole. I don’t know if that’s what he thinks about federal 
corporate tax law, a series of rabbit holes. I find that appalling. I 
find that appalling. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a bill I know that many people 
will want to speak to. Many people will want to speak to this 
legislation. Many people will want to really ask the minister 
responsible: can he produce that simple page, that simple 
definition about where they got this definition from that he 
seems so keen on? And if he can table it, if he can table it — 
we’ve been calling for it for a couple of days now — if he can 
table it then that’s great. That is really excellent. But the page, 
the citation . . . 
 
But I know many people will want to speak to this bill and 
speak to other bills before us tonight. So I want to make sure 
though that, you know, when I see this image in my mind’s eye 
of a house with a for sale sign in the front porch and the owner 
says it’s not really for sale, but walking by you see the sign. 
And the people say, it’s not for sale; I’m just checking out the 
language. I think it really is for sale. 
 
And these guys are desperate. You can hear it. You can hear it 
right now, very desperate for cash. They’re in their treasury 
board meetings, and they’re all wondering where they’re going 
to get their money from. And this is what they’re looking for. 
This is what they’re looking for. So, Mr. Speaker, with that I 
would move adjournment on Bill No. 40, An Act to amend the 
Interpretation Act, 1995. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 40, The Interpretation 
Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 
 

Bill No. 2 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 2 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Crown Corporations’ Fiscal Year 
End Standardization) Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise of course today to 
speak to Bill No. 2 . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I don’t think 
I have quite that voice, so thank you. Some technical difficulties 
over here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
For those that missed it, Bill No. 2 is The Miscellaneous 
Statutes (Crown Corporations’ Fiscal Year End 
Standardization) Amendment Act, 2016. Mr. Speaker, certainly 
those members in this Legislative Assembly and many of those 
at home will have some recollection of this bill. Of course prior 
to the bill being formally announced in this Legislative 
Assembly earlier this spring, there was an announcement in 

November indicating that the fiscal year-ends of the Crown 
corporations would be extended, Mr. Speaker, for an additional 
three months, so 15 months, Mr. Speaker, 15 months of 
reporting of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Saskatoon Centre 
on his feet? 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Leave to introduce a guest. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . No, it’s not about finishing my speech or 
anything I forgot to say. But I would like to introduce to you 
and through you to all members of the House, a guest in the 
west gallery, Brittney Senger, from Saskatoon. She’s actually 
very active on Saskatoon’s east side, very active in the civic 
election, in the past civic election. She is a political science 
student at the U of S [University of Saskatchewan]. I would ask 
all members to welcome her to her legislature. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 2 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Crown 
Corporations’ Fiscal Year End Standardization) 

Amendment Act, 2016 
(continued) 

 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This has been a bumpy 
start to this, my comments today. 
 
So going back to my previous comments, of course this . . . We 
got a first indication of this legislation back in November when 
the Finance minister did release the mid-year financials at that 
point, so we know that that is possible, Mr. Speaker. At that 
time, he was also . . . had to admit that we were looking at a two 
point . . . or $262 million deficit at that time, Mr. Speaker, so 
that we did get a bit of an update at that time and of course did 
not get a budget ahead of the most recent election, Mr. Speaker. 
So that adds, I think, some context to this bill that we see before 
us today. 
 
When the minister did rise in May to speak to this bill, he noted 
that Crown corporations of course are formed by separate 
legislation and some didn’t have a specific date, a fiscal 
year-end date. So there is some reason I suppose, Mr. Speaker, 
in having those year-end dates align. Certainly this government 
today, as we know, has been in power in this province for nine 
years. So I do find the timing of these changes before a 
provincial election, where the books maybe could use a little 



November 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1167 

sprucing up, Mr. Speaker, to be very interesting, very 
interesting timing indeed. 
 
And of course those . . . To refresh memories, we did not see a 
budget ahead of that provincial election, which has since proven 
to be a bit of a misfortune, Mr. Speaker. Because although I’m 
not sure exactly the extent that it would have changed the 
results, I think a lot of people would have liked to have had that 
information before casting their vote. But of course they didn’t. 
 
So what this bill does propose again is changing the fiscal 
year-end from March the 1st . . . from the calendar year-end to 
the fiscal year-end, from April 1st to March 1st, Mr. Speaker, 
which is a reasonable practice. But again I think when you’re 
looking at any changes, not only do you look at the decisions to 
make the changes, but you look at timing. You look at context. 
You look at, why wasn’t this done in the previous number of 
years where it could have been? And why did this happen right 
before a provincial election, an election again where we did not 
see the true state of the books ahead of that election, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
So I think that is a valid question. Certainly was a question I 
was asked and a number of people were asked on the campaign 
trail, and certainly have a lot of people wishing that they 
would’ve seen those books ahead of the election, Mr. Speaker. 
And it didn’t come without consequence of course either. So 
this would be a new practice for the Crown corporations and 
would . . . involved a little uncertainty about exactly how they 
were going to be reporting those additional three months. And I 
know that all of the Crowns in the end did an admirable job of 
ensuring that they had those reports on time and in front of the 
people of Saskatchewan. And I think that, yes, there certainly is 
some lessons to be learned by others, Mr. Speaker, about 
getting your reports in on time and having that public scrutiny 
that is so deserved by the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
When I was preparing for my comments today, Mr. Speaker, I 
was just going back and having a look at some of those annual 
reports that were tabled by the Crown corporations. And I’m 
going to read a little bit from the SaskPower annual report. 
SaskPower, of course, is our provincial power corporation that 
has one of the largest power grids in Canada, Mr. Speaker — 
one of the largest power grids with one of the lowest consumer 
densities, Mr. Speaker. And that’s really important in a 
province like Saskatchewan where we do have a dispersed 
population where, if you look at a map, a provincial map of 
Saskatchewan, that fully half of the geographic land mass in 
Saskatchewan is north of Waskesiu. 
 
It provides some interesting challenges, and that of course, Mr. 
Speaker, is why the Crowns were created in the first place. The 
Crowns ensured rural electrification, ensured that we had 
service to the North. And they continue, very admirably, Mr. 
Speaker, to fulfill that role today. 
 
[16:30] 
 
And you know, when we’re looking at transforming, when 
we’re looking at providing not only just power but we’re 
looking at providing health care and education and economic 
opportunities in rural and remote communities, Mr. Speaker, it 
is essential that we have those Crown corporations, and that we 

don’t do anything to hamper their ability to provide not only 
those economic dividends, Mr. Speaker — $300 million a year 
— but the social dividends to the people of Saskatchewan. And 
that is a unique mandate amongst Crown corporations, Mr. 
Speaker. They don’t report to shareholders; they report to all 
people in Saskatchewan. And I think that’s very, very 
important. 
 
In their preamble to their annual report of SaskPower, which 
was of course established in 1929, they note that they’re defined 
by their “. . . commitment to support economic growth and 
enhance quality of life in our province.” Mr. Speaker, and I 
think that that is very important — almost 3,200 full-time jobs, 
an economic and a social commitment. 
 
And I rise today to speak to this legislation, but also at a time 
when those jobs and those services and that social commitment 
to the people of this province are being threatened, being 
threatened by legislation that appears not to be particularly well 
thought out, and certainly legislation that doesn’t seem to take 
into account the full context and the full scope of potential 
consequences, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think that that is something that we have seen time and 
time again from this government, I think. If I may, you know, 
when you’re bringing in legislations, be it, you know, pulling 
the ability of school boards to set their own mill rates, it’s really 
important that you have a plan for where you’re going to go 
from there. And that is not something that we have seen, and in 
fact we’ve seen the opposite, time, time, and time again, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We want to ensure that, you know, in addition to having this 
extra accounting piece at the end of this year . . . And again, as I 
mentioned, the Crowns did do admirably in making sure that 
they had had their reporting. I remember in estimates they were 
able to account for their fiscal year-end. Again, we are yet to 
see that from the Finance minister, that kind of update from 
him. But I know that people again are waiting to see that. 
 
And again, they have good reason to be concerned, Mr. 
Speaker, given that just shortly after the election we finally did 
see a budget and a Throne Speech and there was some surprises 
in there, Mr. Speaker. There were some surprises in terms of 
increased drug costs for seniors, cuts to Buffalo Narrows 
penitentiary — correctional facility, rather, Mr. Speaker. Now 
we’ve got cuts to the SAID program, increased cuts to school 
boards, NORTEP, not paying for teacher salaries, clawing back 
WCB [Workers’ Compensation Board]. 
 
So people in this province have good reason to want to pay 
attention and want those updates and that clarity from this 
government. Certainly this legislation is cloaked in the guise of 
providing clarity and some streamlining of processes, which on 
the surface is admirable, but it’s always I think important to 
question deeper motives or to point out where maybe some of 
the unintended consequences have not been fully thought out. 
 
And I mention again, Mr. Speaker, that people of this province 
are being reasonable, and members on this side certainly being 
reasonable in questioning this state of not only the Crown 
corporations and the increasing debt that they’re being asked to 
hold onto, but you know, the finances overall in this province 



1168 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2016 

— $7 billion added to the debt in seven years, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re talking some of the highest years of revenue in the 
history of the province, so that’s certainly concerning. Failing 
an audit, Mr. Speaker, the first time in Canadian history, you 
know. And was this change a way to prop up the books ahead 
of that election? I mean, I don’t know. Certainly that’s a 
one-year deal if that is the case, because now they’ll all be 
aligned. But I think, given the full context, I think there’s some 
reasonable questions around that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we’re seeing, you know, increasingly desperate measures. 
Again as I mentioned, once the fiscal years align, that 
on-the-surface boost to revenues, that’s a one-time deal. So 
we’re seeing government that’s getting more and more 
desperate to divert the attention of the people of this province 
away from the true state of the books. Well we don’t know the 
true state of course, Mr. Speaker, because we haven’t seen those 
financial updates. 
 
But desperate, really desperate measures like proposing selling 
off 49 per cent or making it easier to sell off 49 per cent of our 
Crown corporations, which will have economic impact certainly 
for those in those jobs but as well as the dividends that are paid 
to all people in Saskatchewan, as well as service. And as I 
mentioned before, our ability to provide education and health 
care and business opportunities across this province, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s increasingly important. 
 
And I certainly do have a number of additional questions that I 
would like to ask about this legislation and to check in with 
stakeholders to see if they have any additional comments, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s not only the announced and the intended 
consequences that we have to pay attention to when we’re 
looking at legislation. It is all of those unexamined 
consequences, obscured consequences, and consequences that 
will be realized in the long term, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So as I noted, on the surface, aligning the fiscal year-ends for 
Crown corporations does seem a reasonable measure, although 
a little less reasonable or a little more questionable, given the 
context when this legislation was first talked about and was first 
proposed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think that committee will provide a good opportunity to put a 
little more of a spotlight on this legislation and ensure that there 
are no hidden consequences negative towards our Crowns 
because, Mr. Speaker, we all know that our Crown corporations 
are certainly under a lot of stress and a lot of scrutiny. And 
there’s a lot of fear out there, Mr. Speaker, and legitimate 
concern about what exactly is in the future for those very 
important corporations in our province and the good work that 
they do. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to propose, I would like 
to move Bill No. 2 . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I would like 
to sit down. 
 
The Speaker: — The member would like to move . . . Adjourn 
debate? 
 
An Hon. Member: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — All right . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Okay. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which bill shall this be committed? I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 
that Bill No. 2, the miscellaneous statute amendment Act, 2016 
be moved to the committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
Bill No. 2 to Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 4 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 4 — The Queen’s 
Bench Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur la 
Cour du Banc de la Reine be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
enter the debate on Bill No. 4, The Queen’s Bench Amendment 
Act, 2016. Mr. Speaker, this bill does a few things before us, 
and I’d just like to refer to the minister’s second reading speech 
to talk a little bit about this. He points out, Mr. Speaker, that: 
 

. . . amendments to the Act are required to fulfill . . . [our] 
obligations as a signatory to the New West Partnership 
Trade Agreement, which will allow existing or future 
awards made by dispute resolution panels to be enforced 
against any party as if they were civil judgments of the 
court. Amendments to the Act will [also the minister had 
gone on to say that] be made to allow awards to be made by 
dispute resolution panels under trade agreements to be 
enforced as if they were civil judgments of the court, and 
allow awards . . . enforced against persons other than the 
Crown. 

 
So the other thing, there are a few other things that this 
particular Bill No. 4 does, Mr. Speaker. It also amends the 
reference to the size of the court from a Chief Justice of 31 
other judges, to a Chief Justice and 32 other judges to reflect the 
actual size of the court today, Mr. Speaker. That’s more than a 
reasonable amendment. 
 
One of the other things this bill does, Mr. Speaker, it includes a 
notice requirement specific to the appointment of 
court-appointed legal counsel. The minister had gone on to 
explain in his second reading speech that: 
 

. . . the lack of a statutory basis for the administration of 
the court-appointed legal counsel program has [in fact] 
resulted in inconsistencies in when and how such counsel 
are appointed. 
 

And he points out that: 



November 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1169 

Providing for a notice requirement specifically designed 
for court-appointed counsel and introducing those rules in 
The Constitutional Questions Act, 2012 will enhance the 
ability to address these matters in the Act, and [as he says] 
improve certainty. 

 
Mr. Speaker, so this particular bill, I’ll just summarize here. 
This bill makes it easier to enforce decisions made by the 
dispute resolution panels under free trade agreements. It allows 
the minister to keep a list of lawyers who can be appointed as 
court-appointed lawyers, regulating their compensation, and 
update the process for people applying to get a court-appointed 
lawyer. 
 
I’d just like to walk you through — so that’s in summary of 
what the bill does, Mr. Speaker — I’d just like to walk you 
through the changes to the bill here. So in subsection 4(1), it’s 
amended to provide for 32 other Queen’s Bench judges rather 
than 31. And this amendment reflects the existing size of the 
court and does not represent an expansion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So with respect, there’s a new section, section 4, that: 
 

. . . establishes a requirement for the appointment of court 
appointed legal counsel to proceed only when the court is 
satisfied that the application and notice of requirements of 
part III.1 of The Constitutional Questions Act, 2012 have 
been met. 

 
And as it says in the explanatory notes: 
 

This requirement will not be necessary where, under 
section 33.1, a different process is to be followed with 
respect to the appointment of counsel for children in child 
protection matters. 

 
Another change . . . This is one of the changes that is repeated 
throughout the Act, Mr. Speaker, is, “The reference to domestic 
is removed to allow for trade agreements to have a broader 
application.” 
 
Again, so in definition 89.1, those definitions are amended to 
remove the reference to “domestic” trade agreement. So the 
definition of “award” and “certified copy” in the past, Mr. 
Speaker, in the previous legislation, referred to “domestic,” and 
so that will be removed. 
 
In subsection 89.2, it will be: 
 

. . . amended to remove the reference to “domestic” [again] 
and to remove the restriction of enforcement of the order to 
an order against the Crown. 

 
And in subsection 89.2(2), it “. . . provides the ability to enforce 
an award whether the award was made on or after the section 
comes into force.” 
 
Just like to take you down to subsection 109(1), it’s amended to 
remove the reference, once again, to “domestic” trade 
agreements, in keeping with our commitment to the New West 
Partnership. And in section 4, the reference in (c) is updated to 
31 judges, again in accordance with the change made to 
subsection 4(1) of the Act. 

In subsection 9(1) it provides for related amendments to The 
Constitutional Questions Act, 2012. And in subsection 2, the 
long title’s amended to include reference to amendments to 
provide for the appointment of court-appointed counsel.  
 
In subsection 9(3), it: 
 

. . . introduces the new section 12.1 to provide that the 
notice requirement of Part III of The Constitutional 
Questions Act, 2012 do not apply to matters for which an 
application for court appointed counsel is being made 
pursuant to Part III.1. 

 
Just want to take you down to subsection (4) of the bill that 
provides for the new Part III.1 to address court-appointed 
lawyers, as I had mentioned in the summary, Mr. Speaker. 
Section 15.1 sets out definitions for the new Part III.1. And the 
“administrator” is defined for the purposes of this part and 
“court” means the Court of Queen’s Bench or the Provincial 
Court of Saskatchewan. A “list” means the list of lawyers 
maintained by the administrator. The “minister” means the 
minister responsible for the Act, and “prescribed” means 
prescribed in the regulations. So that gives you some sense of 
the definitions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[16:45] 
 

Subsection 15.3(1) provides that any person who seeks to 
have a lawyer appointed to represent him in a legal matter 
may make an application to the court.  
 
Subsection 15.3(2) provides that an application pursuant to 
subsection (1) is to be made in the manner and form as 
provided in the regulations and is to be accompanied by 
any additional information that the administrator may 
require. 

 
Subsection 15.3(3) establishes that notice must be provided 
14 days before a hearing for an application for a court 
appointed lawyer. Notice is to be provided to the 
administrator, the chief executive officer of Legal Aid, the 
federal Attorney General where it is a federal prosecution, 
the provincial Attorney General, and any other prescribed 
person set out in the regulations.  
 
Clause (b) [of this subsection] provides that such notice is 
to be filed with the court with proof of service. 

 
Subsection 15.3(4) provides that the matters set out in 
clauses (a), (b) and (c) are exempt from the notice 
requirements in subsection (3).  
 
Subsection 15.3(5) provides that with the consent of the 
administrator, the court may order that the 14 day notice 
may be shortened. 

 
So in 15.4(1): 
 

Where the court orders the applicant to be represented by a 
lawyer, the court shall refer the applicant to the 
administrator and the administrator shall appoint a lawyer 
to represent the applicant for the purposes of that matter. 

 



1170 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2016 

In 15.4(2), after a lawyer is appointed “. . . in accordance with 
clause(1)(b) the administrator shall file a notice in the court 
advising the name of the lawyer that has been appointed.” 
 
And in 15.4(3): 
 

For the purpose of appointing a lawyer in accordance with 
clause (1)(b), the administrator may establish a list of 
lawyers that may be appointed in accordance with this part 
and enter into contracts with those lawyers and law firms 
regarding the provisions of legal services for these 
purposes. 

 
[And] Clause (b) provides that the administrator may also 
establish a flat fee for matters to be payable to the lawyers 
appointed in accordance with this Part. 
 

And 15.4(4) of Bill No. 4: “Where a lawyer is appointed in a 
matter not in accordance with this Part, no fee will be payable 
to the administrator.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, so 15.5(1): 
 

An administrator shall remove a lawyer from the list if that 
lawyer has been removed from the panel of solicitors 
maintained by the Saskatchewan Legal Aid Commission. 
 
Subsection (2) The administrator may remove a lawyer 
from the list for just cause by giving the lawyer notice of 
his or her removal and setting out reasons. 
 
Subsection (3) A lawyer who has been removed from the 
list has 30 days to apply to the Court of Queen’s Bench to 
appeal that decision. 

 
[And then (4)] On application, a court may order 
reinstatement of the lawyer on the list or dismiss the 
application to be reinstated. 

 
[And then] Subsection 9(5) of the Bill introduces a new 
subsection 17(3) providing that a notice to any other 
person is to be served in the prescribed manner. 

 
And finally, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Subsection 9(6) of the Bill introduces a new section 17.1 to 
provide for new regulatory authority for the purposes of 
this [particular] Part. 
 
This includes powers to prescribe the manner and form in 
which an application for legal representation is to be made; 
prescribing any other persons to whom notice is to be 
served and prescribing accepted manners of service. 

 
Mr. Speaker, again, so just in conclusion, this bill is designed in 
part to fulfill our obligations, this province’s obligations as a 
signatory to the New West Partnership Trade Agreement. Mr. 
Speaker, and these all seem like fair and reasonable 
amendments and changes. I know though eventually when this 
bill gets to committee, there will be further questions asked 
about this particular bill. But with that, for now I would like to 
move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 4. 
 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Riversdale has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 4, The Queen’s Bench 
Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 5 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 5 — The 
Electronic Information and Documents Amendment Act, 2016 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased today 
to stand and talk about Bill No. 5, The Electronic Information 
and Documents Amendment Act, 2016. This was presented by 
the Minister of Justice and Attorney General in the previous 
session, in the spring session of this year. And so when he 
brought this forward, he talked about how this bill is based on 
the recommendations from other departments such as the credit 
unions and real estate agents who would like to be able to 
provide information electronically to people. 
 
In this day and age, Mr. Speaker, we’re going into more of an 
electronic-based society, that we do a lot of things through 
email, and so that seems to be a process that we are going to. So 
I could see why this might be brought forward by them. And it 
seems like this bill is also supported by some of the chamber of 
commerce in Saskatchewan and SaskCentral and, like I said 
before, the realtors’ association. And so I could see how this 
could make things a little bit easier. We tend to always be busy 
and hustle and bustle of life, and sometimes the only way we 
can communicate is through these different means of 
electronics, so email and such. 
 
But one of the areas that I do get concerned about when we do 
things electronically is that could bring us to be presented at 
having some breaches of confidential information. And so I 
believe, I know the Minister of Justice . . . And our critic of 
Justice, I have great confidence in her ability to review this file 
and determine the realities of it and so to make 
recommendations based on some of the amendments that are 
being presented here. And I know she’ll do a good job with 
regards to that and questioning at committee about some of 
these potential confidentiality breaches that could happen. And 
we want to ensure that people’s confidential information is 
maintained and so that definitely . . . especially when you’re 
talking about some sensitive things like, that could be financial 
matters. 
 
So I know, I myself use a lot of my . . . I keep a lot of electronic 
data for myself and more and more people are going towards 
that route with keeping files on their computer and such. But 
again, that kind of stuff can fail. And so where will those hard 
copies be? And what will people do? And where will those 
avenues be? So those are a lot of good questions that are going 
to need to be asked when this is presented to committee and 



November 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1171 

discussed between the Minister of Justice and our critic in 
Justice as well. They both have law degrees and I’m sure 
they’ve looked at a lot of documents such as these and they’ll 
be able to determine what is kind of due process at this point, 
you know. 
 
We are going towards these directions in our society, and I’m 
sure it’s going to be progressing even more, more, more. And 
so when I look, the last time this Act was amended was in 2002 
and this particular Act was implemented in 2000. And so, I 
would say, like in the past 14 years there’s been a lot of changes 
and a lot of progress with regards to how we do business and 
how much our technology has advanced. I’ve probably gone 
through about five different phones in the past 14 years. I think 
I had a flip phone at that time in 2002. So now we’re in the day 
and age where we have the smart technology of our phones. But 
again, it does bring me to be concerned about confidentiality 
and how we’re going to maintain that and keeping that 
information safe. 
 
Another thing that’s being addressed with regards to this 
amendment to these Acts is there’s a lot of housekeeping with 
language change in here. And so they’re changing things from 
“the department” to “the ministry,” which I would consider that 
to be somewhat of a non-issue. It seems like a lot of the 
legislation that we’re going through at this point, there’s a lot of 
changes to that language. And I believe it’s really important to 
keep language consistent between all of the legislation because 
people get used to saying something, and so we are all on the 
same page when we’re talking about the different ministries. So 
there’s a lot of that housekeeping aspect that are being 
implemented. 
 
And we also know that there’s some wording with regards to 
the transfer of interest in land and third parties. And so I think 
that’ll need to be reviewed and looked into again by our critic. 
And I’m sure she’ll address a lot of that when she’s talking in 
committee with the ministry. So that will be dealt with. 
 
I wonder too with regards to some of the changes to this, is this 
going to be based on when clients are recommending it or is it 
going to be kind of status quo of ensuring that the documents 
are being transferred electronically? Because we want to ensure 
that people have their options of which way they would prefer. I 
know sometimes when I’ve been doing some work with 
different companies and banks and such, they’ll send me an 
email with regards to my documentation, but then they’ll also 
send me a hard copy. So I don’t know if this is going to 
duplicate some of this information or if people are going to be 
able to have a chance to choose which option they’re going to 
want. And so I think those are things that are going to need to 
be discussed. 
 
And I know the business communities were really asking for 
this, but I think it’s important to talk to other people in the 
community with regards to what is their opinion of these 
changes. It’s going to impact them. It’s going to impact just 
everybody that’s, you know, looking into selling their homes, or 
they’re looking into purchasing a home. So I think that’s really 
important that we look and we consult with the general 
population and so, you know, Mr. . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Minister of Justice and Attorney 

General on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the minister. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, Mr. Speaker, thanks very much. 
Mr. Speaker, in your gallery who’s come to visit us — and I 
know it’s a late hour so I won’t take too much time — my son, 
Jeremy. 
 
Jeremy’s just on his way to Winnipeg. He’s got a new position. 
He’s just graduated from geology at the University of 
Saskatchewan so we’re awfully proud of the fact that he’s going 
to work, Mr. Speaker. He’s still living in our basement, but 
we’re hoping that that’s going to change sometime soon. 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to introduce Jeremy to the 
House and ask that all members welcome him to his legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 5 — The Electronic Information and Documents 
Amendment Act, 2016 

(continued) 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was just kind of 
concluding my remarks with regards to Bill No. 5, The 
Electronic Information and Documents Amendment Act. And I 
know my fellow colleagues will have a lot more they would like 
to add to this discussion. So with regards to that, I move to 
adjourn this debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert Northcote 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 5, The Electronic 
Information and Documents Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
It now being 5 p.m., this Assembly is recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1141 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1141 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1141 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1141 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1141 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1142 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1142 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1142 
  Dennis ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1142 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1142 
  Forbes ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1142, 1166 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1143 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1143 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1143 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1171 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1143 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1143 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1144 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1144 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1144 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1144 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1145 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1145 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Prince Albert Receives Saskatchewan Municipal Award 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1145 
 Scholarship of Honour Recipients 
  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1145 
 Paramedic Association Donates to Food Bank 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1145 
 Mosque Opens in Lloydminster 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1146 
 Support Our Troops Gala 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1146 
 Joint Agreement Regarding Conservation Officers and First Nations 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1147 
 Firm Moves Head Office to Moose Jaw 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1147 
STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Rulings on Points of Order 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1147 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Role of the Global Transportation Hub in Land Acquisitions 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1148 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1148 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1149 
 Public Accounts Committee Meeting 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1149 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1149 
 Employment and Provincial Economy 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1150 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1151 
 SaskTel Call Centre 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1151 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1151 
 Health Services for Northern and Rural Communities 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1151 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1151 
 
 



 

 Donations to Political Parties 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1152 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1153 
MOTION UNDER RULE 61 
 Well Completion Program 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1153 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 6 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2016  
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1153 
  Merriman (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) ...................................................................... 1153 
 Bill No. 7 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2016 (No. 2) 
 Loi no 2 de 2016 modifiant le droit législatif  
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1154 
  Merriman (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) ...................................................................... 1154 
 Bill No. 10 — The Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 2016  
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1154 
  Merriman (referral to Economy Committee) ....................................................................................................................... 1156 
 Bill No. 11 — The Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2016  
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1156 
  Merriman (referral to Economy Committee) ....................................................................................................................... 1156 
 Bill No. 14 — The Horned Cattle Purchases Repeal Act, 2016  
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1156 
  Merriman (referral to Economy Committee) ....................................................................................................................... 1159 
 Bill No. 40 — The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’interprétation  
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1159 
 Bill No. 2 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Crown Corporations’ Fiscal Year End Standardization)  
 Amendment Act, 2016  
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1166 
  Merriman (referral to Crown and Central Agencies Committee) ...................................................................................... 1168 
 Bill No. 4 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2016 
 Loi modificative de 2016 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine  
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1168 
 Bill No. 5 — The Electronic Information and Documents Amendment Act, 2016  
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1170 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


