






















































Hansard: June 08, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 13A  WEDNESDAY, JUNE 8, 2016, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Hon. Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Hon. Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Merriman, Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 51; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Maurice Riou http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 413 
 June 8, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you, and 
through you to the rest of the members in this Assembly, it’s a 
pleasure to stand in the House today to introduce the 
administrative support team for CIC [Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan], or Crown Investments Corp. 
They’re seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. I believe there’s 
about seven of them: Norma Berryman, Christie Donauer, 
Alanna Gee, Cheryl Kowalchuk, Melissa Morris, Charlene 
Peterson, and David Warford. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people work for the CIC, of course Crown 
corporations, which is the shareholder more or less. The people 
of the province are the shareholders of the Crown corporations. 
They do great work, Mr. Speaker, in helping manage that file. 
I’d like all members to welcome them to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to introduce 
the parliamentary program for the public service, Mr. Speaker. 
There are a number of employees from the public service here 
— I believe 28 — that are from various ministries: the 
Advanced Education, Agriculture, Central Services, Education, 
and Environment, Health, Highways and Infrastructure, and a 
number of others, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is a program that comes through the Assembly on a regular 
basis. They have the opportunity to meet with, I believe, 
opposition members as well as government members as well as 
yourself, Mr. Speaker. I know I’ll be having an opportunity to 
sit down with them and talk a little bit about the proceedings in 
this House, and try and explain what they perhaps just saw as 
far as question period. I’d like all members to not only welcome 
them to their Legislative Assembly, but also thank them for the 
great work that they do for the people of this province each and 
every day. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d just 
like to join the minister in welcoming these important 
individuals to their legislature. Certainly the administrative 
team from the Crown Investments Corporation, I’d like to 
welcome you on behalf of the official opposition and certainly 
the critic for CIC, the member from Lakeview. But as well to 
bring a word of greeting and thanks to the important public 
servants that are here with the parliamentary program for the 
public service. It’s always indicative of the commitment that 
public servants bring to their job that they want to come 
participate in a program like this to gain that finer 
understanding of the parliamentary democracy side of the work 
that is done by the public service. 
 

And certainly I think it strengthens us and the work that we do. 
It certainly, I think, lends to a better perspective for the public 
servants that do such critical work, day in, day out, for the 
people of Saskatchewan and for the different ministries and 
agencies of government. So again I join with the minister in 
welcoming these important individuals to their Legislative 
Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Monsieur le Président, j’aimerais vous 
présenter, et à l’assemblée, Madame Marcelle Petit du Québec. 
Elle est ici en Saskatchewan enfin de fêter la graduation de sa 
grande-fille, Gabrielle Ring. Gabrielle a reçu un diplôme 
d’éducation de l’Université de Régina. En septembre, Gabrielle 
sera un professeur à l’École St. Mary à Régina. Madame Petit 
est avec sa fille, Madame Carole Ring, qui est la femme de 
notre légiste et conseiller parlementaire. Bienvenue à 
Saskatchewan, Madame Petit. 
 
[Translation: Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and 
to the Assembly Ms. Marcelle Petit from Quebec. She is here in 
Saskatchewan to celebrate the graduation of her granddaughter, 
Gabrielle Ring. Gabrielle received an education degree at the 
University of Regina. In September, Gabrielle will be a teacher 
at École St. Mary in Regina. Ms. Petit is with her daughter, Ms. 
Carole Ring, who is the wife of our Law Clerk and 
Parliamentary Counsel. Welcome to Saskatchewan, Ms. Petit.] 
 
I would like to ask all members of the Assembly to welcome 
Madame Petit to our Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Oui, Monsieur le Speaker. Je voudrais aussi 
dit bonjour et bienvenue à Madame Petit à notre assemblée, et 
dit félicitations pour la graduation de votre grande-fille, je 
pense. Alors bienvenue, et nous sommes très fiers de votre 
son-in-law, notre conseiller pour l’assemblée. Alors bienvenue 
à Saskatchewan et bienvenue à notre assemblée. 
 
[Translation: Yes, Mr. Speaker. I would also like to say hello 
and welcome to Ms. Petit to our Assembly, and say 
congratulations for the graduation of your granddaughter, I 
think. So welcome, and we are very proud of your son-in-law, 
our counsel for the Assembly. So welcome to Saskatchewan 
and welcome to our Assembly.] 
 
The Speaker: — Well some people get two introductions, and 
I’ll make it three. And this one will be in English. You must 
know someone very special to us in the Assembly here. Hon. 
members, I would like to join the member from Cannington in 
welcoming Madame Marcelle Petit to the Assembly today. 
 
Madame Petit is in Regina to celebrate her granddaughter’s, 
Gabrielle Ring’s, graduation from the University of Regina with 
an education degree. Gabrielle will be teaching grade 1 at St. 
Mary school in September. Madame Petit is here with her 
daughter Mrs. Carole Ring who is the spouse of our 
Parliamentary Counsel and Law Clerk. Welcome to the 
Assembly and Saskatchewan. 



414 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2016 

I recognize the member from Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Bonk: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, I’d like to 
welcome my friend Rob O’Connor to the legislature today. Rob 
and I have known each other for about 30 years, I’d imagine 
now. And Rob is the show manager for Ag in Motion, which is 
Western Canada’s outdoor farm show. It’s an interesting new 
project that they have just outside of Saskatoon. Prior to that he 
was the manager of Canada’s Farm Progress Show here in 
Regina. 
 
Rob and his wife Dawn and their two daughters live at Vibank, 
and they have a successful Hereford breeding operation there. 
Rob is also a committed volunteer and works in 4-H and many 
youth ag programs. And he’s also a leader in agriculture in our 
province. I’d like all members to join me in welcoming Rob to 
his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And on behalf of the 
official opposition, I too would like to take this opportunity to 
welcome Rob to the Assembly. Certainly the work that he’s 
doing with Ag in Motion is a very significant event here in 
Saskatchewan. I think it’s one that’s being looked to by 
producers, certainly across the province, if not across Western 
Canada, and I know it’s a ton of work. So I really want to 
express our appreciation for the work you do and would like to 
take this opportunity on behalf of the official opposition to 
welcome you to your Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s always a 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 
the Assembly students from the Humboldt Collegiate Institute 
in Humboldt, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have 37 grade 12 students sitting in the west gallery and 
I’m looking forward to meeting with them later. And, Mr. 
Speaker, accompanying them is their teacher, Mr. David 
Millette, and Ms. Jacqueline Bergerman. Mr. Millette has been 
bringing a class to this Assembly each year for as many years as 
I can remember, so he’ll have to tell me how many years that 
has been. But it is indeed a pleasure to have him here, and we 
all welcome this great class. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to rise today in the Assembly to introduce three guests, 
two of them very special guests, in the Speaker’s gallery. 
 
First of all I’d like to welcome our caucus staff, Jannet Shanks. 
And accompanying Ms. Shanks is two great and dear friends 
from Buffalo Narrows, Mervin and Darlene Petit. And I can 
point out, Mr. Speaker, that Mervin is a famous fisherman and 
hunter from the Northwest, and he even rivals our leader’s 
hunting and fishing skills. And while he’s good, I asked him not 
to exaggerate because our leader is quite an accomplished 
fisherman and hunter himself. So, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all the 
members of the Assembly to welcome Mervin and Darlene Petit 

to their Legislative Building today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Gardiner 
Park. 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. In the west gallery 
are 19 grade 12 students from F.W. Johnson Collegiate I’d like 
to introduce to the House. Mr. Scott McKillop is their teacher 
and the assistant today is Ms. Shanna Roy. I look forward to 
having a chat after routine proceedings. Please help me 
welcome them. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
again to present a petition to improve PTSD [post-traumatic 
stress disorder] coverage for Saskatchewan workers. The gist of 
the petition or the request of the petitioners, Mr. Speaker, is that 
if you’re injured on the job and suffer PTSD, Mr. Speaker, that 
you should be able to get prompt treatment and get back to 
leading a normal life, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Saskatchewan government to 
make the necessary changes to ensure that if Saskatchewan 
workers are exposed to traumatic events on the job and are 
then diagnosed with PTSD, it is presumed to be caused by 
the worker’s employment and the worker will subsequently 
be covered under workers’ compensation and receive the 
same benefits as others with work-related injuries. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens from 
Maidstone and Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition on behalf of a number of individuals from Saskatoon. 
What they are saying is that in 2012 the federal government 
announced an end to the community pasture program that had 
operated under the Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration 
since the 1930s to restore marginal lands subject to erosion and 
manage them for livestock grazing. The land we know is being 
transferred to the Saskatchewan government which has now 
offered the pastures for sale. These pasture lands serve a vital 
role to species at risk, mitigating climate change for cattle 
ranchers and their communities, preserving cultural and heritage 
values, and for recreational and cultural purposes. I’d like to 
read the prayer. They say: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the Government of Saskatchewan to halt the sale of public 
land with ecological value, including Crown lands that, 
until removed by recent order in council, had been 
protected under The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act; 
conduct a complete inventory of our remaining native 
grasslands; create legislation that recognizes the value of 
our remaining grassland; protect native prairie, including 



June 8, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 415 

monitoring and enforcing conservation easements 
preventing breaking of these lands. 

 
I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition in support of funding heritage 
languages here in Saskatchewan. We know that after 25 years 
the Government of Saskatchewan is discontinuing all support 
for heritage language learning here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Since 1991, heritage language schools have depended on this 
modest funding from the Ministry of Education to help sustain 
their programs, but as a result of the announcement by the 
Ministry of Education, many of these non-profit heritage 
language schools will be faced with a difficult decision of 
whether they can continue to operate. 
 
And we know that in addition to providing language and 
cultural classes, these schools offer a welcoming environment 
and crucial support for newcomers who are searching for a way 
to feel at home in their new surroundings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to reconsider this decision and restore funding for heritage 
language education in Saskatchewan heritage language 
schools. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And today, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition are 
from Saskatoon and Martensville. Thank you very much. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

Canine Hero Saves Life 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, today I would like to rise to recognize the heroic 
actions of Rex, the eight-year-old Alaskan malamute German 
shepherd cross from Aberdeen, Saskatchewan who has recently 
been honoured with induction into the Purina Animal Hall of 
Fame as one of 2016’s Canada animal heroes. Rex selflessly put 
his life on the line to ensure the safety of his owner’s mother, 
Noreen Hawman, who was visiting her family in Aberdeen this 
past Christmas Eve when her son Mitch’s house started on fire 
while Noreen slept on the couch, medicated and recovering 
from a bout of pneumonia. 
 
Rex, seeing the flames, recognized that Noreen was in 

imminent danger and tried to wake her by barking and nudging 
her with his snout. When his attempts failed, Rex leapt into 
action and grabbed her pyjama bottoms with his teeth and 
dragged her off the couch and across the room towards the exit. 
When Noreen woke and was able to grasp the horrific situation 
surrounding her, she quickly grabbed what little she could 
salvage and escaped to safety with Rex by her side. 
 
Dogs provide their owners with comfort and companionship, 
unconditional and unwavering. Their loyalty to their family is 
evident through their protective nature. And Rex embodies his 
protective nature explicitly. Mr. Speaker, I call on all members 
to recognize and celebrate heroic actions of this brave canine. 
Good dog, Rex. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 

Melfort Junior Citizen of the Year 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, while 
most grade 12 students are hanging out with friends and busy 
preparing for a summer of rest and relaxation, there is a young 
woman from Melfort who has shown an exemplary level of 
community leadership. Mckenna Dyck was chosen as Melfort’s 
first Junior Citizen Of the Year. 
 
The Junior Citizen of the Year is a new award that is meant to 
honour a young person from Melfort that shows leadership, 
community involvement, and volunteerism. Mr. Speaker, the 
criteria for this award describe Mckenna perfectly. This 
incredible young woman has a long list of community 
organizations where she volunteers, from playing shuffleboard 
with local seniors to volunteering with a kindergarten class and 
giving her time to food bank initiatives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, along with community involvement she is very 
involved in her local church, saying that her faith is a big part of 
her life. There is no question that Mckenna has made a huge 
difference in Melfort and will continue to do great things as she 
graduates and decides what to do next. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members join me in 
congratulating Mckenna on her being chosen as Melfort’s 
Junior Citizen of the Year and wish her the very best going 
forward. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

The Power of Culture 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, culture can heal, strengthen, and 
nourish, and in this time of reconciliation, that power of culture 
is now more important than ever. This morning I was proud to 
attend the pipe ceremony that opened the 2016 Scott Collegiate 
Graduation Powwow in a good way. Held at the First Nations 
University of Canada Regina campus, the powwow honours 
high school graduates throughout Treaty 4 territory and beyond, 
and it was off to a great start. 
 
I want to acknowledge the excellent work done by Principal 
Shannon Fayant and the staff and students of Scott Collegiate, 



416 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2016 

and I offer my sincerest congratulations to each of the graduates 
for reaching this important milestone and hope for more great 
things to come. 
 
And while on the subject of the power of culture, hundreds of 
people, including police, firefighters, First Nations leaders, 
students, and just plain folks from the neighbourhood took part 
in the smudge walk that wound its way through North Central 
last Thursday. On one level the smudge walk is a ritual 
cleansing of the neighbourhood, but it’s also a powerful symbol 
of the strength of the community’s commitment to face our 
issues and challenges as a community. The smudge walk is 
indicative of the many caring and compassionate individuals 
and organizations already making a big difference in the 
neighbourhood every day. 
 
I particularly want to acknowledge the roles of Chief Myke 
Agecoutay of Muscowpetung First Nation and Chief Cadmus 
Delorme of Cowessess First Nation for helping to show us all 
the good way forward, and a very special hay-hay to John 
Hopkins of the Regina Chamber of Commerce and all the 
people and organizations that made the Smudge Walk 2016 
such a great success. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 
 

New Diagnostic Equipment at the Ponteix Health Centre 
 
Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Later today, residents 
of Ponteix and the surrounding area will celebrate an important 
improvement in health care services. The Ponteix Health Centre 
is now home to a modern, state of the art digital X-ray machine 
and new lab equipment. This was made possible through 
community leadership efforts and the campaign led by the Dr. 
Noble Irwin Healthcare Foundation. I want to express a 
heartfelt thank you to all the donors for their generous 
contributions. Thank you also to those who contributed their 
time and ideas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Ponteix Health Centre serves a broad 
geographical area and is one of the region’s more active 
medical imaging departments. This new machine will perform 
basic X-ray imaging with improved image quality and 
instantaneous viewing in a more environmentally friendly 
manner with no film, cassettes, or chemicals required to render 
images, Mr. Speaker. This new equipment may reduce the need 
for travel and provides more timely results. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these improvements will greatly benefit residents 
in this area. As we celebrate with them, I want to reinforce our 
government’s commitment to ensuring timely, high-quality 
health services are available for everyone in the province, no 
matter where we live, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I ask all members to please join me in congratulating the 
residents of Ponteix on the addition of this new equipment. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 

Miners Work to Achieve Mission: Zero 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I am pleased to rise in the House today to acknowledge the 
award recipients of the Saskatchewan Mining Association’s 
48th annual Emergency Response and Mine Rescue Awards. 
The awards ceremony was held this past weekend on June 4th, 
and I would like to personally recognize the recipients of this 
year’s awards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that you, along with the rest of the House, 
join me in congratulating the following groups and individuals 
for their outstanding efforts in working to achieve Mission: 
Zero. PotashCorp Lanigan, in my constituency, was the overall 
underground winner. The team members include Adam Essar, 
Justin Foley, Kevin Leggott, Jory Vanthuyne, Clint Morrow, 
Lee Berhermann, Mark Nivon, Jeff Morelli, Kyle Renwick, and 
Ford Leggott. The overall surface winner was PotashCorp 
Patience Lake. 
 
I would also like to highlight Cameco McArthur River mine, 
Mosaic Esterhazy K1, and Claude Resources Seabee mine for 
winning safety trophies in various categories. 
 
The Emergency Response Person of the Year was awarded to 
Mr. Ken Worobec for his lengthy dedication to the mine rescue 
community. 
 
It is role models like these that help Saskatchewan to achieve 
Mission: Zero. Mr. Speaker, again I would like to congratulate 
these distinguished teams and individuals on their achievement 
of creating a safer Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
University. 
 

Golf Tournament for Childhood Cancer Research 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This weekend I had 
the opportunity to attend, along with my colleague from 
Saskatoon Westview, an amazing golf tournament. The Team 
Naomi Get Well Now Golf Tournament was a resounding 
success, raising over $28,000 for childhood cancer research. 
 
One hundred and thirteen golfers played — and not very well 
— to help a special little girl, eight-year-old Naomi Lendvay, in 
her battle with cancer. The tournament took place at Greenbryre 
Golf & Country Club in Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, 100 per cent 
of the money raised at this tournament will end up in the hands 
of researchers. Currently childhood cancer research only 
receives 4 cents out of every $1 spent on cancer research. 
 
The words, get well now, came from Naomi’s mouth many 
times after she was first diagnosed. She received many get well 
soon gifts and she would always look at them and say, I want to 
get well now, not soon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, cancer is the leading cause of disease-related 
death in children age 5 to 14. Research is the answer. 
Fundraising is the lock. Awareness is the key. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to please join me in recognizing 
the courage and strength of Ms. Naomi Lendvay and to join 
with me in supporting her, her parents, and extended family 
during their difficult journey. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 



June 8, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 417 

The Speaker: — I recognize Prince Albert Carlton. 
 

Prince Albert Company Works on Regina Bypass 
 
Mr. Hargrave: — Mr. Speaker, on Monday the opposition 
members tried to imply that there are no Saskatchewan 
companies playing an important role in the Regina bypass 
project. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s a bit callous to disregard 
the 47 Saskatchewan companies and organizations working on 
the bypass. I’d like to highlight one of those companies which 
I’m very proud to say resides in my city, Prince Albert. Mr. 
Speaker, that company is Broda Group of Companies. Broda 
Group has a 50-year history in the heavy construction industry 
in this province. In that time they have created hundreds of jobs 
across the province and have given back generously to their 
community. Mr. Speaker, the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote may want to ignore the great work that they are doing 
on the bypass but I am very proud to stand up for this 
hard-working Prince Albert company. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to note that today the Minister of 
Highways and the Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
announced that the Pilot Butte overpass will be completed one 
year ahead of schedule, opening fall of 2018. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank all the companies working to 
make sure that the bypass is done right and on time. I’d also 
like to say a special thank you to Broda Group for their hard 
work on this project. Thank you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Regina Bypass Project 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this government’s 
mismanagement of the Regina bypass project has been scandal 
plagued and full of blunders, from ballooning costs to the GTH 
[Global Transportation Hub] scandal, lawsuits, and 
infrastructure waste. It started at $400 million, shot up to $800 
million, and is now pegged at $2 billion, a massive overrun. 
The RMs [rural municipality] and the city are left in the dark, 
worried about what their chunk of the bill will be. 
 
In just one example of the egregious waste, in 2013 the Pinkie 
Road interchange was officially opened to help accommodate 
truck traffic to and from the GTH. Less than two and a half 
years later, they say that the $4.3 million overpass needs to be 
ripped up and rebuilt. Talk about waste, Mr. Speaker. That $43 
million wasted could have held off hiking prescription drug 
costs for seniors and kids for the next three years. It could have 
saved labour market development programs, the Aboriginal 
police group, the court worker program, urban parks, and the 
Buffalo Narrows correction centre for the next five years, and 
we could have kept the employment supplement for families 
that were grandfathered — all that with money left over. Will 
the Deputy Premier admit that once again it’s Saskatchewan 
people left to pay the price for Sask Party mismanagement? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister in charge of 
Highways. 
 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The very first 
question of question period, and we’re already correcting the 
record. The member opposite knows that that $400 million 
price tag was for a completely different project. The scope has 
changed drastically. It hasn’t ballooned, Mr. Speaker. The cost 
for construction for the current bypass route was $1.2 billion, 
and that’s exactly what we’re paying. 
 
And I would appreciate, and I said this in my speech the other 
day — and it’s not whining, to the member from Athabasca — I 
would be happy to have a discussion about the bypass as long 
as the information that the members opposite bring in here is 
factual, Mr. Speaker, and it’s not. And as to Pinkie Road, that 
overpass was actually designed to be changed when the bypass 
came through. The existing overpass will remain intact and 
access ramps will be upgraded, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that minister’s answer 
doesn’t hold water, nor has the Premier’s. That government said 
they’d studied this project to death when it was $400 million; 
now a massive overrun to a company from France. And you 
know, they’ve dropped billions on this project.  
 
And certainly some Saskatchewan companies, and good 
Saskatchewan companies, are involved. That’s a good thing. 
We’ve never said, we’ve never said otherwise. In fact though, 
we said that proud, strong Saskatchewan companies can handle 
this work. They should be enjoying much greater benefit. 
Instead the Sask Party is sending the big cheque, the $2 billion, 
to a foreign company from France. They’re getting the big 
money, and they’re in charge. 
 
We’re obviously in favour of a bypass for our capital city, one 
that would actually bypass the city. And we’ll stand up for 
Saskatchewan companies and workers every day of the week. 
The Sask Party, on the other hand, is blowing money on 
scandals and mismanagement instead of prioritizing the 
Saskatchewan economy and Saskatchewan workers. 
 
Will the Deputy Premier admit that had his government put as 
much effort into managing this project properly as they put into 
baseless attacks on us or hiding information, that we wouldn’t 
now be adding to their record of mismanaged boondoggles and 
job losses for Saskatchewan people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, day in and day out — 
whether it’s in the last number of days of this session, Mr. 
Speaker, whether it was months before the previous election — 
there isn’t an issue that that member doesn’t want to call a 
scandal or misappropriation of funds, Mr. Speaker. Nothing 
could be further from the truth. The members opposite continue 
to overreach, continue to use hyperbole over and over again. 
Mr. Speaker, quite frankly the general public of this province 
has no . . . They see no credibility in that opposition 
whatsoever. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people on the east side of the province, the 
people using these intersections, know that safety is priority 
number one. That’s why these interchanges are going ahead, 



418 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2016 

Mr. Speaker. It’s a far cry from when the opposition was in 
government, Mr. Speaker. This province didn’t see an overpass 
because it didn’t see growth for 16 long years. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I guess the reason we can 
talk about scandal after scandal after scandal is because there’s 
limitless options to choose from with this government, Mr. 
Speaker. You know, pick your scandal and pick the waste this 
government signed Saskatchewan on, and have wasted their 
dollars and have cost Saskatchewan people in the process. 
 
You know, at the end of the day, the other side can laugh and 
they can joke and they can brag, but 9,000 Saskatchewan 
workers lost their job in this last year. Instead of more empty 
words or attacks, I’ve a very simple and straightforward 
question to the Deputy Premier. How much in dollars of that $2 
billion is going to Saskatchewan companies and workers? How 
much is being shipped out? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Immigration, Jobs, 
Skills and Training. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. The fact of the matter is when it comes to jobs, we 
have seen huge job increases in this province over the course of 
the last eight years: 67,000 jobs created, full-time jobs created 
over that period of time. We know that our population is at an 
all-time high, Mr. Speaker, which is in stark contrast to when 
the members opposite were in government, when we saw 
population decrease, a significant one over those eight years, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:00] 
 
We continue to make very, very significant investments into job 
training, something that we never saw under the members 
opposite. In fact it’s about 67 per cent higher, depending on the 
program, Mr. Speaker, that we’re spending on job training this 
year over when we formed government in 2007. So, Mr. 
Speaker, we continue to make some very, very real and 
significant investments. We continue to see the economy 
remain strong and moving forward. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — That arrogant back-patting is a 
disrespect to the thousands of families and workers who have 
lost jobs all across Saskatchewan. In the same way that the 
bypass doesn’t actually bypass all of the city, we’ve never 
suggested that all of the money is bypassing Saskatchewan 
companies and workers. But it doesn’t change the fact that a 
foreign company from France is at the top of this mismanaged, 
scandal-plagued, overrun project. The big cheque, they’re at the 
top of the food chain, and many of the jobs aren’t going to 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with all the scandal and all the waste in this 
boondoggle, I would hope the Deputy Premier would be happy 
to answer the very simple and straightforward question that I 
had to him a minute ago. So I’ll ask it once again. How much of 
that $2 billion is going to Saskatchewan companies and 

workers, and how much is being shipped out? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, once again the preamble 
to the question is absolutely wrong. Like they do each and 
every question period, Mr. Speaker, they stand up and they play 
loose with the facts. Mr. Speaker, that has absolutely no 
bearing. This interchange is extremely important to southeast 
Saskatchewan, to southern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And we 
can run down the list of companies that are working on this 
project that are from Regina, some from Edenwold, some from 
Moose Jaw, some from Estevan, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s Dart 
Services out of Estevan, whether it’s A&B Rail out of Regina, 
Mr. Speaker, whether it’s . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, company after company 
after company are doing the work here in Saskatchewan on this 
project. Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that if it was up to the 
opposition, this project never would have gone ahead, Mr. 
Speaker, putting hundreds and thousands . . . hundreds of 
thousands of dollars taken out of the economy, Mr. Speaker, 
that are going directly into the economy here in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

Government Usage of Consultants 
 
Mr. McCall: — You’ll note, Mr. Speaker, he didn’t answer the 
question in terms of how much has stayed in Saskatchewan. But 
on to another topic, Mr. Speaker, but it’s related. A quotation: 
“. . . so many have gone outsourcing crazy.” Another quote, Mr. 
Speaker: “Last I heard the Conservative British government 
scrapped outside consultants and saved millions. Where they 
can, public administration should do the same. Take the leap. 
Take the risk.” 
 
Now who said that, Mr. Speaker? Was it some NDP [New 
Democratic Party] flack? Was it some grim leaper? Was it the 
Provincial Auditor? No, Mr. Speaker. It was the member for 
Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota here in the Assembly just 
yesterday. And you know what, Mr. Speaker? We agree. 
 
Under the Sask Party we’ve seen a 328 per cent increase in 
consultants across all ministries — 400 per cent in the Ministry 
of Highways alone, and in Central Services it’s 268 per cent — 
whereas the auditor pointed out yesterday all of those 
consultants are still not doing a good job of protecting the 
private information of Saskatchewan people. So why doesn’t 
the minister take the advice of her own member and fight to 
scrap the government’s pricey consultants and get the job done? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, this government is getting the job done for 
Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at times there will be consultants used, absolutely. 



June 8, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 419 

And the reason why there are more consultants used, Mr. 
Speaker, through this term of government over the last eight 
years of government because there has been growth, and there 
have been projects like the Regina bypass which we never saw 
under the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some of these specialized projects absolutely need the use of 
outside consultants, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s in highways, 
whether it’s in building of schools. Those outside consultants 
are absolutely crucial. That’s not to say, Mr. Speaker, that 
capacity isn’t also building within government. Absolutely it is. 
But when it looks at best practices, and best practices for a 
number of these major projects, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to 
continue to use outside consultants because they’re extremely 
valuable to the success and the growth of this province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Support for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, it’s heckling and behaviour like 
we’ve seen today that make some people compare this place to 
a schoolyard. Sadly, if the Sask Party cuts continue, there could 
soon be as many students in classrooms as there are members in 
this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we learned yesterday that the Saskatoon Public 
School Division is facing a shortfall of $160 per student. There 
will be cuts. There will be fewer teachers. There will be fewer 
educational assistants. The only thing that there will be more of 
are children in classrooms. Mr. Speaker, in the cities, class sizes 
are already too big, and across the province schools are already 
under-resourced. But still this government wants school 
divisions to look for more cuts in their already strained budgets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s the Sask Party who spent wildly during a 
resource boom. So why is it our kids and their teachers who 
have to pay the price? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, one of the obligations that 
we have in this House is to correct misinformation when it 
comes from the members opposite. Mr. Speaker, I want to give 
the member opposite yet another opportunity to correct things 
that she’s done. 
 
On May 31st, the member for Regina Lakeview raised concerns 
about possible disturbed asbestos in Rosthern Elementary 
School. We take these concerns very seriously. Occupational 
health and safety conducted an asbestos inspection of that 
facility based on her comments. Mr. Speaker, I can advise and 
inform the House there is no disturbed asbestos in Rosthern 
Elementary School. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is not right and it is not fair for that member, or 
anybody on that side of the House, to try and incite fear or try 
and make our parents and our students unhappy with the 
education that they are getting when it is, Mr. Speaker, 
absolutely wrong and unnecessary. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, I did not state that the asbestos was 
disturbed, but I did draw attention to the crumbling condition of 
school buildings throughout this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Minister of Education had a little 
difficulty of his own, struggling to explain what he says is a 33 
per cent increase. It’s not new money, just another shell game. 
When challenged by reporters about how property taxes 
factored into this so-called increase, the minister had a difficult 
time explaining and ended up by saying he’d get the numbers. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, parents and everyone who is responsible for 
running our kids’ schools would rather that the minister show 
them the money. Mr. Speaker, this minister talks about his 
supposed increases, but the bottom line isn’t going up. More 
cuts are coming and schools are falling apart. I stand by that 
statement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, from where is the minister getting his numbers? 
Does this actually represent an increase in funding for school 
divisions or is the minister just shuffling envelopes and shifting 
budget lines? Mr. Speaker, why wasn’t the minister more clear 
about this from the start? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
brought up asbestos. I want to talk about asbestos a little bit 
before . . . Let’s talk about another school, Mr. Speaker: École 
Connaught. Regina Public received an engineer’s report stating 
that it was “on the verge of collapse.” The member opposite 
would know that, because she was on the school division at the 
time, that École Connaught contained asbestos. Where, Mr. 
Speaker? In the halls, in the boiler room, in the fan room, in the 
gym, in the principal’s office, in the vestibule, in the nurse’s 
office, in the staff room, and in some classrooms.  
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP education critic was a trustee at that 
point in time. She voted to keep that school open when it was 
structurally unsafe. Mr. Speaker, if you drive by École 
Connaught right now, you see a new school under construction 
because this side of the House cares about the safety and 
security of our students and, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to 
continue to do that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Cost of Prescription Drugs 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, the bottom line is the Sask 
Party’s mismanagement is costing Saskatchewan people. Our 
kids are paying the price. Our parents and our grandparents are 
paying the price. One example: their decision to again raise the 
cost of prescription drugs. One hundred and twenty thousand 
seniors in Saskatchewan will be affected. The executive director 
of Saskatchewan Seniors Mechanism told the Leader-Post that 
since many seniors have multiple prescriptions, that increase 
would be significant, and she said after the last time the Sask 
Party raised the rates, seniors called for consultations. 
 



420 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2016 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we just had a province-wide consultation — 
the election — but they never mentioned that hike. On March 
17th the minister spoke at a seniors forum and said nothing 
about this imminent increase. Now he says the increase is “. . . 
just to help us keep up with inflation and the rise in drug costs.” 
Does the minister want us to believe that he just learned about 
inflation in the last two months? Why wasn’t he straight with 
seniors from the beginning? Will he start being straight with 
seniors now? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatchewan people I think are fortunate to have one 
of the most comprehensive drug plans in the entire country. Mr. 
Speaker, when you look at the formulary and when you look at 
the drugs that we do cover on an annual basis, Mr. Speaker, 
when you look at the fact that we have added in this budget 15 
new cancer drugs for full funding, when you look at the fact 
that Saskatchewan is one of a few provinces in this country that 
pay 100 per cent of the ancillary drugs that go along with 
cancer treatments such as the anti-nausea medications, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what we do know is that our drug costs have 
risen over the last eight years, Mr. Speaker. Under the members 
opposite, the drug plan costs were about $246 million a year. In 
this last year they’re now $312 million, Mr. Speaker. So as we 
had done in the past, we looked to make adjustments to the 
copay program. Mr. Speaker, we have not had a change in that 
since 2012 and, Mr. Speaker, the decision was made in light of 
the fact that our drug budget is increasing anywhere from 10 to 
$15 million a year, Mr. Speaker, that we would also . . . In order 
to ensure that we have a sustainable plan going forward into the 
future and make those adjustments to that plan as well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, seniors don’t want partisan 
excuses and partisan games. They want honest-to-goodness 
facts and more support, not higher bills. Mr. Speaker, the 
president of the Saskatchewan Medical Association has noted 
that doctors will now have to consider the financial implications 
before prescribing additional medications for their patients. 
That’s a big consequence for a change that was dropped on 
seniors without warning. 
 
Along with the Opposition House Leader, that minister was at a 
seniors’ forum during the campaign. He discussed seniors’ 
issues, but throughout that whole forum he said nothing about 
the Sask Party plan to raise prescription drug costs for seniors 
— not a word, Mr. Speaker, not a word. 
 
Again if, as the minister says, the reason for the increase in 
inflation is the reason for the increase in rates, why didn’t he 
tell seniors that? Or is it because the real reason for the increase 
is just because it’s a convenient cash grab? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I do remember that debate that I had with the member 

from Elphinstone and other members of political parties at the 
seniors’ event here in Regina, Mr. Speaker. In fact it was at that 
event where the member from Elphinstone, in front of the group 
of people said the NDP platform will have a seniors’ minister: 
we, if we are government, if we’re elected government, we will 
have a dedicated minister for seniors. 
 
But you know what, Mr. Speaker? While we were at the debate, 
the NDP platform was released in full. Mr. Speaker, you know 
what was missing from that platform? A seniors’ minister, Mr. 
Speaker. So he didn’t even have the information for his own 
platform, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to the seniors’ drug plan in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, we do still have, Mr. Speaker, a very 
comprehensive drug plan for people in this province. Whether 
they’re on the seniors’ program, the children’s program. Mr. 
Speaker, as well for seniors that may need additional support 
with their drug costs, we do have the special support program, 
the supplementary health benefits, Mr. Speaker, as well as 
guaranteed income supplement. There are still some supports 
for seniors. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Aquatic Invasive Species and Ministry 
of Environment Strategies 

 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday we heard from the 
auditor about several inadequacies in the Environment 
minister’s strategy to deal with invasive aquatic species. I have 
to admit, even I was surprised to hear that because, Mr. 
Speaker, it seems like any time we hear from the Environment 
minister, it’s about quagga mussels or zebra mussels. Of course 
protecting our lakes and rivers is important. But it’s pretty much 
the only thing that this minister does, and he is still failing at it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what about their promised tech fund? Five 
Environment ministers later, Mr. Speaker, and still nothing. 
Nothing. Radio silence. How novel would it be if this 
Environment minister tackled some other issues? We don’t hear 
him talk about conservation or water strategies or even climate 
change. But then again, given how the minister has done on his 
pet project, I don’t have much confidence this government or 
this minister could come anywhere close to making the progress 
that is needed. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Still, to the minister: when can the people of Saskatchewan 
expect to see some serious action taken to protect the air we 
breathe, the water we drink, and the land we grow our food on? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you for 
the question. And we certainly do take our Provincial Auditor’s 
recommendations very seriously, Mr. Speaker, and we thank 
her for the good work that she does. 
 
And some of these things that we’re doing with regards to 
combatting and preventing aquatic invasive species from 



June 8, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 421 

entering our province, we’ve initiated $100,000 in new funding 
for that project. We are working together. As you know, on 
Monday we announced an interprovincial agreement between 
ourselves, Manitoba, Alberta, British Columbia, and the Yukon 
to share information, to share expertise, and to share ways in 
which we’re going to combat keeping these out of our area. 
 
We’re also working with Canadian border services industries, 
and I think we’re the first province to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ve trained some Canadian border service staff and they are 
now relaying information to us. Should they suspect a boat to 
come into our province with aquatic invasive species on them, 
we send our decontamination units down there to take care of 
that. That’s the kind of work that we’re doing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Closure of Correctional Facility 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With us today is a 
worker who’s served this province and his community for three 
decades at the Buffalo Narrows correctional centre. He joins all 
those who work in, around, and with the centre in wondering 
what he should tell the seniors back home, the single mothers 
back home, and many others who rely on the many services 
provided by the Buffalo Narrows correctional centre. The 
inmates in the minimum-security facility helped haul wood and 
water in the winter. They picked up garbage throughout the 
community, helped elders with yard cleanup, and shovelled 
snow in the winter through many community organizations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Buffalo Narrows correctional facility is not 
just an employer. It’s not just a correctional facility. It is an 
important part of this community and help people in and inside 
of its walls recover from hardship and regain control of their 
lives. Mr. Speaker, how can the Saskatchewan Party so coldly 
and callously shut down this very important facility that has 
been providing necessary services and assisting many groups 
and seniors who need this help? How could they do this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. All the decisions 
we had to make surrounding our budget were not easy 
decisions. I mean, my colleagues can certainly attest to that. 
This particular building or correctional facility was certainly a 
tough decision to be made. I want to thank all of our staff for 
the great work that they have done. Closing the facility was 
about how to achieve the best results in service delivery and the 
most efficient use of our existing correctional facilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what this correctional facility comes up against is 
the 96-bed mental health and correctional facility in North 
Battleford, Mr. Speaker. That funding is in this budget, also the 
municipal police grants. Municipal police grants, Mr. Speaker, 
look after units in policing through the integrated child abuse 
unit. The funding for new cancer drugs, Mr. Speaker, comes up 
against those serious, serious issues so that we have indeed a 
role to play. Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t an easy decision. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 
 

Children in Provincial Care 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — They really do seem to have a problem with 
clarity over there. Yesterday I asked the Minister of Social 
Services why she told the media the number of kids in care had 
decreased when it had not. She accused me of taking her quote 
out of context. Mr. Speaker, for context, here’s the whole quote: 
“We are one of the few provinces, if not the only province, that 
has brought down the number of . . . [kids in] care. We have 
brought that number down.” Well when the reporter noted that 
the number of kids in care was in fact up, the minister admitted, 
“It’s up a little bit, yes.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, this isn’t complicated. Up a little bit? No matter 
how you cut it, it’s not down. And she tried to do the same 
thing again yesterday. Why doesn’t the minister just admit that 
she didn’t have her facts right? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I’m glad the member 
opposite decided to read the entire thing into record this time 
instead of just a select little piece that suited her purpose. 
Because, yes, in 2012 the numbers were coming down, unlike 
when the NDP were in power where they went up at a very 
alarming rate. 
 
We put in a number of supports to support families before they 
go into crisis, Mr. Speaker. We also have introduced a parenting 
program to help with families that may go into crisis. To try to 
bring that number down, we have connected more children with 
family members so they don’t have to go into foster care, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We have increased the child protection budget by over 200 per 
cent, Mr. Speaker, because it is a priority for this government. 
That is why the numbers have been plateaued somewhat, and 
they’re not going up at the same rate as they were under the 
NDP. That’s why we don’t have 21 children in a foster home, 
which was happening under the NDP, which is why we have far 
fewer overcrowded foster homes than what was happening 
under the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Is there more work to do in this file? Absolutely, but it’s 
extremely important, Mr. Speaker. . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . The critic of Finance is busy beaking away, even though her 
other members say that she doesn’t appreciate heckling, Mr. 
Speaker. Is it up? Yes, I admitted to the reporter it is up, Mr. 
Speaker, from the numbers that we had in 2012. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 26 — The Patient Choice Medical Imaging Act 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move that Bill No. 26, The Patient Choice Medical Imaging Act 
be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 



422 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2016 

that Bill No. 26, The Patient Choice Medical Imaging Act be 
now introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 27 — The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2016 
Loi modificative de 2016 sur les services de l’état civil 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move that Bill No. 27, The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 
2016 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Attorney General 
that Bill No. 27, The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2016 be 
now introduced and read a first time.  
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask for 
leave to put forward a motion regarding changes in membership 
for the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Committee Membership 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 
 

That the membership for the Standing Committee on 
Human Services shall be expanded to eight members with 
the addition of the member for Saskatoon Riversdale for 
the duration of the inquiry concerning the rate of organ 
donation in Saskatchewan, as ordered by the Assembly on 
May 19th, 2016. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader: 
 

That the membership for the Standing Committee on 
Human Services shall be expanded to eight members, with 
the addition of the member for Saskatoon Riversdale, for 
the duration of the inquiry concerning the rate of organ 
donation in Saskatchewan, as ordered by the Assembly on 
May 19th, 2016. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — All those in favour? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — All those against? Carried. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 65 through 72. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions no. 64 to 72 is tabled. I recognize 
the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answer to question 73. 
 
The Speaker: — Question no. 73 is ordered. I recognize the 
Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answer to question 74. 
 
The Speaker: — Question no. 74 is ordered. I recognize the 
Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answers to question 75. 
 
The Speaker: — Question no. 75 is ordered. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 
 



June 8, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 423 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that the Assembly approves in 
general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Ms. 
Sproule.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate 
the opportunity to make some comments regarding the budget. 
And I wasn’t able to speak during the . . . with comments from 
the Speech from the Throne, so I would like to take the 
opportunity to thank some people that had worked for me 
during the election. 
 
I want to start off by saying I will be supporting the motion. I 
won’t be supporting the amendment to the motion. I looked at 
the amendment and I thought, why would I ever support 
something like that? So I’m certainly not going to. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Don’t do it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — No. I’ve given it some careful 
consideration and it’s just something I’m not there for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the voters of Saskatoon Southeast 
for re-electing me. The boundaries to my constituency have 
significantly changed since the previous election. I’ve lost a lot 
of the . . . I had, by population, Mr. Speaker, the largest 
constituency in the province. It now consists of Lakeview, 
Lakeridge, Rosewood, and a small portion of Briarwood. The 
constituency is interesting because it’s in a rapid growth mode. 
We have under construction in the constituency a new school in 
the Rosewood area and in the early stages of construction, 
Saskatoon’s second Costco store. So we’re appreciative of that. 
The neighbours, when we knocked on doors, were certainly 
very interested to know that first, they were getting a new 
school, and almost importantly for them that they were getting a 
new Costco store. 
 
I was also amazed by the number of new Canadians that reside 
in this constituency. In some areas of the constituency there was 
home after home after home of people that had only been in our 
country for two or three years. I think we should be proud to be 
open and welcoming, as Canadians, but these people certainly 
pose a challenge for our educators and our education system. 
These people often arrive without having English skills and 
often have issues making the transition to cold weather, 
transportation, and other things. So I want to thank our 
education system and the different supports that we have in our 
province and in our government to make our province a truly 
open and welcoming place. 
 
Shortly before the election I had slipped and had a badly 
sprained ankle. I moved significantly slower during the election 
but was still able to get to all of the doors in the constituency. I 
want to thank all of the other candidates that ran, not just in our 
constituency but elsewhere. For them to participate in the 
democratic process is certainly something that we should all be 
thankful for, regardless of the outcome. So I want to thank 

people that chose to participate. I want to thank all of the people 
and congratulate them that were successful and that we see in 
the legislature. 
 
There are some specific thank yous that I would like to make: 
my constituency assistant, Gord Rutten, who has been there for 
many years, former mayor of the city of Martensville, who 
brought along his sister Wanda who also did a lot of work; my 
chief-of-staff who was also the campaign manager, Drew 
Dwernychuk, who brought along his mother, so we got a family 
pack of two for one. They were great to work with. Megan 
Burns from this building; Rita Flaman Jarett, Pat Humenny, 
Ujin Humenny, Elaine Peterson, Marj Rak, Neil Wylie, Neil 
Doell, Dave Thompson, Harley Greening, Joni McKay, Peter 
LeClair, Earl Priddle, Clive Head, Tim Bergsma, Brenda 
Knisely, and Gary Zabos all worked hard putting up signs, 
raising money, and answering phones, finding volunteers, and 
doing the things that are necessary to ensure that a campaign 
goes as it’s supposed to. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Since the election, we’ve held three neighbourhood barbecues. 
This last weekend we had barbecues in three of the 
neighbourhoods in the constituency and dispensed and handed 
out 2,300 hot dogs. We had a lot of the same volunteers. We 
also had Ken and Merle Sawatsky who came and brought their 
vintage fire truck and gave kids a ride on it, and a young person 
named Chris Katana who helped us move tables, set up, and 
worked incredibly hard. And we were certainly appreciative of 
him and everybody else that came along. 
 
And here, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the people that work in 
my office — Drew Dwernychuk, Sherry Rosenberg, Jean 
Watts, Lacy Orange, and Matthew Glover, and Brayden Fox — 
all really excellent, hard-working people. Matthew Glover is a 
new person. He’s married to a teacher. He had a new name tag. 
He went around the building with his new name tag that said 
Matthew Glover. We didn’t have the heart to tell him for some 
weeks that his name was misspelled on it. He discovered it 
yesterday, and has now got a new name tag. So working in the 
Ministry of Education, good to check on those kind of things. 
But great, great people and we thank them for what they do. 
 
I also want to thank my wife, Sandy, who has worked in a 
number of elections, been great to work with. I would like to 
relate to you just a small incident that happened during the 
election. We’d been out door knocking. We were on our way 
back to the campaign committee rooms and I said, you know, 
it’s still reasonably early. Why we don’t we stop and vote in the 
advance polls? She didn’t say a lot. We pulled up in front of the 
advance poll and I said, are we going in? And she said, I’m still 
undecided. I hope that she voted for me. We did go in and she 
. . . It is a secret ballot. In any event she is always somebody 
that has to tolerate my humour, and she’s usually the butt of it, 
so I thank her for that. She’s been a great spouse for a lot of 
years. 
 
Also the people in my caucus. I can hear them mention behind 
how much they appreciated and value the humour that I 
dispense regularly. And based on that, I plan to continue doing 
that. 
 



424 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2016 

Mr. Speaker, the government’s direction of budget for 2016-17 
is built on the principle of keeping Saskatchewan strong. That is 
exactly what this budget is doing. We will continue to invest in 
students and infrastructure even in these difficult financial 
times. This year’s education budget was increased 7.8 per cent 
from 2 billion to 2.2 billion. Funding for school divisions has 
increased to $1.9 billion. We applaud the great work of our 
school divisions to do exactly the best thing for our students. 
 
The initiatives that they’ve shown in looking for efficiencies are 
something that we appreciate and want to work with them to do. 
We respect their autonomy and the responsibility they have to 
make decisions on how to allocate their funding so that they can 
support provincial priorities as well as local needs. School 
capital in this year’s budget is $391.4 million, which includes 
over $310 million for joint-use schools in Warman, 
Martensville, Saskatoon, and Regina. These projects are slated 
to be completed on time and on budget, and will open in the fall 
of 2017. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to say to the members opposite, this 
is a budget that they should support. These are schools that their 
constituents will appreciate and use and, Mr. Speaker, to each 
of them, if they don’t support these, we’ll certainly be 
reminding the electors of that at the next election because I 
think it’s important that people know who stood up for the 
citizens, who supported, stood up for the children. So we want 
to remind people if the members opposite choose not to support 
this budget. 
 
The joint-use schools that are under way are the largest publicly 
owned and operated school construction project in 
Saskatchewan’s history. We’ve also invested $41.9 million for 
ongoing capital projects in St. Brieux, Langenburg, 
Martensville, and Regina. One of these Regina schools is the 
École Connaught Community School. A brand new school will 
no doubt be far safer than its predecessor and will include some 
of its old characteristics such as Tyndall stone and a brick 
interior. I drove by the school this morning. It is coming along 
well. We’re glad to see it’s under construction. To the people in 
that community, in spite of the fact that some of the members 
opposite didn’t support that, we want them to know that we will 
do what’s right for them regardless of what the members 
opposite say. 
 
Since 2008 we’ve built or completed major renovations on 65 
different schools throughout Saskatchewan, from Oxbow to La 
Ronge, Hudson Bay, Maple Creek. We are building schools in 
this province. We are working with our school division partners 
to make sure that we are inspecting, detecting, and correcting 
building failures before they occur. Our preventative 
maintenance and renewal budget this year is 33.5 per cent, a 25 
per cent increase over last year. 
 
While we’re proud of our record when it comes to building and 
maintaining our schools, we readily acknowledge that there is 
more work to do. We are committed to supporting students and 
teachers in the classroom so we have increased funding for 
supports for learning by 1.5 per cent to $288 million. We’re 
also committed to ensuring equitable education outcomes for all 
First Nations, Métis, and non-Aboriginal students across the 
province. $5.1 million will go to programs such as invitational 
shared services initiative, Help Me Tell My Story, Help Me 

Talk About Math, and Following Their Voices. Part of this 
money will be able to ensure that on-reserve students have 
access to the same software that is available throughout the 
province. 
 
We are allocating $5.4 million of operating grant funding to 
some of our newest residents in the province, the Syrian 
refugees. On top of that we have asked the federal government 
for further funding in order to help these new students. 
 
On the labour side we will continue to work to keep 
Saskatchewan workplaces safe, productive, and fair. In this 
year’s budget we have hired an additional occupational health 
and safety officer to support our targeted interventional 
strategy. It is our goal to reduce workplace injuries by 50 per 
cent by 2020 and, Mr. Speaker, that’s only a starting point. We 
need to go even further. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing, I want to thank the staff and people that 
work in the Ministry of Health. My mother was recently in the 
hospital. She’s 95 years old. She had a fall. She was taken by 
ambulance to Saskatoon City Hospital, transferred later on to 
St. Paul’s Hospital, and received absolutely wonderful care in 
all the places that she was at. Specialists came in, rehab people, 
assessment people, so that she was in and out of the hospital in 
five days and is at home recovering well. She received 
absolutely superb care. So to the women and men that work in 
our health care system in Saskatoon, on a personal note, I want 
to thank all of them that worked hard, and from my mom I 
thank them as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to close by saying that this is a budget that 
I think all of the members should support. The members 
opposite, I would urge them to sit down, look through the things 
in there, decide carefully before they decide not to support this 
budget, because there are a lot of things in this budget that they 
will want to be on record as being supportive of. Some of the 
members opposite that aren’t here any more didn’t support 
some of the things in the budget, didn’t support new schools 
when they were in their constituency, and it did not bode well 
for them when the electors became aware of the fact that they 
didn’t support a new joint-use school. 
 
So to each and every one of the members opposite I would urge 
them: sit down and have a careful look at this budget because it 
will have consequences for them if they don’t support it. Thank 
you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like to 
lend my voice to . . . Since I didn’t have an opportunity to speak 
to the Throne Speech, now in my speech for the budget I’d just 
like to congratulate you, Mr. Speaker, on your election and I 
would certainly like to thank our former Speaker for the work 
that he did over the past term. 
 
At this time I would also like to just take a moment, if I may, 
Mr. Speaker, and thank the constituents of The Battlefords 
constituency for the confidence that they’ve shown in me, and 
I’m committing to them to continue to work hard as I have in 
the past. 
 



June 8, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 425 

I would also like to thank my campaign team: my campaign 
manager and co-manager Gregg and Stacey did an awesome 
job; Shelley of course; Terri-Lynn and Dennis have been 
involved in both of my campaigns. And especially I would like 
to say thanks to my wife, Linda, her sister Susan, and again 
Terri-Lynn. They started working on this campaign probably in 
January and February, working on our data entries, and did 
many, many hours of work in getting that ready long before the 
campaign started. 
 
And of course to Linda, I would say thanks for everything that 
she does in keeping me on track — not just during the 
campaign time — while I’m gone, looking after things back 
home. 
 
To all of the other great friends and volunteers that I had who 
worked so hard, your efforts are greatly appreciated. And the 
day-to-day work in our constituency office, as many of my 
colleagues, I know, have referenced the great work that our 
constituency assistants do back in our offices. So I would just 
like to say thanks to Lil Robinson, my full-time CA 
[constituency assistant], and as well Gail Heintz, my part-time 
CA for all the great work that they do while I’m here in Regina. 
 
Before I begin referencing the budget, Mr. Speaker, I’d just like 
to give my personal thanks to our fantastic Finance minister. I 
think he’s done a great job, and also to him and to the efforts of 
his treasury board team in preparing this keep Saskatchewan 
strong budget. I can only imagine the hours that he and indeed 
all of that treasury board put in, and his Finance officials as 
well, to prepare this budget and what I think is indeed a great 
budget. 
 
It spells out clearly how the government has a plan to deal with 
our nearly $1 billion loss in our resource revenue and still keep 
this province strong by investing in the badly needed 
infrastructure and keep this province strong by investing in 
badly needed infrastructure in the Crowns and in the highways, 
in schools, in hospitals, the education department. And that 
plan, Mr. Speaker, also it means investing in people, not 
reaching into their pockets with tax hikes, as was the common 
practice when the members opposite became under financial 
pressures. 
 
We will continue to assist those most vulnerable in our society 
and our seniors with things like the seniors’ income plan, which 
we have tripled since forming government in 2007 after the 
NDP increased it not one dime in the 16 years that they were in 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we continue to be the second fastest growing 
province in the nation. Our employment rate is one of the best 
in Canada and our debt-to-GDP [gross domestic product] ratio 
is still one of the lowest in the whole nation. And throughout 
this forecast period of this budget, we’re still below what it was 
under the former NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I may, I would just like to now talk a little bit 
about some of the activity in my own constituency of The 
Battlefords. You know, I’m very proud to be able to represent 
that constituency. I represent not only the city of North 
Battleford but also the town of Battleford. As well this year 
after the realignment I also have a portion of the rural 

municipality of North Battleford, which was previously handled 
by my colleague from Rosthern-Shellbrook . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . And we’re happy to have it. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Of course of greatest interest right now, I think, what we’ve 
talked about in many cases is our new Saskatchewan Hospital 
being built in North Battleford. You know, over the past several 
years I’ve had the privilege of attending a lot of functions on 
behalf of our government: a lot of programs, a lot of 
sod-turnings, those kind of things.  
 
I think back to one of the first things was the water treatment 
plant expansion for the town of Battleford. The urban connector 
highway that went through Battleford and greatly enhanced 
safety going through that town. We build two new Battleford 
residential services homes in North Battleford, duplexes for our 
less fortunate people to handle. We were pleased to be able to 
attend that. I also attended the sod-turning for our first Habitat 
for Humanity duplex in North Battleford that now houses two 
very appreciative families, I’m sure. And I think, most recently 
the sod-turning at our Battlefords Trade and Education Centre 
with over $4.5 million of funding from our Social Services 
ministry. That building is now nearing completion, and it’s 
replacing the 100-year-old building that they’ve been suffering 
through for the last several years. 
 
But as I said, at the sod-turning for our Saskatchewan Hospital 
last fall — and this is not to diminish the importance of all these 
other projects and announcements that we made — but the Sask 
Hospital in North Battleford was definitely the Godzilla of all 
announcements. It is going to be a hospital that we’ll be proud 
of for many, many years, and I was proud to be part of that. 
 
Further to that, we’ve seen several increases in our funding for 
non-government agencies in the Battlefords. You know, I look 
at things like our Prairie North Health Region, they’ve seen a 
71 per cent increase since ’07-08 in their budgeting. It’s now 
sitting at $220.256 million, a very substantial increase. 
 
I look at the revenue sharing that both the town of Battleford 
and the city of North Battleford have been able to receive, a 
tremendous increase from what it was prior to our government 
being formed. Under the NDP government actually it decreased 
for the last year. North Battleford revenue sharing since ’07-08 
is up a whopping 162 per cent, from $1.158 million to what it is 
today. In ’16-17 the budget will be $3.032 million. The town of 
Battleford is almost the same, Mr. Speaker: increase of 129 per 
cent from four hundred and seven point seven thousand dollars 
to today’s rate of nine hundred and thirty-four point seven 
thousand dollars. Tremendous. 
 
[14:45] 
 
I was also able to attend the announcement for our new CUplex, 
in which our government provided $7 million dollars in 
financing for our beautiful CUplex that we’re so proud of in 
The Battlefords, Mr. Speaker. And then we put an additional 
$814,000 dollars into our aquatic centre which forms part of 
that CUplex. 
 
And not only the government, Mr. Speaker, is showing 
confidence in The Battlefords. I think it’s great to see that the 



426 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2016 

private sector also is taking advantage of some of the activity 
going on in our area. We see a new strip mall being built, 
something that hasn’t been built there for many, many years. 
Certainly I don’t think there’s been one since prior to 2007, so 
it’s great to see these kind of things being built. We’ve seen a 
huge expansion to our Wal-Mart store, something that is one of 
our larger stores in our whole community. 
 
We’ve seen $10 million provided for over 200 rental and 
homeowner units provided through Social Services, something 
that is badly needed. Since 2007, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen 127 
new child care spaces built. 
 
And something that’s very unique to our community, Mr. 
Speaker, is our opera theatre that’s above our town hall in the 
town of Battleford. And this very unique opera theatre was 
built, I guess as opera theatres should be built, with actual walls 
that are tapered in. They’re not perpendicular for the sound that 
. . . and it is a really beautiful room. And our government has 
provided $250,000 towards that renovation, and we can’t wait 
to see that opera theatre be renovated and opened up again. 
 
I’d just like to now, Mr. Speaker, talk a little bit about some 
things that are going on in my ministry. And I think we’re doing 
some good work there. We’ve got some great officials that are 
doing some good work and, contrary to what the critic may 
think, I don’t think we’re totally inefficient over in that 
department. 
 
This year the WSA [Water Security Agency] budget, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re looking at about a $48.5 million dollars in 
expenses. Our revenue is going to be in that department of 
$246.7 million dollars.  
 
As you may remember, in the fall of 2015 we passed some new 
drainage regs because these regulations had not been changed in 
over 35 years. They were in badly needed of updating and some 
changes that we needed to make. And we did make several 
changes in the regulations, but I think perhaps one of the most 
significant is the requirement that all works, whether they’re 
built prior to 1981 or after 1981, will have to be approved. And 
if they can’t be approved, if downstream land control can’t be 
obtained, these works will be closed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we estimate that here in the province of 
Saskatchewan there’s probably in the range of 150,000 drainage 
works in existence today, and perhaps only in the 
neighbourhood of about 5,000 of those are actually approved. 
So, Mr. Speaker, you can see that we’ve got a daunting task 
ahead of us, and that’s why we’ve projected that this is 
probably going to take us in the range of 10 years to do. And 
we’ve decided that we’re going to do it in a phased-in approach 
because this is the only way that we can probably get the job 
done. 
 
And we’re calling on some of our stakeholders, you know, 
some of the watershed authorities and some people that are in 
these areas that we think can provide some input. So we’re 
beginning with some of the watersheds in our pilot projects that 
have experienced some flooding in recent years, and by 
working with the watershed groups and other stakeholders, we 
can make some valued decisions that will help inform how we 
develop our regulations going into the future. In this way, we 

think we’re going to be able to control some of the drainage 
problems that have been prevalent in this province in the last 
few years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in spite of the massive drop in our resource 
revenue that we’ve talked about quite a bit in the House 
recently here, we are continuing with our commitments on 
numerous capital investment in infrastructure projects in the 
province. And this year, those infrastructure projects are going 
to total approximately $20.83 million. And we’re doing this, 
Mr. Speaker, from funds in our cash reserves. And the reason 
we’ve decided to do that . . . And these are cash reserves that 
have built up over the years from our water rates. By doing this, 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve saved the Saskatchewan taxpayers 
approximately $640,000 a year in annual interest charges. 
 
Some of the major projects that I would just like to highlight 
that we’re doing, going to be doing over the next 12 months. 
You know, the most significant of these probably is the 
continued upgrades and renovations to the M1 canal, which 
provides water to a lot of our potash mines, to Saskatoon 
southeast. This year’s tranche of money this year will be about 
twelve and a half million dollars, and that’s going to bring our 
total expenditure for the renovations of that M1 canal up to 
$34.5 million. 
 
Another project that’s being undertaken this year, Mr. Speaker, 
is going to be $1.5 million for work on the Zelma dam east of 
Saskatoon. And we’re going to continue with work on Rafferty 
and Alameda dams as well as other smaller projects across this 
province. Mr. Speaker, we have many dams in this province 
that we are responsible for maintaining, and that’s why our 
budget is pretty significant for that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we just heard some comments about work being 
done on environment in this province. I think that we’re doing 
some good work on environment in this province. And we 
absolutely remain committed to doing our part in reducing the 
greenhouse gas emissions in Saskatchewan, and I think we’re 
seeing some good results. We’re seeing a reduction in our 
greenhouse gas intensity by 12 per cent over the last few years, 
while at the same time, Mr. Speaker, our GDP has grown by 24 
per cent. So we’re definitely seeing a delinking of those two 
items. Our total emissions per capita has also decreased in 
recent times from times under the NDP. It grew by 70 per cent 
while they were in power at the same time with a stagnating 
economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have also just seen the largest investment per capita of any 
jurisdiction in technology and innovation to reduce our 
greenhouse gas emissions from power plants. Of course here, 
Mr. Speaker, I’m referring to the Boundary dam 3; the first 
commercial scale power plant to capture CO2 emissions 
anywhere in the world. To date, Mr. Speaker, we’ve captured 
839 000 tonnes of CO2 gas, and we’re on track to capture 800 
000 tonnes in this calendar year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity a couple weeks ago to tour 
this Boundary dam 3 plant with our federal Environment 
minister, Catherine McKenna, and it was very rewarding to see 
how she came to understand the magnitude of this project. I 
think until you actually go there and are able to speak with the 
SaskPower officials who run this plant . . . And by the way they 



June 8, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 427 

did an excellent presentation, very professionally done, had 
total factual material available, answered questions, and I know 
the federal minister took a lot of notes. And she, as I said, has a 
great understanding of the magnitude of this project. She now 
has a great appreciation of how important this type of 
technology can be, not only in Saskatchewan, not only in 
Canada, but globally, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With approximately 1,000 coal-fired power plants on the 
drawing board right now and a 600 megawatt power plant being 
built every 9 or 10 days in China, the technology that we’ve 
developed at Boundary dam 3 is something that could be the 
most phenomenal project to reduce greenhouse gases globally, 
and she certainly appreciates that now. And as she left that plant 
and we returned home, she basically couldn’t wait to tell this 
story internationally, and I understand she’s doing that. On a 
very . . . future trip to Asia, she’s going to be talking about what 
we’ve done with our Boundary dam project. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, we also tend to forget a lot of times the 
importance of some of our other industries in this province with 
regards to what they do for carbon sinks. And I’m referring now 
of course to agriculture. Sometimes we take a hit for our 
resource economy. We take a hit for what’s done in agriculture. 
But one of the things that a lot of people forget about is that in 
recent years nearly 12 million tonnes of greenhouse gas has 
been sequestered in the sink in our agricultural industry. And, 
Mr. Speaker, this can go a long ways towards doing our part to 
showing that Saskatchewan is in fact reducing greenhouse gas. 
You add to the agriculture sink, also our forestry sink, and you 
can see that Saskatchewan is definitely doing its part toward 
reducing greenhouse gas. 
 
Last year, Mr. Speaker, of course we saw a very unprecedented 
wildfire season here in this province. And I would just like to 
take a moment to thank and commend all of our very 
professional and well-trained firefighters in the wildlife 
management branch. But equally important, Mr. Speaker, was 
the contribution of First Nations and northern community 
leaders and the volunteers who were invaluable in their 
assistance that they provided with fighting our fires in the North 
and with evacuating nearly 13,000 people from the North. The 
Red Cross and the Social Services have made a huge task as 
efficient as it possibly could have been and helped these people 
to get back into their homes again. We certainly thank them for 
their efforts. 
 
This year, Mr. Speaker, after what we’ve heard from our 
northern consultations, we’ve made several changes. And we’ve 
also increased our budget this year by $18 million in the 
wildfire branch to $73.887 million. And, Mr. Speaker, as well 
we provide additional funds, should that be required, to handle 
an unprecedented fire season again this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, towards this end we have already undertaken 
several initiatives prior to the beginning of this fire season: 
things like purchasing more equipment, fire hoses, sprinklers, 
pumps, backpacks, those kinds of things. We have also done 
upgrades to our weather forecasting system. We’ve done a lot 
of clearing around communities in the area to help increase the 
fireguards. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, our most noteworthy investment in this 

budget is our commitment for the purchase and conversion of 
the CL-215 water bomber, with a capital investment project of 
about $14.6 million this year. And we’ve also committed to 
spend $3.2 million on hangar and apron improvements in our 
La Ronge fire base. These are all improvements that will 
certainly contribute to our ability to continue to provide 
excellent fire protection in the North. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve also committed to investing in the North 
with a $455,000 increase in our woodland caribou range 
assessment and range planning department. As well, we are 
investing 124,000 as start-up money for the new Saskatchewan 
Outfitters Association commission. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, we are investing $100,000 in our 
fight to prevent aquatic invasive species from entering our 
province. Mr. Speaker, you may know that preventing these 
species, in particular quagga and zebra mussels, from ever 
entering this province has been of particular interest to me for 
some time now. I would just like to share a little history on 
these mussels and what a devastating problem they could be if 
they ever enter our province. And we do have many pristine 
lakes, waterways, and streams in this province that need 
protecting. These species are now getting close to our borders. 
They’ve been found in Lake Winnipeg in Manitoba, which of 
course is one of the largest freshwater lakes in the world. And 
they’re now also been found in Cedar Lake which is only 265 
km east of Nipawin, so they are getting close. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I won’t go into too many more details on how 
these species came to our province but I will just say this, that 
we have increased our funding again. In ’14-15 we had invested 
about 252,000. In ’15-16 we increased it 264,000 and now 
we’ve added another 100,000 to that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, no matter what we do I still believe that our 
best defence is education. And we’re going to continue with 
that, whether it’s billboards, advertising, radio and television — 
whatever we need to do to convince people to clean, drain, and 
dry. Let’s face it, we live in a huge province. We cannot 
possibly stop every person from coming across any roadway so 
we need to continue our education efforts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that that pretty much concludes my 
comments today. I would just like to close by saying this is 
exactly the kind of budget we need to keep Saskatchewan 
strong, and I will therefore be supporting the budget motion. 
And I certainly could never support the amendment. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the Minister 
of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m pleased to rise 
to take part in the budget debate. But first, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
I want to thank a couple of people. First I want to thank the 
people that I have the good fortune of working with in this 
building, Mr. Speaker; that’s the staff of my ministerial office. 
Mr. Speaker, we actually have worked very closely with the 
Minister of Rural and Remote Health’s office, Mr. Speaker, and 
so there is a large joint office that really works well together on 
a day-to-day basis. But I especially want to thank those that are 



428 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2016 

in my office, Mr. Speaker. So to Morgan, and to Jim and Dale 
and Chaelah, Mr. Speaker, a tremendous thanks to them as well 
as everybody that works in the Rural and Remote Health office, 
Mr. Speaker, that provides so much assistance to us in handling 
casework and case files and interacting with people each and 
every day. So I want to thank them. 
 
[15:00] 
 
I also want to thank my constituency assistant, Marcie, who 
does a great job in the Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency office 
and has been doing so even before I became the MLA [Member 
of the Legislative Assembly], Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think you 
will know that she has been the constituency assistant for the 
MLA for Weyburn-Big Muddy for a number of years now, even 
going beyond the 10 years that I’ve had this position. And so I 
want to thank her, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re in a bit of a transition due to the fact that after this 
election we moved office spaces. We moved a block over to 4th 
Street in Weyburn, in downtown Weyburn. And there’s a lot 
that goes into moving, Mr. Speaker, and she would know that 
better than I because Marcie was left to do most of the moving 
without me. And so she did a tremendous job in getting 
everything organized and everything transferred over and all of 
our bills changed and equipment moved over. And so I want to 
thank her for that. 
 
And I want to thank my good friend Mark Schmidt. Mr. 
Speaker, Mark is probably my oldest friend in the world and 
he’s a co-owner of Quality Plumbing & Heating in Weyburn, 
and he helped out on an afternoon to move some of the bigger 
furniture over with me. And so I want to thank Schmitty. I want 
to put that on the record. Schmitty, thank you for all your help. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to again, as I did very quickly in the 
Throne Speech reply, I do want to thank my family, especially 
Amanda and Jack. You know, Mr. Speaker, I haven’t . . . maybe 
spoke a little bit, I’ve spoken a little bit about Jack on the floor, 
but I, you know, I want to take a little bit of time to talk about 
him. We’re into a really great age. He will be two on the 28th of 
this month, Mr. Speaker, and it’s going by so fast. And he’s got 
more energy than the two of us combined and so we’re trying to 
keep up with him, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you know, we’re into that age with him where, you know, 
he’s doing a lot of talking, but he’s not saying a lot of words 
that make a lot of sense, which kind of reminds me about being 
at work here from time to time, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But you 
know, the words are starting to come, and we’re starting to 
figure out what stuff means. So some’s pretty obvious. So, 
juice. He’s saying juice quite a bit. So we know he wants some 
juice. And he says Peas, and Peas, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is short 
for PJ, which is our dog. Our dog is named Pickle Juice and we 
call him PJ, and Jack calls him Peas. And so he’ll be talking 
about Peas, something that Peas has done. 
 
And he knows the word no. And we’re hearing that quite a bit, 
and being that he’s a couple weeks away from the age of two, I 
think we’ll be hearing that for a number of years to come. But, 
Mr. Speaker, I think the best word is when you hear dad or 
dada, Mr. Speaker, and so I just want to just put on the record 
what a joy and a blessing he has been and how much I love my 

Jacky Boy, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to congratulate the Finance 
minister and all the members of treasury board for the work that 
they did in putting together a difficult budget, Mr. Speaker. And 
I do want to say and put on the record, Mr. Speaker, that we’ve 
been very fortunate, first with Rod Gantefoer and then Ken 
Krawetz, Mr. Speaker, who served admirably for many years in 
this House even before they stepped into the chair to be the 
Finance minister and the Chair of the treasury board, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would say, in my opinion, that we are very 
lucky to have the Finance minister that is now the Finance 
minister of the province to follow in those footsteps. In fact, 
Mr. Speaker, on a number of occasions back home and in Swift 
Current when I was at an event, I had a number of people come 
up to me to say that they actually watched the budget address 
and they were so very impressed with our Finance minister and 
the way he delivered that address but the content of the budget 
that he was able to put together. So I congratulate the member. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and I also want to congratulate other members that 
have taken part in great speeches, and I had an opportunity to 
hear a lot of them last night. But I especially want to 
congratulate the member from Lloydminster for a great speech, 
especially one that I think will be one that not only for . . . And 
I think members know that I’m a bit of a history buff, as you 
are. But I think that’s one speech not just for her own family 
members — because I think that that’ll be quite a treat for her 
family members 50 years from now and 100 years from now to 
read that speech and note the connection with her family and 
this building, Mr. Speaker — but I think that’s a speech that 
anybody that has an interest in this province will sure enjoy and 
find quite interesting. So I want to thank the member from 
Lloydminster for delivering that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have the privilege of representing the great 
constituency of Weyburn-Big Muddy, Mr. Speaker, and I want 
to talk a little bit about my constituency before I get into how I 
think the budget will be reviewed and viewed back home. Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve had a bit of a change in the Weyburn-Big 
Muddy constituency, so I’m still very fortunate to represent the 
city of Weyburn and towns like Bengough and Ogema and 
Pangman, Yellow Grass, Minton, Gladmar, Ceylon. And now 
Radville and Lake Alma are two new communities in our 
constituency, even though they were in the constituency up 
until 10 years ago, and then there was some boundaries that 
were redrawn. And there’s other smaller communities along the 
way — Trossachs and others, Mr. Speaker — as well as our 
rural municipalities, that make up a really great constituency. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I now no longer represent Willow Bunch, 
well at least half of Willow Bunch, Mr. Speaker, because the 
highway divided Willow Bunch between myself and Wood 
River, as well as the community of Coronach, Mr. Speaker. But 
I think they will be well represented for many years to come by 
the new member for Wood River, Mr. Speaker. But I want to 
thank people in those communities for all of their support but as 
well their encouragement and their advice all those many years. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’ll talk a little bit about each one of them, and 
I’ll try to be pretty brief. So, Mr. Speaker, on the far west side 



June 8, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 429 

of the constituency is the community of Bengough, Mr. 
Speaker. This is really the gateway to the Big Muddy Valley, 
Mr. Speaker. In fact, they host for the 12th year in a row this 
year, this July will be the Gateway Festival, Mr. Speaker. And I 
would encourage members, if you have an opportunity to be 
down in the Big Muddy Valley area down near Bengough, to 
check out the Gateway Festival, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is a real great festival for a community of, you know, 
somewhere between 3 and 500 people, Mr. Speaker. But on that 
weekend every year for the last 12 years — and it has grown 
each and every year — but that community grows by like 10 
times the population. And, Mr. Speaker, Corb Lund will be the 
headliner this year as well as, maybe for some older members, 
the Stampeders if that’s maybe more along your taste, Mr. 
Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, I would encourage members, if they 
have an opportunity, the people of Bengough do a great job. 
 
So if you head south on 34 Highway about 20 minutes later 
you’ll be in Montana, Mr. Speaker, but before you get there 
you’ll hit Castle Butte which is one of the great geographical 
landmarks in this province, Mr. Speaker. And it’s in the heart of 
the Big Muddy Valley, and people will know it when they see it 
if you haven’t ever heard of it before. But if you go north on 34 
and then east on Highway 13 you get to Ogema. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there isn’t enough time in this House to talk about 
Ogema, Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, again another community 
of a couple of hundred people, Mr. Speaker. The town of 
Ogema . . . Actually the original name was Omega, Mr. 
Speaker, meaning the end because at the time it was the end of 
that rail line. But when they registered their name back in about 
1911 or 1912 they realized or they were told that there was 
another town already incorporated Omega. So they just 
switched the letters around to come up with Ogema, and that’s 
how Ogema got its name. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for many years, I think, like a lot of communities 
in rural Saskatchewan, they saw their numbers dwindling and 
their population and communities around them going by the 
wayside, Mr. Speaker. And about 10 years ago, a little more 
than 10 years ago there was a group of citizens — I would say a 
little bit more than 10 years ago — headed up by people like 
Wayne Myron, who’s the mayor of Ogema, and they decided 
that their fate was going to be different, Mr. Speaker. And they 
were not going to rely on anybody else to decide their own fate, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they started out by buying the shortline and 
by buying the elevator. And then they decided, well we need a 
train station because ours got tore down years ago. So they 
found an exact replica train station, Mr. Speaker, a 1912 edition 
train station. It was being used to store grain up near Simpson, 
Saskatchewan, and they traded a couple of modern grain bins, I 
think two or three grain bins, Mr. Speaker. I’m not sure of the 
capacity of them. But they traded the farmer the brand new 
grains bins for this old train station that had been used to store 
grain up near Simpson. And over about seven years and 
thousands of hours of volunteer work, they restored this train 
station, Mr. Speaker, and it’s now really become the focal point 
of the community. And from then, other things have happened, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

Southern Prairie Railway. So if you were down in Bengough 
during the Gateway Festival, I’d encourage you to take a stop in 
Ogema and ride the train. You can ride on a Saturday and go 
east to Pangman and take part in the farmers’ market in 
Pangman, or you can go west on one of their various days of 
operation and go to places like Horizon and get a tour of a 
restored grain elevator, a working grain elevator, or even a 
pitchfork fondue with some cowboy poetry. And, Mr. Speaker, 
every once in a while that train actually gets stopped by bank 
robbers, by train robbers, and that’s quite an experience. And so 
I would encourage people to stop by Ogema. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll say during the campaign one of the best stops 
was at a restaurant called Solo Italia. They make fresh made 
pasta and pizza, Mr. Speaker, and it’s a great story. It was a 
young couple that met on vacation. They were either in Mexico 
or somewhere in the Caribbean, and he was from Italy and she 
was from Ogema, and they got together. They became a couple, 
and I think they lived in northern Italy for a time. And then they 
decided to relocate to Ogema where they started an Italian 
restaurant. Mr. Speaker, their frozen pizzas and frozen pastas 
can be bought all over southern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
and it’s just a real great community, a real jewel in our 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you head east on Highway 13, you can take 
a turn south on 28 and visit Radville and see the new Marian 
Health Centre that was built just in the last year or so, Mr. 
Speaker. Or you can keep going on 13 and get to Weyburn, Mr. 
Speaker, and that’s the largest community in my constituency. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, so those are a bit about the places, and 
I could talk a lot about history. I was really inspired by the 
member from Lloydminster that talked about history. And I 
don’t have enough time, but you know, Weyburn was home to 
one of the provincial hospitals, the Souris Valley mental 
hospital, Mr. Speaker. At the time it was built, in 1921, when it 
was opened it was the largest building in the British 
Commonwealth, Mr. Speaker, in Weyburn, Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know, there’s just so many great things about 
Weyburn. It is the opportunity city. We are the largest inland 
grain gathering point in all of Canada, Mr. Speaker, and really it 
is the opportunity city for a variety of reasons. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that’s a little bit about the places I represent, 
and I want to talk a little bit about the people I represent. Mr. 
Speaker, we have a pretty mixed economy between agriculture 
and a lot of ranching in our area, especially down in the Big 
Muddy Valley. And obviously the oil industry is a pretty 
important part of our constituency, Mr. Speaker. And so, you 
know, we’ve been fortunate on part of our economy that, you 
know, the agricultural part of our local economy has really been 
steadfast and has really been the mainstay, even at the earliest 
days of the communities that I’ve just mentioned, Mr. Speaker. 
But you know I would say more and more, you know, we’ve 
seen development, from the historical developments back in the 
’40s and ’50s, and that seemed to be, you know . . . We had the 
benefit of some longer term plays, Mr. Speaker. And obviously 
we’ve benefited mightily from new discoveries like the Bakken 
and new technologies like horizontal drilling and hydraulic 
fracturing, Mr. Speaker. 
 



430 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2016 

But you know, the last year, especially the last year with the 
low commodity prices for oil has meant, you know, it’s meant 
some difficult times for people in my constituency, for 
businesses and families, Mr. Speaker. It’s meant that some of 
our daycares . . . There’s a lot less kids in some of those 
daycares than there were at the beginning of the year, Mr. 
Speaker, because families have had to make some difficult 
decisions in terms of leaving and trying to find work elsewhere. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, one thing about my constituents is they are 
hard working and they are optimistic, Mr. Speaker. And so I 
support this budget because I think it’s a reflection on them, and 
it’s a reflection on the things that I heard during the election. It 
keeps taxes low. Mr. Speaker, this is not a time I think that we 
need to be adding any more difficulty to ensuring that we have 
a competitive environment, ensuring that people can live in 
Saskatchewan and grow a business in Saskatchewan and 
employ people in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, it keeps building. 
It keeps building at a time that, Mr. Speaker, our province has 
seen incredible growth. Mr. Speaker, it provides for more 
innovation and as well it thinks for the long term, Mr. Speaker. 
So those are some of the areas that I want to talk about. 
 
So as I said before, certainly what I heard during the campaign 
is that when you live in the Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency, 
you see it all around you. You see the difficulties that some of 
the industry is going through, some of our local economy. But 
we’ve been through this before, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
grew up in a family that was very involved in the oil industry. 
My dad was a truck driver and, Mr. Speaker, I was pretty young 
at the time but, you know, I remember what the mid-’80s were 
like in terms of the fact that early in my life . . . I don’t quite 
remember this but early in my life, you know, my dad took 
another job working for a contractor, working in the oil industry 
just to try to make ends meet. You know, I remember my 
mother taking on a second job at Christmas time, Mr. Speaker, 
just to ensure that we could have some presents under the 
Christmas tree, Mr. Speaker. So we’ve been through this before. 
 
[15:15] 
 
I have said before, I have mentioned before my grandfather, 
who is 88 years old — I think 88 years old this year in August, 
Mr. Speaker — worked in the oil patch, was a catskinner his 
entire life, built the lease site for the first horizontal well drilled 
in southern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, back in about 1989 or 
1990, the last job he ever worked on, Mr. Speaker, before he 
shut down his business and retired. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been through this before and we know, 
and the people in my constituency know that a strong economy 
is not just needed so that government can invest, but also so that 
communities can continue to invest. The Marian Health Centre, 
the new Marian Health Centre in Radville would never have 
been built if government didn’t have the revenue and if the 
community couldn’t have raised their 20 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, you hear from members opposite about the dollars 
that were left behind when the government changed in 2007. 
Well why weren’t they building some of this infrastructure that 
we needed, Mr. Speaker? So we’ve had a lot of catch-up and 
I’m going to talk a little bit more about that later. 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think at a time like this we need to be . . . I’ll 
very quickly say we need to be supporting our industry. We 
need to be supporting ways to get our industries’ products to 
market. We must not be advocating some of the things that 
we’re hearing from members opposite in terms of some 
manifestos that are going around. And we need federal 
leadership, Mr. Speaker, and we certainly know where that’s 
coming from in this province, and frankly in Western Canada, 
and it’s coming from a member that sits over here on this side 
of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need to keep building and, you know, I’ll talk 
a little bit about some of the infrastructure that we’re trying to 
build in my ministry, Mr. Speaker. But you know, even if you 
look at SaskPower . . . So 60,000 customers in the last eight 
years and a projection of about 82,000 customers over the next 
10 years, Mr. Speaker. So a business, a private company . . . 
And I think it doesn’t really matter if it’s a Crown corporation 
or a private company. Certainly it was the case when my 
grandfather started his business in . . . Basically he owned a 
couple of Cats, owned a couple of bulldozers, a couple of 
scrapers, and he built municipal roads and he built lease sites. 
And he was told when he went out on his own, Mr. Speaker . . . 
The bank gave him a year. He had six kids at the time, Mr. 
Speaker, and he used to work for other . . . He was a contractor, 
worked for others and decided he was going to take the leap and 
go on his own, Mr. Speaker. And he had a year to make things 
work, Mr. Speaker. Like any business, you have a couple of 
options. You can invest using your earnings or you can take on 
debt, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, but the members opposite don’t like either 
one. They don’t like, well they don’t like when rates go up, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re always against when rates go up, even though, 
Mr. Speaker, on average I think the maintenance costs for 
SaskPower are about $400 million a year just to keep the 
maintenance going. And I think the average under the members 
opposite was less than $400 million a year. So they weren’t 
even keeping up with the maintenance, Mr. Speaker. So never 
. . . If you’re the NDP, never raise a rate. Never take capital 
dollars out of the earnings of the company, but never take on 
any debt as a company. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, how do you square those two? That’s the 
answer that we still don’t have from the members opposite, 
which we don’t have on a lot of issues, Mr. Speaker. They take 
all sorts of positions of what they’re against, and what they 
wouldn’t do if they were the government, but we don’t really 
hear what they would do to ensure that this province continues 
to grow. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there’s actually a third option. I said two. You 
can take it out of the earnings, you can take on debt, or you can 
stop growing. And I think that that’s a little bit of what the 
philosophy from the members opposite was, Mr. Speaker. I 
don’t think it was a coincidence when a member from Prince 
Albert under the NDP said that it’s okay when people leave the 
province because there’s more for the rest of us, because I think 
that that was the mentality. Because you don’t have to make the 
decisions on capital infrastructure. You don’t have to make 
some of the decisions that we’ve had to make, Mr. Speaker, 
when the province isn’t growing, Mr. Speaker. And I think that 
that tells a lot about the members on the NDP side of the House 



June 8, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 431 

and what their party stands for. So, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to 
keep building, and we’re going to be innovative when we do it, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the member from Riversdale, my colleague, 
my friend from Riversdale, who I have a great deal of respect 
for, Mr. Speaker, despite the fact that we agree on not a lot, 
disagree on most, Mr. Speaker, but she mentioned in her 
speech, and I read it, she mentioned that, so we put 14.1 million 
into RUH [Royal University Hospital] and the Pasqua and the 
General Hospital. Well, Mr. Speaker, we actually have more 
than that. Those are for three special projects on heating and 
cooling and electrical, and over top of that we’ve actually 
found, in a difficult year, a 25 per cent increase in maintenance 
for our capital facilities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Still not enough. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — So, Mr. Speaker, on one hand . . . The 
member from Riversdale points out that it’s not enough. We’re 
not putting enough in because she said they’re putting $14.1 
million into these buildings, but they need $675 million in 
maintenance. And, Mr. Speaker, I would agree. We have, in 
terms of the capital needs of our province just in health care, not 
including education or highways or other areas, in health care 
it’s in the billions of dollars, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so the member opposite criticizes: well you’re putting 14 
million in, not including what we’ve done on new buildings and 
the over $1 billion that we spent in eight years, Mr. Speaker. 
But at a time when the members opposite commissioned a study 
on health care facilities and the maintenance, they 
commissioned the study and then they sat on it. And when we 
were elected, the new Health minister and the members of the 
cabinet looked at it and it was well over $1 billion that was 
needed. 
 
You know what the NDP spent on maintenance of health 
facilities at a time that their report said they needed over $1 
billion in maintenance — $4.4 million. Less than the amount of 
money that we’re going to put into the heating and cooling at 
RUH, Mr. Speaker. For the entire province, $4.4 million. 
 
So on one hand, it’s spend more. On the other hand, they say, 
don’t spend in a different way. Don’t spend in the 
non-traditional way. So, Mr. Speaker, if that was the case we 
would never have a brand new long-term care facility in Swift 
Current. We’d never have it. We P3’d that one, Mr. Speaker, on 
time, on budget, and the first residents started moving in on 
Sunday, Mr. Speaker. That would never have been built. 
 
The Saskatchewan Hospital at North Battleford would never 
have been built. There just isn’t enough money in the budget to 
do it. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s even considering the members 
opposite saying that anything less than 6 per cent in health care 
is a zero. So you’ve got to spend 6 per cent in health care plus 
you’ve got to build everything traditional like the way we’ve 
always done it, Mr. Speaker. It just doesn’t add up. 
 
And you know what else doesn’t add up? The fact that the 
Finance critic said on budget day you have to spend more than 
6 per cent in health care or else it’s a zero. Well that’s $335 
million, and frankly I’d love a 6 . . . In case the Finance 

minister’s listening, in the event that I have this seat next year, 
I’d love a 6 per cent increase. Just so you know. Just so you 
know, I’m not turning down 6 per cent. 
 
But the members opposite campaigned two months ago in an 
election . . . Now keep in mind 6 per cent is what we have to 
spend in health care according to the NDP, yet their own 
platform called for a point eight per cent increase in health. 
 
So if you’re the Sask Party, you have to spend 6 per cent in 
health care, which is zero, but if you’re the NDP, less than 1 per 
cent is fine. That’s what we get from the members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit . . . I don’t have a lot of 
time left. Okay, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to be really quick. 
 
The member from Riversdale talked a lot about the drug plan, 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, one thing that she mentioned is, she 
talked about a report called Pharmacare 2020. It’s a UBC 
[University of British Columbia] report. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, she talked a little bit about that this is apparently the 
gold standard of what a pharmacare or a pharmacy program 
should look like, and it should be based on efficacy and safety, 
Mr. Speaker. So let’s make decisions based on efficacy; I think 
that that’s reasonable. We make decisions based on the 
common drug review and work through the health innovation 
working group to determine, can we afford the drug? Can we 
negotiate a price that makes sense? And is it effective? 
 
Yet from time to time we get the member from Riversdale that 
says, don’t worry about the common drug review, just approve 
the drug. Why aren’t you paying for the drug? And so we’ll say, 
well we’ve got to go through a process to ensure that it’s 
effective. Is there efficacy in terms of funding this drug? So, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can’t understand that. On one hand she 
said it should be based on efficacy, and on the other hand she 
says, just fund everything, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It doesn’t make 
sense. 
 
And the other thing she said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I don’t 
have all the details, but I know she did talk about a constituent 
of hers. And she talked about a constituent of hers, and I’ll 
quote: 
 

I’m thinking about a woman I talked to on Friday who 
lives in low-income housing in Riversdale on 20th Street. 
She earns . . . $1,200, [actually] $1,180 a month with her 
CPP and OAS, and she pays . . . 800 in rent. So she has 
about $400 a month to live on. So an increase for her 
medications at $5 a pop . . . Mr. Speaker, and her comment 
to me: I’m lucky I live where I do, which is low-income 
. . . [but otherwise] I’d be using the food bank. 

 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I hope the member opposite would 
have taken the time for that constituent. Based on hearing that 
she only makes $1,180 a month, I hope she would have taken 
the time to say — instead of just maybe a partisan comment 
about, you know, the government raised it up to $25, and how 
dare they raise it $5, all those types of political comments — I 
hope she would have said, why don’t you, madam constituent 
that lives on 20th Street, it’s Friday, make an appointment. 
Come down to my office. Because if you only make $1,180 a 
month, well you may be eligible for SIP [seniors’ income plan], 



432 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2016 

which would add to your income. And if you’re eligible for SIP, 
then that means that you’re also eligible for some of our special 
support drug plans, which means that you get chiro and you get 
eyeglasses and you get a reduced deductible two times a year at 
$100 a month, and then 35 per cent is your cap on your drugs. 
 
Then if you still are eligible, you may be eligible for special 
support, which basically is if your drug costs are still above 3.4 
per cent of your income, then we basically will take the lower 
of the two, either $25 per prescription or the lower amount, and 
in many cases it’s actually lower. So I hope she didn’t just do 
what I fear that she did, is just make a political comment about 
the government raising her drug prices again by 25, and actually 
provided some help and some assistance to say, you actually 
may be eligible for additional programs. If she didn’t do that, I 
would hope that she would perhaps refer that constituent on to 
my office because we’d be happy to try to help that constituent 
out of hers. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, so these are not easy decisions. I know 
Tatagwa View got their funding cut, Mr. Speaker. That’s a park 
in my constituency in the city of Weyburn. It’s, I believe, 
$47,000 a year that they receive. But the good news is, what 
they received in increased revenue sharing, well in amount . . . 
well exceeds that. In fact Weyburn, the city of Weyburn’s 
revenue sharing has gone from $820,000 under the NDP to over 
$2.2 million under this government, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. 
Speaker, difficult decisions had to be made. Difficult decisions 
in raising from 20 to $25, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the answer isn’t what the NDP is offering. 
The answer is not to never change, as we hear from the 
members opposite, because I don’t even know what their ideas 
is, Mr. Speaker. Would they think that in 2007 a $15 drug plan 
should be put in place and never touched ever again? Should it 
have stayed at $20 forever? Should we never have touched that 
program ever again, Mr. Speaker? So is it a drug plan that never 
changes? Is it saying no to P3s [public-private partnership]? Is 
it saying no to private surgical suites? No for two-for-one MRIs 
[magnetic resonance imaging] and CTs [computerized 
tomography] and no to innovation, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, for all those reasons, that’s why I’m saying no to 
the amendment and I’m saying yes to the budget. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Bonk: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a great 
pleasure to join in the debate today, my first opportunity as the 
new member from Moosomin constituency. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, as I campaigned in the run-up to the 
April 4th election, standing on the doorsteps in Moosomin 
constituency, I kept getting one message from the great 
majority of the people I encountered. The message, Mr. 
Speaker, that came across again and again was that people knew 
we were in challenging times, but they overwhelmingly 
expressed their confidence and optimism in having the 
province’s economy in the hands of the Saskatchewan Party. 
And, Mr. Speaker, they were very appreciative of the things that 
this government has done for them in the last two terms. This 
includes over 100 million in road improvements: 20 million in 

the last year and another 14 million in the budget for this year. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the community of Moosomin alone there has 
been a 142 per cent increase in revenue sharing since 2007, an 
$18 million integrated health care facility in Kipling, a new 
hospital in Moosomin, significant budget increases for the 
health regions and school divisions that serve our constituency, 
improvements to area schools, and the list goes on and on. Mr. 
Speaker, the good people of Moosomin constituency know 
where the money went. They see evidence of it every day. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, as I told you in my maiden speech, I’ve had 
the opportunity to live and work in many countries around the 
world. I’ve seen first-hand that the world wants what 
Saskatchewan has to offer, and it has always made me proud to 
realize that we have world-class products, world-class 
technology, and world-class know-how that the world is eager 
to acquire. And the Saskatchewan Party government has done 
everything in their power to facilitate this process, and we 
continue to do so. 
 
Our government continues to receive excellent reviews from 
rural Saskatchewan for the assets of this budget. Just a week 
ago, Mr. Speaker, SARM, the Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities, stated in a June 1st new release, and I 
quote, “First and foremost, SARM is very pleased that the 
government’s . . . commitment to maintaining the municipal 
revenue sharing formula has remained strong.” Here’s another, 
Mr. Speaker. The president of the Agricultural Producers 
Association of Saskatchewan remarked, “I’ll just fall short of 
saying Christmas [has come] . . . early. All the programs are 
fully funded. In fact, I’ve seen increases.” 

 
But, Mr. Speaker, in order for me to join this budget, I have to 
get something off my chest that’s been bothering me for some 
time now. And the reason I want to include this in the debate is 
because it goes right to the root of one of the most important 
questions in our province. And that question is, just who is best 
suited to look after our economy? As our Finance minister told 
us, our province’s strength is being tested. So the question 
remains, who is best suited to face these tests? Who is best 
suited to find the solutions to the challenges we’re going to 
have to deal with in the upcoming years? 
 
And that is why, Mr. Speaker, I want to take a close look at a 
document that appeared during the last federal election 
campaign. It was called the Leap Manifesto. When I read it, I 
was absolutely astounded by what it said, and I was sure it 
would soon be discredited and never to be seen or heard of 
again. But no, it’s still with us, and would it surprise you, Mr. 
Speaker, that it would resurface at the NDP’s national 
convention in Edmonton where they have adopted this dogma, 
this ideology of the Leap Manifesto in principle. 
 
And I suppose it wouldn’t surprise you, Mr. Speaker, to 
discover that among our friends opposite and those who work 
for them, there are those that have endorsed it. The Leap 
Manifesto, Mr. Speaker, is really an astonishing study 
conceived by armchair economists who seem to be going off in 
all directions at once and ending up at a dead end. The eminent 
Canadian political commentator, Rex Murphy, has dubbed it a 



June 8, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 433 

world-shaking bleat likely concocted at a Greenpeace séance in 
a crop circle. 
 
But before I get into my objections to the Leap Manifesto and 
how it relates to our budget, there were a couple of phrases in 
that document that caught my eye. For instance, Mr. Speaker, 
they make mention of crumbling infrastructure. And the reason 
it caught my eye is because its crumbling infrastructure is 
something that Saskatchewan knew a lot about.  
 
In November 2007 when this government was elected, one of 
the things we were confronted with was crumbling 
infrastructure. The previous government had failed in their 
upkeep of highways, had failed to adequately maintain schools 
and hospitals, although in many cases they just closed them 
rather than fix them. Mr. Speaker, they had left an infrastructure 
deficit that had to be dealt with by the Saskatchewan Party 
government. And deal with it we did — $8 billion in eight 
years. Mr. Speaker, from 2007 to 2015 the Saskatchewan Party 
government more than doubled the commitment to 
infrastructure of the previous 16 years. 
 
But as the Minister of Finance clearly stated, keeping 
Saskatchewan strong means there’s more to do. That’s why, 
Mr. Speaker, this budget includes allocation of a record 1.15 
billion for the highways and infrastructure budget. For the first 
time in Saskatchewan’s history, the highways and infrastructure 
budget is more than $1 billion.  
 
And the reviews are in, Mr. Speaker. A June 1st news release 
from the Canadian Press stated: “Winners: Drivers. More than 
1,300 kilometres of provincial highways to see repairs or 
upgrades this year.” In another release from SARM, they 
commented this time about the 16 million allocated for the 
municipal roads for the economy program: “This speaks to the 
Saskatchewan Party’s commitment to help municipalities 
facilitate the movement of grain, oil, and other products over 
their roads.” 
 
And that’s only roads. Looking further into the budget, we see 
municipal infrastructure, an increase; school construction, 
maintenance, renewal, an increase. In fact the largest capital 
investment for the Saskatchewan Builds capital plan, $1.7 
billion, which is an increase — in challenging times, mind you 
— of $400 million. In 2016-2017, Mr. Speaker, Crown 
corporations including SaskPower, SaskTel, SaskEnergy are 
projected to spend almost $1.8 billion on infrastructure. Mr. 
Speaker, in challenging times, our government is actually 
increasing the budget allocations for infrastructure. Does that 
begin to answer the question, who is best suited to look after 
our economy? 
 
The Leap Manifesto also references our First Nations, and I 
quote: “Indigenous Peoples should be first to receive public 
support for their own clean energy projects.” Well that might be 
a good point, Mr. Speaker, but not very original idea. In 2011, 
four years before the Leap Manifesto appeared, the province’s 
First Nations Power Authority negotiated a mutually beneficial 
10-year agreement with SaskPower to develop First Nations-led 
power projects in Saskatchewan. One of these projects is 
forecasted to result in the production of 40 megawatts of clean 
energy from solar and flare gas. This is a one-of-a-kind contract 
in North America. It creates business and investment 

opportunities and clearly demonstrates this government’s 
commitment to partner with our First Nations population in 
Saskatchewan’s economy. 
 
And this budget shows our further commitment to First Nations 
people with an increase — yes, in challenging times — an 
increase in program funding targeted at First Nations and Métis 
organizations and individuals. More funding for on- and 
off-reserve job training programs and on-reserve basic 
education, and there is an increase, shows an increase in gaming 
agreement transfers. Further it includes increased funding for 
additional wildfire crews and for the Ministry of Highway and 
Infrastructure’s First Nations apprenticeship program. Again, 
when we ask ourselves the question who is best suited to look 
after our economy, the answer becomes quite obvious.  
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when the Leap Manifesto attempts to set its 
hand to agriculture policy, this is really when we separate the 
wheat from the chaff. Here’s their take on agriculture, and I 
quote: 
 

We must develop a more localized and ecologically-based 
agricultural system to reduce reliance on fossil fuels, 
absorb shocks in the global [food] supply — and produce 
healthier and more affordable food for everyone. 

 
And there’s more, Mr. Speaker, and I quote: 
 

We call for an end to all trade deals that interfere with our 
attempts to rebuild local economies, regulate corporations 
and stop damaging extractive projects. 

 
I think that the most accurate statement I have heard regarding 
this policy was put forward by my colleague, the Minister of 
Agriculture. He said, I’ve never read two paragraphs which 
voiced more ignorance of a subject than these two in my whole 
life, and we know that’s a long time. He goes on to say, they 
couldn’t have got it more wrong. This is absolutely the opposite 
of the truth. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to illustrate to you just how 
ridiculous this section of the Leap Manifesto is. So I questioned 
some of the legislative staff, took some measurements and, 
according to my calculations, this Chamber would hold 
approximately 195,000 bushels of grain. Now bear with me, 
Mr. Speaker. When I tell you that my good friend and 
neighbour down the road operates a modern and efficient farm, 
last year he harvested 400,000 bushels of canola. So he would 
have filled this Chamber more than two times over. He could 
have filled this Chamber twice with his barley crop and one 
more time with the wheat he harvested. 
 
And here’s the point I’m making. Mr. Speaker, if we were to 
end all trade deals as the Leap Manifesto proposes, where 
would my neighbour and all the other farmers in our rural 
municipalities sell their grain? End all trade deals. End one of 
the cornerstones of our economy. Imagine if you will, if there 
were no international trade deals, the farmers in my RM, all 176 
of them, and keeping in mind the huge volumes of grain we’re 
talking about, if they were to descend on our local town, 
Glenavon, a town of 188 people, if they were to arrive there 
selling their products at the locals farmers’ market, what would 
that be like? 



434 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2016 

Mr. Speaker, my wife tells me that you need about 3 cups of 
flour to make a loaf of bread. I just don’t see myself having the 
time to calculate how many loaves of bread the good folks of 
Glenavon would have to consume to use all that grain. And of 
course, Mr. Speaker, it’s ridiculous. And thinking that people 
who support the Leap Manifesto want to be put in charge of 
Saskatchewan’s economy, well that’s also ridiculous. Does that 
help answer the question, who is best suited to look after 
Saskatchewan’s economy? 
 
Mr. Speaker, fully 20 per cent of the jobs in this province are 
directly related to international exports. That is why this budget 
acknowledges loud and clear that agriculture is still a central 
force in Saskatchewan’s economy. 
 
The Minister of Finance in his opening message clearly stated, 
and I quote, “The provincial government continues its 
significant commitment to the agriculture sector.” Accordingly 
this budget includes a 7.5 increase in funding for the 
Agriculture ministry. It further provides almost 15 million 
increased funding for agriculture business risk management 
programs and 27 million for agricultural research. 
 
Saskatchewan exports 95 per cent of all our agricultural 
production. Only 5 per cent is consumed in Canada. Trade is 
absolutely vital to our province and our economy. And this 
government is proud of our agricultural producers. We are 
proud of our world-leading technology, and we are proud that 
we produce some of the best and safest products you will find 
anywhere in the world. And that is why, Mr. Speaker, through 
Growing Forward 2 program, the provincial government will 
contribute 11 million of the 37 million that will see the 
construction of the new international trade centre at Evraz Place 
in Regina. 
 
This 150,000 square foot space will be a suitable showplace for 
such major events as Canadian Western Agribition and 
Canadian Farm Progress Show. It further solidifies this 
government’s commitment to aggressively market and promote 
what our province has to offer. 
 
We welcome trade. We encourage trade. And we will support 
the good people of this province by standing up for their 
interests. 
 
The NDP are always asking, where did the money go? Well I’d 
like to ask the NDP and their Leap Manifesto, where will the 
money come from? And the answer is simple. The answer, Mr. 
Speaker, is raise taxes. Raise taxes on the wealthy. Raise taxes 
on corporations. Increase resource royalties. Invent new taxes. 
Yes, it’s simple, Mr. Speaker. In the 16 years previous that the 
Saskatchewan Party was elected, the NDP raised taxes 21 times. 
And the equalization payments flowed in, and the silence in the 
agricultural, resource, and manufacturing sectors was 
deafening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the Moosomin constituency, we have a success 
story that we’re all proud of. Seed Hawk Inc. in Langbank has 
thrived in an environment where successive Saskatchewan 
Party governments have created a business environment that 
has given them the opportunity to succeed. Seed Hawk is at the 
very cutting edge of precision seeding equipment. They are 
among the best in the world at what they do. Mr. Speaker, my 

business dealings have taken me to a number of countries 
overseas and when I see Seed Hawk equipment working in 
these countries, I feel such pride that this is Saskatchewan 
innovation, know-how, and technology competing with the best 
in the world. 
 
Companies like Seed Hawk contribute greatly to the provincial 
economy, provide good jobs for the people in rural 
Saskatchewan, and by the way, Mr. Speaker, for the second 
year in a row, Seed Hawk has been chosen as one of the best 
places to work in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Seed Hawk are innovators and the patents that 
they have registered demonstrate how they are at the forefront 
of modern scientific agricultural research and development. I 
can’t wait to see what they’ll do with this government’s patent 
box initiative. This patent box incentive is another example of 
how our government supports homegrown innovation. 
 
This is the kind of business that has contributed to our 
province’s record exports. Mr. Speaker, in 2015 Saskatchewan 
exports reached $32.6 billion. To put it another way, that works 
out to be roughly $30,000 for every man, woman, and child in 
this province. This is an amazing achievement and something 
that everyone in this province should be proud of. 
 
In 2007 under the NDP government, Saskatchewan agricultural 
exports were 6.4 billion. In 2015 our exports reached 15.3 
billion. That’s 139 per cent increase. Is there still any question 
who is best suited to look after Saskatchewan’s economy? And 
all this, Mr. Speaker, is because of a business environment 
where they haven’t been overburdened with taxes, where we cut 
red tape, where we reward innovation, innovation that we are 
seeing developed by companies like Seed Hawk and many 
others. It shows how our government’s budget with its $27 
million commitment to research funding will keep 
Saskatchewan at the forefront of agricultural science. So who is 
better suited to look after Saskatchewan’s economy? 
 
The Minister of Finance has presented us with a 
well-considered document, a budget, as he said, that is doing 
the prudent thing, to run a manageable deficit rather than 
implement severe cuts to programs and services or increase the 
tax burden on Saskatchewan people and businesses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when Saskatchewan people are given the 
opportunity to succeed, they will succeed. And the 
Saskatchewan Party government continues to foster this 
opportunity. Mr. Speaker, this budget provides real benefits for 
real people, real Saskatchewan people, real people who are 
innovators and need government encouragement, not 
roadblocks; real people who need to move their technology and 
products to the rest of the world; real people who want their 
children to attend the best schools, and their loved ones to be 
cared for in the best hospitals and care homes; real people who 
enjoy the shortest surgical wait times in Canada; real people 
who have reasonable utility rates, still the second lowest in 
Canada; people who appreciate the second lowest taxes in 
Canada;, and people who might need one of the 15 new cancer 
drugs now approved — but, Mr. Speaker, real people who are 
proud to live in the only province in Canada that plans to reach 
a balanced budget by next year. 
 



June 8, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 435 

[15:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are a government that looks before it leaps, 
that gives its people the opportunity to succeed, not by 
burdening them with new and higher taxes. And we are a 
government that knows that this job isn’t finished. We are a 
government that listens to the people of this province. Mr. 
Speaker, the citizens of Saskatchewan bestowed a great 
confidence on Saskatchewan Party on April 4th. They have 
shouted loud and clear that they feel we are the ones best suited 
to look after Saskatchewan’s economy. 
 
I am proud, Mr. Speaker, to support this budget put forward by 
the Minister of Finance that will keep Saskatchewan strong. 
Further I will not support any amendments. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege and 
an honour to rise today in the House to join in the budget 
debate. It’s always a privilege and honour to join in these 
debates and, this being my first budget debate, it’s extra special, 
I suppose. 
 
I don’t think I’ll shock anybody but I am rising to support the 
amendment to the budget and will not be supporting the budget 
itself. I do want to thank our Finance critic. I think she’s done a 
fantastic, remarkable job of looking at the budget and giving it 
the analysis that it deserves and highlighting the concerns that 
we have in the budget. 
 
In particular we feel the budget reveals more cuts, more fees, 
and no plan to protect and create jobs. And of course the 
Finance critic says it a little bit more eloquently than I do but 
that’s what my focus of this discussion will be. And I’m going 
to educate the members opposite a little bit because if you hear 
from their speeches it sounds like everything is great about this 
budget. Nobody is raising any red flags; nothing’s wrong. And I 
think already . . . It’s only been a week and a day since the 
budget was released. We’ve already seen quite a few articles in 
the newspaper, quite a few groups speaking out and raising 
concerns, so I’m going to highlight those. 
 
But I know this budget is the opposite of the gift that keeps on 
giving. It’s the budget that keeps on taking away, and it’s a bit 
of a slow burn of a budget that seems like more and more we’ll 
see what the truth is behind these cuts and the problems that 
will be associated with that. Every day, I think every single day 
our caucus is hearing from different organizations, new 
organizations every single day about what this budget means to 
them negatively and the cuts that they’re going to be forced to 
face and the very difficult decisions they’re going to have to 
have. 
 
Before I get into that any more . . . But I do want to highlight 
that it’s clear that in the budget that was revealed to us, there 
was no reason why we had to wait until June 1st for this budget 
to come out. It was no shock to anybody at this point in time 
that the price of oil was low and wasn’t going to go up any time 
soon. There’s no reason why this couldn’t have come out before 
the election was called and then we would have had a little bit 
of honesty from this government, and the Saskatchewan people 

could have gone into the election with their eyes open and they 
could have made an informed decision. 
 
And I know from trying to figure out, Mr. Speaker, whether or 
not or how this budget will affect my constituents in Regina 
Douglas Park, there were a few things that I’m assuming will be 
concerning for them and it would have been nice if they would 
have been able to see those before they voted. 
 
For example, they failed to mention the plan to hike 
prescription drug costs for seniors and children, and that would 
have been of particular concern because I do have a lot of 
young families and a lot of seniors on fixed income who live in 
my constituency. And that’s one of the ones that have already 
been highlighted as a concern. 
 
I’m looking at a Leader-Post article, June 6th, where some local 
groups were already highlighting the concern. And I think we 
talked about this in question period already today, but I want to 
highlight. Holly Schick who’s the executive director of 
Saskatchewan Seniors Mechanism pointed out that, “My 
immediate take would be that even that $5 per prescription 
increase can be significant for some people. A lot of older 
adults have multiple prescriptions.” And then she says here 
again later on in the article, “Older adults are in a position 
where their income is quite fixed and they have no options to do 
anything about it. Some people can go out and get a job but for 
many folks, they are not able to do that anymore.” 
 
And that’s the problem with this, Mr. Speaker, is that a lot of 
seniors are on fixed income and any type of changes to their 
expenses, it hurts them. And it’s a problem, and that’s what the 
concern is. And that’s the problem with having these increases 
go on the backs of vulnerable people in our community. 
They’re already struggling. You know, they’re already having a 
hard time making ends meet, especially in Regina, I would say, 
with the cost of rent going up and cost of food going up, and 
now the cost of prescription going up as well. 
 
The other one that is concerning is the reversal of the active 
families tax benefit which really helps give a leg up to 
middle-class families especially, who wanted to give their 
children an opportunity to participate in sports. As we all know, 
that it’s such an important thing to give kids the opportunity to 
participate in kind of group sports. I have been a volunteer with 
Regina Big Sisters for a few years, and I know the value it is for 
kids from seeing my little . . . And you know, when she doesn’t 
have the opportunity to participate in sports . . . But when she 
does get the opportunity to be in a team environment, it’s huge. 
It’s a huge impact on their self-esteem, and it’s a huge impact 
on the people that they become as they get older. 
 
The other one also is the increases to our utilities that weren’t 
discussed in the budget but were conveniently talked about very 
shortly after session started, and that’s another one that would 
have been really nice to know as well. And like I said, lots of 
seniors in my constituency, lots of young families, so lots of 
concerns, especially with seniors, when the costs are going up 
when you have a fixed income. So all these aren’t platform 
items that the Sask Party ran on, but now we’re having to deal 
with them. 
 
Another one is the Wascana Centre Authority funding which, 



436 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2016 

you know, we’ve heard is potentially on the chopping block. 
It’s up for discussion, apparently. That borders my 
constituency. It’s a very beautiful, large part of Regina. I know 
I run around there almost every other day. I know my leader 
runs there quite often as well, and I have a lot of constituents 
who spend their weekends there having family barbecues. It’s 
amazing, if you walk around the lake, how many groups, how 
many families are there on a Sunday barbecuing and enjoying 
their family time. Especially a lot of new Canadians actually, 
you see, Mr. Speaker, a lot using the park and loving it. So I 
would hate to see these really, really important institutions in 
our communities go away. And off-loading tough decisions 
onto municipalities, which is what I think happened here, isn’t 
an excuse, and I think people will see through it. 
 
There are so many cuts that, you know, hadn’t been discussed 
before the election and are being discussed now. And 
sometimes the members opposite like to butter it up and say that 
it’s not a cut, but it is a cut, frankly, Mr. Speaker. When health 
spending is up only 1.8 per cent, education is up point seven per 
cent, and social services up 2.8 per cent, it’s simply not 
sufficient. And it’s a case of priorities, Mr. Speaker. I know the 
members opposite sometimes think that we’re telling them to 
spend, spend, spend, but it’s all about priorities, and their 
priorities are in the wrong place. And that’s the problem here, 
and that’s why families are suffering, for sure. Seniors are 
bearing the brunt of this. Children are bearing the brunt of this, 
and it’s just not acceptable. 
 
These increases that I just alluded to are simply not enough to 
cover the basic increases that we see in these areas, and that’s 
the problem, Mr. Speaker. So what happens is that these very 
difficult decisions get off-loaded onto, like I said, our 
municipalities, our universities, our hospitals, and our schools. 
And it’s frustrating is what I would say, when the provincial 
government tries to blame, you know, more grassroots level, 
locally elected school boards, for example, for tough decisions 
that they’re being forced to make because of these funding 
decisions that the provincial government has made. 
 
Like I said, I know this first-hand from being a school board 
trustee for the last four years. I have colleagues on my side and 
I know that there are members opposite who are trustees or 
were trustees as well, and I’m hoping that the members opposite 
are expressing their concern because I know as trustees we’ve 
all expressed our concerns to the SSBA [Saskatchewan School 
Boards Association] about the off-loading of these difficult 
decisions and these funding cuts that are ultimately cuts, and 
they’re resulting in larger class sizes, less supports for our 
students, especially considering we have such a rise in English 
as additional language students in our classrooms, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s becoming a huge problem, especially in our city schools. 
It’s great; it’s a wonderful problem to have because it means 
that we’re growing as a community. It means we’re diversifying 
as a community, and that’s so important. But we need to make 
sure that we’re supporting these kids and that they’re getting the 
language training, for example, that they need so that they’re 
integrating into our communities and they don’t feel like they’re 
cut off from communities and that they’re . . . We need to get 
them involved and a part of our community as soon as possible 
because we lose them quickly if we don’t, and then they feel 
isolated. And we want to make sure that they’re integrating into 

the community as soon as possible and the funding in the 
schools is so integral to that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know my colleague from Regina Lakeview talks about it also, 
more eloquently than I do, but it’s a concern that we’re going to 
keep talking about. It’s resulting in teacher turnover as well 
because teachers are feeling the pressure, and they told me that 
all the time as a trustee. It’s not like I’m not hearing it anymore 
now as an MLA. Teachers are feeling undervalued. They’re 
feeling pressured in the classroom. They’re feeling like they 
have more and more . . . They’re being asked to do more and 
more with less and less, and when we don’t have enough 
supports, we don’t have enough educational assistants in the 
classroom, they’re really feeling the pinch. 
 
We also have a quote here from a concern that the U of S 
[University of Saskatchewan] president, Peter . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Stoicheff. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Stoicheff said. Thank you. In a Leader-Post 
article . . . Oh, it was a Saskatoon StarPhoenix article, sorry, on 
June the 5th, 2016, who also expressed some concern about the 
funding that was occurring. And he, towards the end of the 
article, stated that a zero per cent increase is not sustainable. 
And that’s what I’m saying when I say, well even if they’re 
painting something as not being a cut, it’s ultimately a cut. 
 
And it’s all about priorities, Mr. Speaker, and that’s the concern 
that we have here — asking these organizations to be austere in 
a time when they have been austere for the past couple of years. 
We know the clawbacks that happened to universities last year 
and the problems that we had faced, or that school boards faced, 
in the last couple of years in terms of being asked to be austere. 
We had an efficiency factor that happened to us — was that last 
year? Two years — that was just a baseline cut to school 
divisions, and now it’s happening again essentially. And that’s 
what’s not appropriate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s also a problem with the mean-spirited social assistance 
cuts. And I know we talked about this quite a bit, and we’re 
going to continue talking about this again because like I’ve 
been stating, with the seniors and the children, these are 
vulnerable people. We shouldn’t be letting the government’s 
mismanagement of their finances go onto the backs of the most 
vulnerable people in our community. Government is 
transitioning to social assistance with no wage exemption, and 
this has been described by some poverty advocates already, so 
already we’re hearing concerns. 
 
I’m looking at another StarPhoenix article, June 3rd. It was 
described by, this is the Regina anti-poverty ministry worker, 
Peter Gilmer, who I have a lot of personal experience with in 
my past life as a pro bono lawyer, and he’s very well respected 
in the Regina community, very well known as a great advocate 
for vulnerable people in our city. He described this as short 
sighted and worried that it would end up costing the province 
more in the long run, and he said: “A person on the TEA, the 
very first dollar they earn gets clawed back from their benefits. 
There’s no wage exemption whatsoever.” And then he says 
again, “. . . blatant cost saving at the expense of some of the 
most vulnerable people in the province.” 
 



June 8, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 437 

And that’s the problem, Mr. Speaker, this cost saving at the 
expense of some of the most vulnerable people in the province. 
And we’re not really sure how much this is actually going to 
save. When you’re off-loading and tiering, essentially, 
recipients of social assistance programming, you’re basically 
creating a situation where you’re saying some social assistance 
recipients are more deserving than others, and that creates a 
very, very difficult and complicated situation. And it’s 
essentially an ideological decision. It’s not a fiscally prudent 
decision. It’s ideological and that’s just not acceptable, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[16:00] 
 
The other concern we had about this budget, Mr. Speaker, is 
that we really find nothing in terms of a way to address jobs in 
the province. Unemployment is up. I believe it’s at 7 per cent 
now which is the highest in five years. I have particular 
concerns about this, Mr. Speaker. I have family in construction 
who have been laid off in the past six months. I have family in 
the oil and gas sector who are having a hard time finding jobs. I 
think everyone in the House probably has either personally or 
has family who have been affected by the drop in oil prices. 
 
But this shouldn’t come as a shock to anybody, the fact that oil 
prices fluctuate. I think it’s quite common sense. We should be 
doing a better job. And this government, I’d like to see this 
government do a better job of making sure that we’re not tied to 
the rise and fall of oil and gas prices. We have great people who 
are working in the oil and gas sector and they deserve to be 
thought of as . . . They deserve to be protected, essentially, Mr. 
Speaker. We need to make sure that we’re creating an economy 
and our government is working to create a situation where 
we’re not so tied to the rise and fall of these oil and gas prices. 
 
And the frustrating thing about this budget, Mr. Speaker, is the 
government is mostly just talking about investments that have 
already occurred or construction projects that have already been 
announced. There really isn’t much new in this budget, Mr. 
Speaker, so there really isn’t, from what I can see, any 
well-thought-out plan in terms of creating opportunities, 
creating jobs for people in the province. 
 
And I understand that we’re in a difficult time now because of 
the drop in oil prices but that’s a great opportunity for us to look 
at ways we can diversify our economy. There are so many 
different ways we could do that. We can look at other 
jurisdictions for examples. We’re seeing province after province 
put out very exciting climate change policies, creating more 
green jobs. It doesn’t have to be one at the expense of the other 
frankly, Mr. Speaker, and that’s what the members opposite 
keep seeming to want to argue. 
 
And that’s not the case. Right now when the price of oil is low, 
it’s such a great opportunity, Mr. Speaker, for us to really look 
at this and see what we can do better as a province. You know, 
we want to create, like we were saying in our campaign, we 
want more eggs in more baskets. I understand we lost the 
campaign, and I probably shouldn’t use slogans from our 
campaign, but I liked that one and I think it’s important. It’s 
important. Yes, it’s not about . . . We need more eggs and we 
need more baskets. I’m fine with that. I’m holding on to that 
one. 

The problem, Mr. Speaker, with what this government has done 
so far is it seems like, based on what we see in the budget, is 
that they’re just trying to white-knuckle it until the price of oil 
increases. Like, let’s just hold on and just hope we can ride this 
through for 12 months. And that’s not a fiscally prudent way of 
planning for the future. Like, that’s not how I plan for my 
future. That’s not how I’d like to see my government plan for 
their future as well — plan for all of our future, frankly. I think 
they could do better. I’d like to see them, you know, rise to the 
challenge. And you know, instead of trying to hope that the 
price of oil will rise, which maybe it will . . . but it may not rise 
to what this government had got to enjoy for the last eight and a 
half years. So let’s plan then. Let’s put some thought into this. 
Let’s figure out what we’re going to do for our future. 
 
Moving on to some concerns I have in my particular critic 
portfolios, which is what we’ve been highlighting in question 
period. We’re trying to get more answers, Mr. Speaker, and 
we’ll continue to ask more questions and hopefully get some 
answers. 
 
I’m looking forward to estimates so that I can parse this out. I 
have a hard time actually reading the budget, figuring out 
exactly where these cuts are, because there are actually . . . 
There’s real cuts in Justice, like there’s . . . I don’t even have to, 
you know, say that a slight rise is a cut. No, there are 
straight-up cuts in Justice. So I’m looking forward to the 
opportunity to spend some time with the two ministers opposite 
and get some more details about these in particular. You know, 
we’ve talked about this time and time again, and we’ll continue 
talking about it. 
 
We had a great gentleman in the House today to highlight the 
closing of the Buffalo Narrows correctional centre. And my 
colleague from Athabasca is doing a fantastic job of supporting 
them and standing up for them, and I know he’s going to 
continue standing up for them. It’s really important that we 
have good-paying jobs in the North, Mr. Speaker, and unique 
correctional facilities like Buffalo Narrows, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
minimum security prison. It allowed inmates to give back to 
their community. It allowed them to stay in the community, first 
of all, so that families could actually visit them, which is really 
important. 
 
If you look at the studies, it’s really important for inmates in 
terms of lowering recidivism rates, in terms of allowing them to 
reintegrate and hopefully not reoffend. Because that’s the whole 
point of our corrections system is it not, so that people don’t 
reoffend? And that’s what Buffalo Narrows gave them that 
opportunity to do. They were, like we heard today, they were 
shovelling sidewalks for elders. They were cleaning, picking up 
garbage in the community. They were helping and they were 
contributing, pulling firewood for their community. It’s such an 
important correctional centre. 
 
And then aside from that, they were great-paying jobs for the 
North, and we’ve seen so many crises in the North lately that 
are going unaddressed. We saw what happened in La Loche, 
and this government’s response hasn’t been to provide them 
with much other than closing a correctional centre that was 
providing great-paying jobs. And it’s a little offensive, frankly, 
to the workers to tell them that they can, you know, because of 
their, through their union and through their collective 



438 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2016 

agreement, they can bid into new jobs in different parts of the 
province. 
 
Well the great thing about Buffalo Narrows correctional centre 
is it was in Buffalo Narrows. And these families lived there. 
The families still live there. They want to live there. We don’t 
want to see this community break apart. And that’s essentially 
what’s going to happen once this facility closes. And I know the 
member from Athabasca is very, very passionate about this and 
he’s going to continue to speak on behalf of the community, 
and I’m so proud that he’s doing that. 
 
The other concerns I have about the cutting for funding for 
Aboriginal police consultation groups and the Aboriginal court 
worker program. I don’t understand, frankly, the logic behind 
that when the rates of First Nations people in custody are so 
much higher than they should be in proportion to the population 
in the province. So what are we doing to address this? We’re 
cutting programs that are dealt, that are created specifically to 
address these problems, so I just don’t understand what the 
logic is behind that. I had first-hand knowledge working with 
these organizations and the Aboriginal core worker program in 
particular in my past life as a lawyer. 
 
The other one that I’m also particularly alarmed about, and I’m 
hoping to get a few more answers in terms of exactly what has 
happened here, is the reduction in funding for alternative 
measures programming. So when we’re talking about a ministry 
that’s been priding itself on innovation and working on 
diversion and recognizing, I thought, how expensive it is, 
frankly, Mr. Speaker, when we put people through the court 
system . . . And cutting a program or reducing the funding in a 
program whose sole job was to divert people away from the 
court system makes absolutely no sense to me. Like the amount 
of money he might have saved in reducing this funding is so 
counterintuitive. You would save so much more money than 
you would have had to spend in this diversion program. 
 
And I just want to read . . . I’m still learning what this cut 
actually is and I’d like some more information, frankly, as to 
who this is actually going to affect. But these programs are so 
important and their strategies are so important that I actually 
want to read it out, because I want the members opposite to 
know what they’re actually cutting. 
 
So the main objectives of an alternative measures strategy, for 
example like the one that’s in Regina, is (1) to develop a justice 
system perceived to be culturally sensitive by Aboriginal 
offenders, victims, and communities; (2) reduce the 
representation of Indian and Métis people in the justice system; 
and (3) increase the proportion of Aboriginal people employed 
in the justice system. 
 
So I don’t really understand what the logic is here, and I’m 
hoping that the minister can explain this to me in the future. 
And I’m hoping that the reduction in funding isn’t what I think 
it is, which is going to cause nothing but problems in terms of 
our justice system in the province. And studies have shown, Mr. 
Speaker, that alternative measures programming has not only 
helped to divert people away from the court system, saving us 
money, but it’s also reduced recidivism rates. And I’m not too 
sure why we would ever cut programming that reduces 
recidivism rates, Mr. Speaker. It just makes no sense to me 

logically. 
 
I’m looking at a study that I just pulled . . . I’m sure there’s 
others. Unfortunately it’s a bit difficult to study and to actually 
quantify the impacts of recidivism rates in the country, and we 
don’t do a very good job, frankly. I’d like to see us do a better 
job in this province of keeping track of stats in our justice 
system and in our corrections system, and actually be able to 
see what we’re doing in terms of recidivism rates and how 
we’re actually impacting them. 
 
But this is a study called The Impact of Restorative Justice on 
Recidivism Among Shoplifters. And it’s a BC [British 
Columbia] study, Mr. Speaker, that the University of Fraser 
Valley did with the Chilliwack Restorative Justice and Youth 
Advocacy Association. And I want to quote from it, and it 
speaks to the impact of restorative justice. This is something 
I’m going to keep fighting for, Mr. Speaker. I don’t want to see 
any cuts in this area because it’s really going to affect 
everybody that’s involved in the justice system. 
 
I quote: “Restorative justice is a process whereby all the parties 
with a stake in a particular offence come together to resolve 
collectively how to deal with the aftermath of the offence and 
its implications for the future.” 
 
It’s based on principles of responsibility and accountability, Mr. 
Speaker, and I don’t know why . . . If anything, we should be 
putting more funding into this, Mr. Speaker. And this study, it 
looked at some rates of shoplifters and some shoplifters that 
went through diversion programming in Chilliwack. So 
convicted shoplifters went through diversion programming and 
what the likelihood of them convicting a similar crime in the 
future. 
 
So and I’m in a quote from this again, and I quote, begin quote: 
 

. . . that restorative justice has proven to be effective in a 
significant number of ways, including having a positive 
effect in reducing the frequency and the severity of 
re-offending. They also noted that there appear to be no 
inherent limitations in the types of cases that can be 
referred to restorative processes. 

 
So on top of a lot of concerns I have with this budget, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s one of the concerns I have the most. And I’m 
looking forward to getting some more details and figuring out 
exactly what’s going on here in terms of justice funding. From 
what I can see in the budget, Mr. Speaker, there’s no new grants 
for shelters, no new funding for domestic violence. There’s a 
slightly lowered funding to legal aid which is shocking to me 
because I know how overworked legal aid lawyers are in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. There’s a 3.6 million reduction for court 
facility capital expenditures, 7.5 million reduction in office and 
IT [information technology] for capital improvements. 
 
We shouldn’t have to be here, Mr. Speaker. We shouldn’t have 
to be making these kinds of decisions, and we shouldn’t have to 
be making these cuts as I spoke already about the need to 
diversify our economy and the need to not white-knuckle 
fluctuations in oil prices. We should also be saving. And I know 
the members opposite, maybe they don’t like saving. I’m not 
too sure, but they did drain the rainy day fund. 



June 8, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 439 

And it’s not just us that are saying that we need to reinstate that 
rainy day fund. And I’m looking now at another Leader-Post 
article, Bruce Johnstone, June 3rd, and he was arguing that we 
need to dust off the Saskatchewan futures fund. And he looks at 
the report that this government even put about the importance 
of a rainy day fund. And he said, and I quote: 
 

. . . we will never get off this roller-coaster ride of resource 
revenues rising and falling with the commodity cycle as 
long as we persist in spending all of our resource wealth as 
it comes in, rather than putting some of it away for future 
generations. 

 
So it’s not just the NDP making up things. Even respected 
business journalists in the province are saying that this just 
makes prudent financial sense. 
 
[16:15] 
 
I have more things I wanted to talk about, Mr. Speaker, but I’m 
going to wind up here. I’ll just say briefly . . . I already said it a 
little bit but there is nothing in here to address mental health in 
the North and that’s particularly appalling . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Actually, there’s nothing in here . . . You’re 
right. Thank you. There’s nothing in here to address mental 
health at all in this entire province. And there’s no new funding 
for that, and that’s concerning. And it’s something that’s going 
to affect us in the long term, Mr. Speaker. So with that, I’ll 
wind up. I understand my time is up. But like I said at the 
beginning, I won’t be voting in favour of the budget but I will 
be voting in favour of the amendment. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’m very 
pleased to have the opportunity to enter into the budget debate 
and participate in this important discussion of the issues 
surrounding the constituents of Saskatchewan Rivers and the 
province. But first I’d like to thank the Finance minister, the 
member from Regina Northeast, for his dedication to 
Saskatchewan, as well as the members of the treasury board and 
the staff. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as my colleagues and I stand in place and 
recognize the components of this budget and how it affects the 
citizens of Saskatchewan, I feel satisfied we are continuing to 
do good for the people of Saskatchewan. This budget 
demonstrates the government’s will to continue to stand up for 
the people of Saskatchewan and their needs. Mr. Speaker, this is 
a privilege to enter into the debate and discuss the many good 
elements of the budget and how it will benefit all of the 
constituents of Saskatchewan Rivers who have entrusted me to 
represent their concerns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House we can point to things 
that were done in the past by the government that have probably 
helped with the momentum that we seek for the Saskatchewan 
economy and for the interests of Saskatchewan residents. In our 
recent election, we asked Saskatchewan people who was the 
right choice to lead us into the economy, an economy that 
continues to improve on, maintain, and build infrastructure such 
as our highways in Saskatchewan Rivers constituency, 

Highway No. 263 in our beautiful lakeland area of Christopher 
Lake resort community that eventually arrives at our Prince 
Albert National Park and resort community of Waskesiu, a 
highway which will be safer, straighter, and more modern to 
suit today’s needs. 
 
Our government invested 89 million in rural areas to maintain 
the membrane surfaces and repair flood-damaged roads; 52 
million to replace bridges and culverts across Saskatchewan; 16 
million to support safety on rural municipal roads. Repairing 
will occur on Highway No. 2 north of Prince Albert. Repairing 
and repaving will occur on Highway 2 south of junction 
Highway 255. Repaving will occur on Highway 3 west of 
Crutwell. And repaving will occur on Highway 55 west of Big 
River. Thank you to our government. So our government is 
investing in Saskatchewan Rivers constituency in our highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the central point of debate today on the budget is 
sustaining our growth to fund health care, education, and fix 
roads. How do we keep the economy running? The role of the 
economy is to get the fundamentals right, to keep taxes low and 
competitive, to sustain the economic momentum for the good of 
Saskatchewan people. In this budget there is no tax increase. 
There is no new taxes. This year our government’s revenue 
sharing with municipalities will approach 272 million, more 
that 113 per cent since 2007. This budget will provide over 406 
million of direct provincial support to Saskatchewan 
municipalities. In our Prince Albert Parkland Health Region 
there has been a dramatic increase of funding since 2007, over 
74 per cent increase. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Protective Services Award 
recognizes 25 years or more of service protecting Saskatchewan 
people or their property. Our volunteer fire departments save 
lives and property of all our neighbours and friends in our local 
communities. Our public protective services providers and our 
first responders guard the citizenry of Saskatchewan, either as a 
volunteer or as a full-time capacity. Their role in our home 
communities is vital and appreciated in such communities as 
Big River, Buckland, Lakeland, and Smeaton. 
 
Our budget demonstrates keeping Saskatchewan strong and 
reaffirms our government’s strong commitment to 
municipalities. This budget provides over 50 million in funding 
to ensure services and facilities such as libraries and policing. 
Revenue sharing for rural municipalities, including hamlets, 
will total over 76 million, providing critical front-line services 
to rural Saskatchewan. The Candle Lake community has 
received an increase of 115 per cent since we formed 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I belong to an adopt an MLA program in which I 
was matched with this wonderful little family of two. Brian and 
his mother continue to remind me of why we are here, why all 
of us are here in this Assembly today. It’s very humbling to 
meet with Brian and his mother and provide for the people of 
the province who need some assistance. Brian has autism 
spectrum disorder and our budget will continue to provide 
at-risk children, youth, and their families with a continued 
commitment to make life better for people experiencing 
complex needs. These Saskatchewan families will benefit from 
over 16 million investment, providing such necessities as safe 
transportation and residential services to help people live in 



440 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2016 

their home communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan families in the constituency of 
Saskatchewan Rivers work hard and they live within their 
means as they expect their government to do the same, restraint 
on the government’s spending side with a firm commitment to 
living within its means. These principles are the guiding light in 
managing taxpayers’ money. Saskatchewan resources revenues 
annually fluctuate from one year to the next. The budget is 
about moving beyond the boom and bust cycle. This 
government is not immune to the turmoil that shares and shakes 
the world economy. Our government will be guided by the 
principles of discipline and fiscal responsibility. Our 
government will balance the need for fairness and the need to 
protect important services that support the economic strength 
we, the people of this province, continue to enjoy in 
Saskatchewan today. We will also continue to reduce the 
overall government footprint and find efficiencies throughout 
government to keep our great province strong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the constituency of Saskatchewan Rivers we 
have seen many positive changes over the past nine years while 
reducing the taxes. Parks such as Candle Lake has received a 
new service centre and additional campsites. Big River received 
funding towards a district community centre construction. 
Emma Lake, funding to replace the camp entry kiosk. The 
newly constructed Great Blue Heron Provincial Park has a new 
service centre and additional campsites. I urge all my colleagues 
and their families and their constituents to travel towards these 
parks and utilize them and enjoy the serenity we have to offer in 
our great constituency of Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
As government we have worked to improve efficiencies 
throughout agencies, boards, and commissions. Mr. Speaker, 
our government . . . as their government we’ve asked common 
sense questions such as, are these programs delivering the 
desired outcomes? Our goal is to improve results and, using 
creative problem-solving techniques, achieve positive results 
and a better quality of life for all our Saskatchewan people. This 
budget has been prepared with a great deal of discipline, a great 
deal of prudence and caution, something our government has 
always exhibited to the best of our ability.  
 
The hallmarks of our government speaks for itself. An 
important past initiative was implementing the greatest decrease 
to educational property tax in the history of this province. I 
think it was a very good indication of listening to what the 
people in rural Saskatchewan were asking for. And our 
government can point with a great deal of satisfaction that 
Saskatchewan people will always be listened to, especially by 
this government, Mr. Speaker. The farmers, the ranchers, the 
loggers of Saskatchewan Rivers constituency can rest assured 
that their investments and their needs will be in the forefront of 
this government’s mind, such as the past wildlife damage 
compensation program that was needed for years, and our 
government implemented it to the relief of the livestock 
producers.  
 
Mr. Speaker, agriculture still is the foundation of our great 
province. Saskatchewan has almost half of our nation’s farm 
land and agriculture industry accounts for over one-third of 
Saskatchewan’s total exports. This government has increased 
investment in our budget to a total of 389 million recognizing 

agriculture is a very important role to Saskatchewan’s economy. 
Mr. Speaker, nearly 40 per cent of Western Canada’s 11,000 
farm and ranch implement manufacturing jobs are based here in 
Saskatchewan contributing much to our economy. Our 
government will contribute to appreciate and value the 
backbone of our province which is agriculture. From crop 
insurance coverage levels rising, or 26 million for agriculture 
research, and support for 4-H Saskatchewan, and agriculture in 
the classrooms, our government recognized and is committed to 
building a strong industry by supporting farmers and ranchers. 
 
As always, Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud of our great province 
and the wonderful people in Saskatchewan. The path we have 
chosen for Saskatchewan is one of optimism, self-assurance, 
and hope. Looking forward with our confidence in our people, 
our resources, and our firm governance, I can only speculate the 
wonderful future the next generation will enjoy. 
 
We owe our thanks to the past generation. My father was one of 
the many that helped build this province. In fact I enjoy hearing 
his stories of catskinning on a bridge-building project in the late 
’50s, which employed many, many Saskatchewan people. Their 
stories are so inspiring to us as a province. The John 
Diefenbaker bridge crossing the North Saskatchewan River was 
built to last with excellent workmanship and expertise by men 
just like my father who incidentally was born to the first Red 
Cross hospital in the British Empire in the little village of 
Paddockwood, Saskatchewan back in 1929. 
 
Two years later my mother was born, 1931, in the same 
hospital. This hospital was built for the soldiers coming back 
from the First World War as they settled on the northern fringe 
in the area that I represent. So we have a nice monument there 
with a red cross on top of it and it means a lot to our family and 
the area and, as I would say, the province as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you know, I have a very large family and a 
growing family. We have seven grandchildren. And I was able 
to participate in a light horse show last weekend which is a 
prairie tradition across Saskatchewan as all the 4-H shows come 
along. So I had a toddler on my hip, holding a horse as they 
were getting it prepared to have the twins go into the 4-H show. 
So that was very enjoyable. It’s a lovely prairie tradition. 
 
[16:30] 
 
As well, on the long weekend my daughter was married in 
Saskatoon at the University of Saskatchewan. Her husband is 
Seth Barker. So Lacey and Seth Barker, congratulations on 
getting married, and I have another person to love in my family. 
So I’m very proud to say they live in Yorkton. They have a very 
good MLA. So Lacey is a speech pathologist in Yorkton, and 
Seth is a fireman. So Seth brings the injured to Lacey and she 
helps fix them, so they have a very good relationship. 
 
Our other children, Mr. Speaker, live in the province as well. 
Our next daughter, Brigitt, is a social worker/nurse who works 
for a federal MP [Member of Parliament] and she is married to 
a newcomer doctor and they reside in the city of Prince Albert. 
So they’re helping out the community there as well. Our 
youngest boy, Markus, is at the College of Dentistry at the 
University of Saskatchewan, so as I travel home I get to see him 
once in a while too. And our oldest boy is married to a lovely 



June 8, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 441 

lady who has a degree in agriculture, so she’s raising horses, 
cattle, and children. They have five. So, Mr. Speaker, I’m very 
blessed to be the third generation, have my children the fourth, 
and my grandchildren to be five generations on the same farm 
in Saskatchewan, and I can’t be more proud of being from 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a government that I’m very, very proud of, 
and I’m also pleased to be part of playing a small role in serving 
the people of this great province. I’m very proud to be here with 
my colleagues who, in their way and their skills, bring a great 
deal of expertise to Saskatchewan. So I am pleased to support 
this budget and expect the people of Saskatchewan to be very 
well served in times of restraint. And saying that, I will not 
support the amendment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To join in 
in a little bit of discussion, a little bit of discussion on the 
budget, of course. The government, you know, at the end of the 
day, wants everyone to believe it just . . . It was great. It’s 
wonderful. And that’s fine. I understand that their members 
want to . . . They drank the Kool-Aid Some of them had two 
glasses of it. And they’re doing exactly what they’re supposed 
to do. Everything, everything is the NDP’s fault. Everything. 
Let me remind you, not just one thing. Everything that’s gone 
wrong, it’s the NDP’s fault. They’ll take no blame. 
 
Yes, you can shake your hands. They’ll take no responsibility 
for any decisions that they make. It’s always somebody else’s 
fault, always somebody else’s fault. But that’s okay. At the end 
of the day, I said the election went on. The people of this good 
province spoke. You are the government. You now get to clean 
up your mess as well. But unfortunately we’re now seeing . . . 
And at the end of the day, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ll see as 
things roll out, as those people that are the ones that are going 
to suffer for this government’s budget. And they had lots of 
opportunity over the years — eight years, record revenue. They 
had such an opportunity, and I’ve said this before, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, such an opportunity to help Saskatchewan families, 
those seniors, those children struggling. They had an 
opportunity, but did they take that opportunity? But no. 
 
At the end of the day they want to blame somebody. Well you 
need to look back at yourselves and answer your own question. 
Is this to yourselves? And it should be to yourselves. Why did 
we make the choices we made? Why did we spend the money 
and lose money on some of the areas that we have lost money, 
on some of the initiatives that they have spent? And I’m going 
to go through some of those, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But at the end of the day, I want to talk about what’s not in the 
budget for some families, whether it’s in Saskatchewan, the 
North, the South, wherever the good people choose to call 
Saskatchewan home, and there’s many of them. But having said 
that, government likes to pat themselves on the back for 
everything that’s positive, everything that’s positive. But when 
families are struggling, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with some of the 
cuts that are coming, and we’re seeing some of the things that 
are coming out. 
 

I was hoping to see we’d have more money invested in roads in 
northern Saskatchewan. And I can talk about some of them: 
Highway 135, Highway 123, you know, Highway 102. We 
were looking at these different highways that are struggling, 
you know. And the list goes on, you know, 915, 915. We were 
hoping that we would see money for those announcements for 
those roads, for upgrades, correcting what needs we have. There 
are people travelling on these roads time and time again. 
Whether it’s petitions, over the years this government has 
known. We’ve made it well aware. Leadership has shared it 
with government, whether they’re First Nations, Métis, 
municipal leaders have talked about that. Community members 
have talked about the conditions of northern roads. 
 
When this government had record revenue to spend and to take 
care of some of the situations they could have, unfortunately 
they didn’t. And I’ll talk about those areas where they could 
have done differently, could have made better choices with 
Saskatchewan taxpayers’ dollars. It’s their money, but you’re 
entrusted with it. So at the end of the day, they can sit there . . . 
 
And you know, when you think about the Wollaston Lake road, 
and I think that for the leadership over there in their 
community, how they’ve asked. They’ve, you know, come 
forward to the legislature. They’ve asked this government time 
and time again, please address this. It’s about a safety thing. It’s 
about loss of life. It’s about making sure goods . . . 
 
And you know, you talk about climate change and whether it’s 
impacting . . . they’re saying it’s impacting on their all-season 
road that they would love to have because now they’ve got an 
ice road. But they’re not sure. An all-season road would allow 
them to have those opportunities to bring in goods and services 
that the community needs, to get out, to allow economics to 
come into the community. 
 
We talk about tourism. Government wants to talk about all the 
great things . . . [inaudible] . . . some of the opportunities why 
you want to work with those communities. We want to allow 
tourists to come into northern Saskatchewan. It is beautiful. We 
welcome people to come. Even members opposite, I would say 
come to the North. It’s beautiful. The people care. They’ll treat 
you well. The hospitality is good. 
 
But I’m telling you, Mr. Speaker, we have so many issues in the 
North when we look at the record revenue. And I want to talk a 
little bit about this because in this budget I was hoping there 
might have been, you know, a homeless shelter for La Ronge to 
deal with the North. That’s not in there. You know I was hoping 
that would be in there. 
 
I was hoping there’d be an announcement of a long-term care 
facility, you know. I was hoping that would be announced. But 
again year after year, oh we’ll do a study. We’ll do this; we’ll 
do that. But no actual plan to say here’s your announcement; 
you do have a long-term care facility for the health region that 
would cover not only La Ronge but Creighton, the east side. 
You know, to sit down with the leaders, Pelican, Sandy Bay, 
and have those serious discussions about what they need. And 
there’s many issues that need to be addressed. This government 
had the opportunity, and again in this budget I was hoping, you 
know . . . They’re spending a lot of money. They keep saying 
they’re spending. And they’re criticizing that, well you guys 



442 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2016 

want us to spend more money, but you don’t want us . . . You 
know, at the end of the day, they’ve made some choices. 
 
The government, they’re the government, and I give them that. 
The people said yes, you will be the government and you make 
a decision. You’ve made your choices. But now we see what’s 
going on when times are tough. You didn’t save anything for 
the rainy day. Everyone knows that, you know, those that can 
save and put a little away in this province. My grandparents 
talked about that, you know, about saving a little bit. You put a 
little away. You don’t spend everything. You make sure that 
you save a little bit so that when the hard times come — 
because they will come — that you can take care of it. 
 
And those members can heckle all they want, but at the end of 
the day, they made their choices. They made their choices. And 
it’s going to be our children, our grandchildren that are going to 
pay, and our seniors that are going to pay for the decisions that 
they’ve made. 
 
Now they can heckle and say all they want. I know that the 
people that I represent in the Cumberland constituency and the 
people in northern Saskatchewan have asked time and time 
again. Everyone has an opportunity. It’s a democratic society. 
They vote for who they want to represent them in this House. 
But government has to represent all people of this province. 
You’re supposed to govern all people and you’re supposed to 
take care of those individuals. 
 
Now the government can do some of the mean-handed things 
they’ve done by closing some of the facilities and taking away 
the mean cuts. And I say they’re mean cuts that they’re doing 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well how many of those did you 
reopen? Like that’s always their answer. You know always, 
always come back. Well let’s just see how many because I’ll 
tell you . . .  
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member from 
Cumberland currently has the floor. Other members have had 
their opportunity to debate. I would ask them to respect the 
member from Cumberland’s rights to enter into the debate. I 
recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Again I 
want to get back into some of the areas that are struggling. We 
look at some of the funding that has been neglected by this 
government and they have kind of turned their back on our 
trappers, our fishermen in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
There’s maybe been many organizations, people that are trying 
to have affordable living. You look at the cost of . . . 
Government has raised, whether it’s rent, utilities. You’re 
asking now and you can brag about, oh no more taxes, no tax 
increase. But every time you raise utilities, you put things back 
on residents of this province, whether it’s through taxes, water 
rates, utilities going up. It’s the residents that pay. So they do 
pay for it in the end for that service. You’re not giving them 
anything that special. You think you are, but you spin it the way 
you want to spin it. And that’s fine. But at the end of the day 
when it’s seniors that are having to pay more for their drugs, it’s 
children, families struggling. 
 
We see a poverty, you know, initiative that we thought . . . And 

I have to give credit, you know, where credit’s due. There was a 
discussion and I thought it was meaningful that, you know, they 
were going to tackle it and try, but no, no. That’s kind of been 
put on the back burner and we’ll see the comments about that. 
 
And you know, you talk about the different issues, whether it’s 
parks . . . Government made the cuts. It’s school divisions and 
health. Yes they say, oh no, we increased spending, we 
increased spending. And that’s fine at the end of the day to talk 
about that, but it will be those boards of education, health 
regions that will have to make . . . If there are going to be cuts, 
and I believe they’re coming, and we’ll see as they roll out. 
We’re hearing some of that stuff. We’ll see how the libraries 
do. We’ll see how the community-based organizations do with 
this budget. That’s all coming out and I think as things unroll, 
we’ll hear from those organizations. 
 
And we’re starting to hear some of the unhappiness about this 
budget, but the government likes to spin it that it’s all great, you 
know. And that’s fine. Put the blinders on and just keep saying 
it’s the NDP’s fault like you have been. I’ve watched it time 
and time again. Not taking no responsibility for the decisions 
they made, and some of the projects that they have wasted 
taxpayers’ dollars on, you know, where they could have done 
some good things. 
 
Not just in the North — I realize I represent the Cumberland 
constituency, and I will fight for the North — but our First 
Nations and Métis people. You know the First Nations and 
Métis people of this province, as we are in Treaty 4 territory, 
you know this government has an obligation. And they can put 
a little bit of dollars in here and there, but when you see the 
crisis going on in many First Nations communities, within 
Métis . . . If you see the challenges that they’re having to deal 
with as a leadership, and as I guess a community, when you 
look at the number of suicides, the addictions, it’s all 
throughout the province. Granted we have to do a better job, but 
there are some communities and some of our community 
members that are worse than others. 
 
And we talk about the correctional facility that, you know, they 
closed in Buffalo. Here is an opportunity to take Aboriginal 
people . . . And we keep saying, you know, at the end of the 
day, the numbers, you look at the population in our correctional 
facilities, as versus non-Aboriginal/Aboriginal people. Why 
would you cut programs that assist in trying to change that and 
try to work on that; identify that, saying okay, this is an area 
where we have to address. It’s wrong. 
 
What are their reasons why? Addictions, you know, is it 
addictions? Is it the way of life? What can we do? How can we 
as a government do better and help those residents, those 
Saskatchewan residents. It doesn’t matter if they’re Aboriginal 
or not, help those Saskatchewan residents to do better. So let’s 
invest into them. Let’s sit down with meaningful investment, 
and let’s consult with First Nations, Métis, municipal leaders in 
a meaningful way to sit down and have a dialogue. And like, I 
say this, I mean this with the most sincere that I could ever be, 
talk to them. Work together. They’re willing to work with you 
as a government. 
 
I’d be willing to work with you to deal with those issues 
because every time I go and see a family that loses a loved one 



June 8, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 443 

because of suicide, because of addictions, it rips your heart, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s one of the worst things to go and try to support, 
and I’ve talked about that. It’s a crisis, and we have to do better. 
We can’t put blinders on and say, oh no, we’re doing all we 
can. We’re not doing all we can. We have to do better. We owe 
that to those children that are left behind, to those mothers, 
fathers, those family members that are left behind to wonder 
what exactly, what could we have done? Could we have done 
better?  
 
I’ve talked about some of the challenges that some of the 
families face to get help, to try to take a loved one out of their 
isolated community. They just don’t have the resources to get 
there. And so many people turn away, and they’re frustrated. 
 
But again I’m going to go back to saying there are many issues 
that needed to be addressed in this budget. The government 
addressed some of the issues in some of the areas. Yes, we 
understand that. You’re responsible for education, health care, 
you know, social services. We talk about that. The government 
talks about all the great things that they’re doing. They want to 
pat themselves on the . . . There are some challenges. When you 
identify those challenges and the hurdles that are there that 
families are going through, you know, work with those 
organizations. You have to do a better job. You can’t just . . . 
Corrections, and I go right through the whole list, you know. 
 
[16:45] 
 
And I talked about long-term care, and again we have to make 
sure our health regions have the support by this government. 
Again no announcement, but here’s what they do have. I just 
want to give a little bit of this idea of what this government, you 
know, the Sask Party loves to . . . $2 billion on the Regina 
bypass. That’s one area they put money in. They made a 
decision. That was okay. But long-term care in La Ronge, the 
correctional centre in Buffalo had to close, programs for the 
court workers, aboriginal court workers, aboriginal programs 
that assist — those have to be cut. But we can spend 2 billion 
on the Regina bypass. Now maybe at one time it was 400 
million, now it’s $2 billion. Now they’ll say what they want. 
That’s okay. 
 
We talk about 1.5 billion on the carbon capture the government 
spent and the cost overruns that went on on that; if it’s a good 
project, that’s fine, but the cost overruns that went on. You 
know, you’re willing to spend that money there but not on 
seniors, on children in schools. And we see that on people who 
are the most vulnerable, you chose to leave behind. 
 
You know, we look at smart meter fiasco. Look at the money 
that was spent there. How that could have helped today if you 
would have put that money away in a rainy day account or 
whatever, if you would have saved a little bit of that money to 
help today when the tough times . . . to help our seniors, to 
make sure kids can get the medications they need. 
 
Now you know, the list goes on. And I’m going to go through a 
few of them just to make sure. You know, the GTH land deal. 
We’re waiting for that one to come out too. And we’ll see, we’ll 
see at the end of the day exactly on that. And we’re waiting for 
the auditor to do, you know, the final report. And I’m waiting 
patiently to see the dollars that were spent there on that land 

deal. I’m waiting to see exactly what comes out of that. 
 
Now you know, the other thing that you look at, P3s. The 
money they spent on P3s is unbelievable. We are renting them. 
That scheme, every other area of the province is getting out of. 
Every other place is saying, it’s a wrong way to go. It costs way 
too much money. They are abandoning it. This government is 
just, go ahead. Put the blinders on and just have at it. 
 
So these are areas where they have wasted so much of our 
taxpayers’ money. But now, yes, you’ve been elected for 
another four years. You get to clean up your mess. And I’ve 
said that, you’re going to clean up your mess. So at this point, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, you get to clean up your mess. It isn’t 
going to be the NDP that’s going to have to clean up 16 years of 
your mess . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Devine, yes. And you 
guys don’t like relating yourself to Devine, to the ’80s. It’s 
amazing how that is. Conservatives are Conservatives, but 
whatever. 
 
Having said that, at this point I’ve talked a little bit about things 
here, Mr. Speaker, and I’m prepared to adjourn, or actually I’m 
just going to wrap up here. And I will not be supporting the 
motion. I will be supporting the amendment. Thank you, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Before I 
begin, I’d like to do a few thank yous. I’d like to thank my CA, 
Mary Anne Telfer, and her husband, Don. I call them team 
Telfer, and they anchor the ship back in our office in Cudworth. 
 
I’d also like to thank my family, my children, and of course, my 
grandchildren. I’d also like to thank my wife — my partner, my 
friend, my strongest supporter.  
 
I’d also like to tell a little grandson story. The night of the 
election I was pleased to have my oldest grandson, who’s now 
four and a half. He was there with us watching the election, and 
his mom showed him that when grandpa’s picture comes up and 
there’s a little white square in the corner, when there’s a 
checkmark in there, that means grandpa won. So we’re 
watching this, and all of a sudden grandpa’s picture comes up 
with a checkmark. And he yells, Grandpa, you won! And a little 
while later they cycle through it and it comes up again. 
Grandpa, you won again! I won about six times that night. 
 
In order to save time, I will, shall we say, leap into my allotted 
time. I feel it is my Saskatchewan duty to address the Leap 
Manifesto that was presented at the national NDP convention. 
This manifest is an all-out attack on not just Saskatchewan, but 
all of Western Canada. It is definitely well-named Leap, for it is 
a giant leap, but a backward leap unfortunately. It would drive 
our resource-rich province back into the dirty thirties. 
 
My major concern is not which of our Saskatchewan NDP 
members did or did not sign or condone the Leap manifest. My 
question, Mr. Deputy Speaker, my question is why haven’t we 
heard even one of the other side speak up for Saskatchewan by 
speaking against the Leap manifest? There has been no 
comments from the other side. Why isn’t anyone from the other 



444 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2016 

side speaking up for our resources, speaking up for our future, 
speaking up for our children? 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s take a fictitious leap into the NDP manifest. 
In order to get there, we may have to go to Kansas and get 
Dorothy to lead us to the wizard of Leap. Or we could go get, 
see Tinker Bell and get some fairy dust. Mr. Speaker, let’s now 
return to reality and ask some hard questions of leap and where 
our Saskatchewan NDP members stand. 
 
My first question is of the NDP Ag critic. If Leap were 
implemented, how will we farm without the fossil fuels? No 
fuel for our tractors, and on and on and on. Of course, Mr. 
Speaker, the far left say, go back to the one-quarter farm and 
horse and plow. Well, Mr. Speaker, with 47 per cent of 
Canada’s cropland, can you guess how many horses and oxen 
that would take? That of course brings up another very, very 
serious environmental question: what are you going to do with 
all the methane gas? That’s a lot of horse gas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve just given you a brief glimpse of how 
implementation of Leap in Saskatchewan would affect 
agriculture in rural Saskatchewan. I would now like to take a 
look at Leap for urban Saskatchewan. With no petroleum, how 
do you get to work? Your electric car battery is dead because 
there’s no wind. Solar generators aren’t working because it’s 
calm and overcast. Everyone is upset because they can’t get any 
more plastic wrap to wrap their lunch in because it’s made from 
petroleum products, as are all plastic products. 
 
Something you may not really have thought about in urban 
Saskatchewan is paved streets. With no oil, well there’s no 
asphalt. The streets of Saskatoon and Regina would be 
converted back to gravel. Can you imagine the dust at rush time 
in Saskatoon and Regina when the morning commute or 
evening rush hour . . . Dust, dust that you couldn’t see. What 
I’m trying to show, Mr. Speaker, is that the NDP talk about 
taking a giant Leap into a black hole supposedly to save the 
environment, but end up destroying the Saskatchewan 
economy. People will freeze and starve in the dark. 
 
Enough said about Leap. We’ll let Disney Studios finish that 
horror story off in a fairy tale. It’s time to leave never land and 
return to reality. One last speaker, mister comment, on the Leap 
is, look before you Leap. 
 
Looking at the results of the election, I must thank the people of 
this great province for believing in what they have seen happen 
to our province, and showing their overwhelming support for 
the future of this province. The people of this province want the 
Saskatchewan Party to continue to move this province to its 
rightful place in this country. Under Walter Scott, our first 
premier, our province of Saskatchewan was the fastest growing 
province in Canada. Under our Premier, Brad Wall, and the 
Saskatchewan Party, we are finally back on the road to reach 
the potential that Premier Scott saw. The dreams of our early 
settlers, our ancestors, are finally being achieved. Yes, there 
will be some bumps along the way but if we keep working 
together we can keep Saskatchewan strong. 
 
Together we can weather any storm. In the past eight years we 
have already accomplished some amazing things. In my 
constituency of Batoche, we finally have, finally have the St. 

Louis bridge. It was a $60 million project that the NDP had on 
the drawing board for 16 years, but never got it done. We have 
seen the completion of the twinning of Highway 11 from 
Saskatoon to P.A. [Prince Albert]. The bridge at St. Louis and 
the twinning of Highway 11 are vital links to P.A. and area. 
They were much needed, not just for moving our resources 
south but to bring development and products north. Highway 
368, a vital link for jobs and industry that is a big part of three 
constituencies. 
 
Well the people of Saskatchewan have seen an amazing rebirth 
of our great province. We have moved from Lorne Calvert’s 
have-not province and wee province to a world-renowned 
province. We have great abundance of what the world needs. 
By managing our resources we can have things we need. 
Already we are building more highways and making repairs to 
the ones that were neglected for so long under the previous 
government. We are also building schools and hospitals. We are 
building using the P3 model, and the first one is done on time 
and on budget. 
 
But the best part, the best part, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that our 
children are coming home. Our high school grads are finding 
jobs here and building homes here. They are raising their 
families here. They are building a future here. Mr. Speaker, I’ve 
said it in the House before but I will say it again, the real proof 
is when you put your money where your mouth is. A lot of 
world-class companies have done that and they are well worth 
mentioning here. 
 
My favourite is K+S, a German potash mining company that 
was kicked out by the former NDP government — kicked out 
— and now they are back. Mr. Deputy Speaker, they were told 
to get out, but now after careful analysis of the political and 
economic situation in Saskatchewan, they are back with the first 
new potash mine in Saskatchewan in 40 years. They are 
investing a whopping 4 billion-plus into the project. Mr. 
Speaker, they are banking on Saskatchewan staying on this path 
led by a strong Saskatchewan Party government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are more. There are billions of dollars of 
investment, with a “b”. Edgewood Forest Products, Crescent 
Point Energy, Husky Energy, Weil Group, BHP, and the list is 
growing. More and more companies see a future here. It is not 
just the investment they make. The spin created is far-reaching 
in our province. It creates more and more dollars for our 
economy, for our people, and for our future. 
 
Thank you to the people of Saskatchewan for believing in the 
Saskatchewan Party and the governance of this great province. 
The people of this province understand the challenges we are 
facing due to global markets beyond our control. They 
understood that the budget would be a tighter one. They do 
understand that their province is still strong. They understand 
that the only way to the future is to move forward, forward 
through hard times, forward to a prosperous future for all of 
Saskatchewan, and forward to our rightful place in the 
Dominion of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is a true picture of Saskatchewan. We 
are doing what every Saskatchewan family does when times get 
tough: you tighten your belt. Mr. Speaker, we have now had the 
chance to see the budget of our neighbouring provinces. When 



June 8, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 445 

you compare these budgets, it is easy to see that we are better 
off, far better off. The main reason is because we have a plan, a 
concrete plan that still garners an AAA credit rating. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday the NDP member for P.A. Northcote 
started his speech on the budget by saying she expected more 
from the budget. That seems to be the theme from the other 
side, but not one, not one from the other side has said where 
they would get the money from. I suspect what they would have 
done, like former NDP Finance Minister Harry Van Mulligen 
said when he raised taxes right after the ’03 election, he said, 
you don’t talk about raising taxes during an election. Mr. 
Speaker, the most satisfying aspect of our budget for the people 
of Saskatchewan is no raising taxes. Mr. Speaker, thank you 
and thank you to the this House for the opportunity to speak on 
this budget, and I enthusiastically support this budget. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It now being 5 o’clock, this House 
stands adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 413 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 413 
  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 413 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 413 
  Bonk ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 414 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 414 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 414 
  Makowsky.................................................................................................................................................................................. 414 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 414 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 414 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 415 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Canine Hero Saves Life 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 415 
 Melfort Junior Citizen of the Year 
  Phillips ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 415 
 The Power of Culture 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 415 
 New Diagnostic Equipment at the Ponteix Health Centre 
  Marit .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 416 
 Miners Work to Achieve Mission: Zero 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 416 
 Golf Tournament for Childhood Cancer Research 
  Olauson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 416 
 Prince Albert Company Works on Regina Bypass 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................... 417 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Regina Bypass Project 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 417 
  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 417 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 417 
  Harrison ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 418 
 Government Usage of Consultants 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 418 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 418 
 Support for Education 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 419 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 419 
 Cost of Prescription Drugs 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 419 
  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 420 
 Aquatic Invasive Species and Ministry of Environment Strategies 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 420 
  Cox ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 420 
 Closure of Correctional Facility 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 421 
  Tell ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 421 
 Children in Provincial Care 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 421 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 421 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 26 — The Patient Choice Medical Imaging Act 
  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 421 
 Bill No. 27 — The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur les services de l’état civil 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 422 
MOTIONS 
 Committee Membership 
  Cheveldayoff .............................................................................................................................................................................. 422 
 
 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Merriman .................................................................................................................................................................................. 422 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 423 
  Cox ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 424 
  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 427 
  Bonk ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 432 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 435 
  Wilson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 439 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 441 
  Kirsch ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 443 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


