






















































Hansard: June 01, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 9A  WEDNESDAY, JUNE 1, 2016, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Hon. Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Hon. Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Merriman, Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 51; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Maurice Riou http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 241 
 June 1, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
would obviously take the rest of the day to introduce all of the 
guests that have joined us today, both on the floor of the 
Assembly and those that are in the gallery. So may I just say, 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government benches a warm 
welcome to all of our guests. I say this of course through you 
and through the Chair to all of them. We welcome them here to 
the Assembly to, well, watch question period, but I think 
they’re probably here for something else, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is their Assembly and meeting with us today here are 
community leaders who are quite literally involved in every 
aspect of life in the province of Saskatchewan in education, in 
municipal leadership, and in health care, and in business, in 
organized labour. And, Mr. Speaker, this is their Legislative 
Assembly on an important day in the life of province. So on 
behalf of the government benches, I want to extend a warm 
welcome to them to their Legislative Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, I’d like to join with the Premier in welcoming 
everyone who has joined us here today for an important day to 
their Assembly. Certainly what makes our province truly strong 
is its people — always has, always will. That’s on full display 
within this Assembly here today, an Assembly that’s filled with 
people that care deeply about our province, an Assembly that’s 
filled with those that contribute to all facets of our province — 
culturally, economically, socially, leaders from health care to 
business, through education, municipalities, rural and urban, 
First Nations culture, civil society, and more. 
 
We have an Assembly, frankly, that’s filled with common 
sense, compassionate, hard-working leaders from across 
Saskatchewan — innovators, creative thinkers, entrepreneurs — 
that make our province a better place. To each and every one of 
you, on behalf of the official opposition of the province of 
Saskatchewan, we say thank you for what you do to make our 
province strong each and every day. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Apology for Release of Information 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Before we 
get under way in the proceedings here, I’d just like to rise and 
apologize on behalf of the official opposition in the House for 
release of information concerning the opposition’s critique of 
the budget and thereby breaking our undertaking under the 

embargo, which we take very seriously. But as such, I rise and 
apologize to the House unreservedly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy House 
Leader.  
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
The official opposition House Leader referenced this, but there 
was a very serious breach of an undertaking earlier today. 
Confidential budget information was released to the public and 
to the media by the official opposition. This is a very serious 
matter, and the government will be looking into potential 
remedies for this. Thank you. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today again to present a petition to improve PTSD 
[post-traumatic stress disorder] coverage for all Saskatchewan 
workers. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that 
post-traumatic distress disorder can severely impact the lives of 
Saskatchewan workers, that delay in diagnosis and treatment for 
PTSD can be detrimental to recovery, that PTSD is not on the 
list of workers’ compensation illnesses presumed to be 
work-related in Saskatchewan, and that many workers today 
suffering from work-related PTSD are burdened by lengthy 
investigations and approval processes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Saskatchewan government to 
make the necessary changes to ensure that if Saskatchewan 
workers are exposed to traumatic events on the job and are 
then diagnosed with PTSD, it is presumed to be caused by 
the worker’s employment, and the worker will 
subsequently be covered under workers’ compensation and 
receive the same benefits as others with work-related 
injuries. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Prince Albert. 
I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’d like to rise 
and present a petition in support of funding for heritage 
languages in Saskatchewan. And we know that after 25 years, 
the Government of Saskatchewan is discontinuing all support of 
heritage language learning in Saskatchewan. Since 1991 
heritage language schools have depended on this modest 
funding from the Ministry of Education to help sustain their 
programs, and as a result of the announcement by the Ministry 
of Education, many of these non-profit heritage language 
schools will be faced with a difficult decision of whether they 
can continue to operate. In addition to providing language and 
cultural classes, these schools offer a welcoming environment 



242 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2016 

and crucial support for newcomers who are searching for a way 
to feel at home in their new surroundings here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to reconsider this decision and restore funding for heritage 
language education in Saskatchewan heritage language 
schools. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
Saskatchewan, here. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the signators, I’d like 
to present the following petition and draw attention to the 
following. 
 
In 2012 the federal government announced an end to the 
community pasture program that had operated under the PFRA 
[Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration] Act since the 
1930s. This Act was to restore marginal lands subject to erosion 
and manage them for livestock grazing. The land is being 
transferred to the Saskatchewan government, which has offered 
the pastures for sale. 
 
These pastures serve a vital role to species at risk, mitigating 
climate change, for cattle ranchers and their communities, 
preserving cultural and heritage values, and for recreational and 
cultural purposes. I will now read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the Government of Saskatchewan to halt the sale of public 
land with ecological value including Crown lands that, 
until recently removed by order in council, had been 
protected under The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act; 
conduct a complete inventory of our remaining native 
grasslands; create legislation that recognizes the value of 
our remaining native grasslands; and protect prairie, 
including monitoring and enforcing conservation 
easements preventing the breaking of these lands. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Saskatoon. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Argyle School Wins Environmental Society Contest 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, students at a school in my 
constituency are doing their part to protect our environment and 
to promote conservation. For a second year in a row, students at 

Argyle School won the Saskatchewan Environmental Society’s 
25 Acts of Energy Conservation contest for their efforts to 
make the world a little greener. 
 
The Environment Club at Argyle School under the direction of 
grade 7 and 8 teacher, Mr. Curtis Norman, made it their goal to 
connect with people from all over the world to improve the 
environment. Each student had to connect with someone from 
outside Regina to get them to send a picture or video of them 
doing good for the environment. Their efforts won them a 
$1,000 grant for their school which will be used for a 
water-conserving drinking fountain that keeps track of how 
much water is used and how much is saved, allowing students 
at Argyle School to continue their work in reducing their impact 
on the environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking the 
Saskatchewan Environmental Society for supporting this 
important initiative, and also in thanking the students at our 
Argyle School Environment Club and their teacher, Curtis 
Norman, for promoting conservation in Regina and around the 
world. Thank you Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Saskatchewan Supports World Partnership Walk 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past weekend I, 
along with the member from Regina Pasqua, had the pleasure of 
attending the 32nd annual World Partnership Walk. The 
donations to this walk help support Aga Khan Foundation, 
Canada’s programs in Africa and Asia. They will go towards 
enabling families to lift themselves out of poverty to create 
strong and vibrant communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the generosity of Saskatchewan people is well 
known. The people of this province should be very proud of the 
history in helping their neighbours in times of need. They help 
those living next door and they’ll lend a hand to help those 
halfway around the world. 
 
Globally the percentage of people living in poverty continues to 
drop, and we are proud as Saskatchewan exports are helping to 
feed and fuel the world. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has a spirit 
of community, and the continued support for this partnership 
walk is yet another example of that spirit. We have a long way 
to go in regards to ending global poverty. 
 
Seeing so many people come together with a common goal of 
building a better future reminds me of our provincial motto, 
“from many peoples, strength.” We must never take for granted 
the spirit of our community involvement, social responsibility, 
and global awareness that we see right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
I ask that all members join me in thanking the organizers, 
volunteers, and supporters of this walk. Their hard work paid 
off as their event raised over $130,000 in Regina on Sunday and 
over $4.7 million across Canada. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 



June 1, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 243 

Saskatoon School Program Promotes 
Intergenerational Relationships 

 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to recognize June 1st, Intergenerational Day, here in 
Canada, and to share with the House a bit about a Saskatoon 
school program that makes sure every day is intergenerational 
day. 
 
In its second year, Saskatoon Public School Board’s iGen 
program brings together a class of grade 6 students and the 
residents at Sherbrooke Community Centre. The students spend 
their time learning with the elders at this long-term care home. 
Sherbrooke has had a long-standing relationship with schools 
for many years; in fact, that’s where teacher Keri Albert got the 
idea. She was with one of those classrooms that did a project 
with the artist-in-residence at Sherbrooke saying, “I was blown 
away by the power of the elders and the kids together, the circle 
of giving and receiving.” 
 
After some further life, work, and education experiences, Keri 
proposed the idea of a full-time school program to Sherbrooke 
and both the long-term care home and the school board eagerly 
came on board to create iGen. The students cover everything in 
the grade 6 curriculum, just in a different way than their peers at 
other schools, and in conjunction with the elders at Sherbrooke. 
 
Jillian, one of the students, says that her time in the program has 
had a huge impact on her: “I like how it has shown us anyone 
can be friends with anyone, that things like age and physical 
disability don’t need to get in the way.” 
 
Keri sums up the impact of iGen well: 
 

The thing I always think about is the ripple effect. You 
take a student and an elder and it’s perfect on its own. But 
it’s not just the rock in the water. We have made ripples 
with teachers, community volunteers, and others. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Happy iGen Day. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 

SaskTel Aboriginal Youth Awards 
 
Mr. Parent: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise in 
this Assembly today to recognize the nominees and winners of 
the last week’s 18th annual SaskTel Aboriginal Youth Awards. 
Since 1997, the Wicihitowin Foundation has organized this 
awards night to celebrate the many achievements and talents of 
Aboriginal youth in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I was 
honoured to attend this event in Saskatoon as well as participate 
in the opening grand entry which kicked off the evening. 
 
The evening’s MC, Donnie Speidel, did a fantastic job in his 
role. I should also mention, Mr. Speaker, that Donnie is an 
accomplished Lakota singer, dancer, and choreographer who 
has performed all over North America and internationally as 
well. I also had the distinct pleasure of presenting the Spirit 
Award to an outstanding First Nations youth, Mario Ahenakew. 
 
Mr. Speaker, of the total of 89 nominees, other award recipients 

recognized throughout the ceremony included Jodi Delorme for 
community services; Maggie Eastman for culture; Shayna 
Uhryn for education; Emily Noon for fine and performing arts; 
Leah Boyer for leadership; Isabel Gagne, Outstanding 
Achievement Female; Liam Cummins, Outstanding 
Achievement Male; Kaylan Muir, Sports Recreation Female; 
Thomas Johnston, Sports Recreation Male; Joshua Fandrey, 
technology and science; and Victoria Penner for Saskatchewan 
Polytechnic Award. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 
congratulating the Wicihitowin Foundation for another 
successful event, and thank SaskTel for being the title sponsor 
since this event began and celebrating the award recipients for 
all their accomplishments. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 
 

Wood River Organic Food Company Thrives 
 
Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
recognize an outstanding company in the constituency of Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Allen and Marilyn Zak own and operate the Zak 
Organics Food Company from their more than 100-year-old 
family farm in the Fir Mountain area. The Zaks grow wheat, 
peas, lentils, and flax, all under strict organic standards on their 
6,000-acre family farm. Zak Organics sell healthy Crunchy 
Green Pea Snacks in three different flavours, all of which are 
certified organic and contain no trans fats, no cholesterol, and 
no artificial flavours or colours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Zak Organics received funding from our 
government through the Saskatchewan agri-value initiative. 
This initiative aims to help Saskatchewan agri-business that are 
seeking opportunities to collaborate on developing, 
manufacturing, or marketing value-added products which help 
to create a more profitable and competitive agriculture industry 
in this province. Thanks in part to this funding, Zak Organics 
was able to work with scientists at the Saskatchewan Food 
Industry Development Centre in Saskatoon to fine-tune the 
recipe and production techniques of their crunch pea snacks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Allen is proud that his company is able to grow 
their own product, process it, package it, and meet the people. 
They are enjoying it right here in this province. 
 
I ask all members to join me in wishing Allen, Marilyn, and the 
Zak Organics continued success in the agri-food business. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 
 

New Rental Housing Project Opened in Carlyle 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise to inform members of a new rental housing project that was 
officially opened in Carlyle last Friday. This Blue Oak 
Holdings Inc. project is a 12-unit rental housing development 
with six units subsidized for low- to moderate-income renters. 



244 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2016 

The development consists of four one-bedroom units with a 
den, eight two-bedroom units. Each unit is 850 square feet. This 
means 12 individuals and families will have new, safe, 
comfortable homes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is working hard with our partners 
to help those who are in need of housing. Together with the 
federal government, we contributed $240,000 to help create 
these homes. This funding was made available through the 
federal-provincial Investment in Affordable Housing 
Agreement capital rent subsidy program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, from November 2007 to December 2015, there 
have been 145 affordable rental units completed across 
Saskatchewan under the capital rent subsidy. Another 53 rental 
units are currently under construction with support from capital 
rent subsidy. In total, more than 3,600 affordable housing units 
have been developed with the assistance of provincial funding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Blue Oak Inc. contributed $1.8 million to the 
development in the form of cash, land, or mortgage financing. 
This project is an exciting opportunity for Carlyle as it allows 
citizens to live and work in a welcoming community. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Sorry. I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood. 
 

Saskatoon Crime Stoppers 17th Annual Golf Classic 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Friday I had 
the pleasure of bringing greetings at the Saskatoon Crime 
Stoppers 17th Annual Golf Classic at the Willows Golf & 
Country Club in Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, this Texas 
scramble-style tournament raised funds to ensure that Crime 
Stoppers is able to continue to assist law enforcement efforts in 
the Saskatoon area. 
 
Saskatoon Crime Stoppers is a non-profit organization that 
operates both voice and text tip line services which allow the 
public to anonymously provide tips on unsolved crimes. Mr. 
Speaker, the organization offers cash rewards for information 
leading to the arrest of people responsible for criminal activity. 
Crime Stoppers works closely with the Saskatoon Police 
Service, the media, the business community, and the general 
public in solving and reducing crime and in making the 
community safer. Since its launch in 1987, Crime Stoppers 
Saskatoon has helped police clear over 4,100 cases and recover 
over 6 million in property. Mr. Speaker, even its strongest 
advocates couldn’t have predicted the impact Crime Stoppers 
has had in Saskatoon. 
 
I ask all members to join me in thanking the supporters, 
sponsors, and volunteers who made the Saskatoon Crime 
Stoppers 17th Annual Golf Classic another success, and I ask 
members to also join me in thanking Crime Stoppers for the 
important work they do in Saskatoon and in communities across 
Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Well apparently everyone’s a little excited 
today, including the Speaker. I welcome the guests here today, 
and I just want to remind them not to enter into debate, which 

does include applause. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Government’s Fiscal Management 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, as we all look forward to 
finally seeing the budget, we have to admit that we have a 
Premier who really likes deficits. Sure he likes to talk about 
balanced budgets, but time and time again he delivers deficits. 
We all recognize oil prices make times tougher now, but even 
during the sunniest economic times he brought in deficits. In 
2010 he ran a deficit, then again in 2011, then again in 2012. In 
this past year, which will be his fourth deficit, over $1 billion, 
and he masqueraded it as something way less. And now he’s 
committed to deficit number five in his budget here today. And 
of course in each of those years, on budget day they stood and 
boasted of and claimed of a supposed balanced budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while revenues in this province have skyrocketed, 
this Premier still managed to drain the rainy day fund, add on 
piles, in fact billions, of debt, and didn’t save a dime. Why, Mr. 
Speaker, despite record revenues, was this Premier unable to 
balance the budget? Why couldn’t he get the job done during 
the best days? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I thank 
the member for the question, although there is so much about it 
that is just inaccurate and wrong, including his revisionist 
history about the budgets presented by this government, by the 
Saskatchewan Party government, which have been successive 
balanced budgets, Mr. Speaker, to this point, notwithstanding 
that the current year where we’ve moved into deficit for 
obvious reasons. 
 
That would be why I would expect that, Mr. Speaker, for the 
first time in the life, in the history of the province of 
Saskatchewan, we’ve received a AAA credit rating from not 
one but two different credit rating agencies. And I supposed if 
they were believing the account that the members opposite like 
to present, those credit rating upgrades would not have 
occurred. But of course, they have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also just say this, and we’ll get into the 
pre-budget question period debate. I’d certainly welcome the 
chance to do that. The House Leader stood before we began 
today to apologize for what is a very, very, very serious breach 
of the confidentiality of the budget process and of the budget 
embargo. That’s, I guess, one step to take. There will be others 
that we’re going to look at from our side of it. 
 
But in fact, it was the Finance critic, the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana, whose press release divulged details of the budget even 
though they agreed to the embargo. And we have not yet heard 
from the Finance critic. This is a very serious matter. I have 
never seen it happen. I’ve never seen it happen in this place. We 
have members that have been here since ’91. They’ve never 
seen it happen. It goes to the importance of how budgets are 
delivered and shared with everybody at the same time in the 



June 1, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 245 

province of Saskatchewan, and people expect more from all of 
us in this place. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, with the last portion, 
without a doubt this was a mistake that we regret, that shouldn’t 
have happened, that we take serious, and that we apologize 
unreservedly. And we’ll review it and work with government to 
make sure that never happens again. It shouldn’t have 
happened. 
 
But I’ll tell you this, Mr. Speaker, maybe on some other fronts 
the Premier should start taking some of his own advice. Back in 
2009, the Premier said, and I quote, Mr. Speaker: “Deficits are a 
lot like potato chips . . . They’re not very good for your 
long-term health and I bet you can’t stop at just one.” In fact, 
soon after he made the joke, he dug in like going for seconds at 
the KFC buffet. And you know, seems the Premier was right 
about one thing: once you pop, you can’t stop. 
 
Five deficit budgets despite years of record revenues, Mr. 
Speaker. Provincial revenue has skyrocketed. It’s now beyond 
$14 billion, Mr. Speaker. You know, the NDP [New 
Democratic Party] not only balanced the budget but had 
surpluses and invested in the rainy day fund with nearly half the 
revenue. Yet the Premier, yet the Premier couldn’t manage to 
do so despite having billions more. And he can check his own 
budget documents to find all of those deficits, Mr. Speaker. 
Why can’t this Premier kick his budget deficit habit? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand 
by that statement that they are like Lay’s potato chips; it’s hard 
to stop at just one. That’s why we’re in a deficit this year. We 
may well hear in a few moments that that’s going to continue 
for this current, the year that we’re moving into now, and then 
we will bring it back to balance in ’17-18. 
 
Mr. Speaker, much as the member for Weyburn and I think 
members on this side of the House were able to save that buffet 
at Weyburn, that KFC buffet, Mr. Speaker, we will continue to 
protect the finances of this province. We’ll continue with the 
kinds of policies that have delivered $2.7 billion in operating 
debt reduction for the province of Saskatchewan, $6 billion in 
tax relief. 
 
Members opposite like to ask, well where did the money all go? 
Six billion dollars back into the pockets of Saskatchewan 
families and back to Saskatchewan businesses that are creating 
jobs in the province of Saskatchewan. Where else did the 
money go, Mr. Speaker? How about $8 billion into 
infrastructure that has at least certainly helped pave the way for 
unprecedented growth that we’ve seen in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I think it’s that overall management of the 
economy and yes, the finances — I think that’s at least part of 
the story behind what happened on April 4th, Mr. Speaker, 
where we were able to win some seats. We’re going to work 
hard to earn those seats into the future by continuing to deliver 
good management for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, when you’re talking about 
the finances, the truth matters. And the record of this 
government is deficit after deficit after deficit, Mr. Speaker. 
And as far as where the money went, I think that all of the 
people in this room could name mismanaged project after 
mismanaged project that’s wasted their dollars by that 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you know, that government often likes to get into its 
revisionist history lessons. But let’s actually look back and take 
a look at some of the facts. Sadly, running deficits is what 
Saskatchewan conservatives, governments do. In fact this 
Premier’s former boss was no stranger to deficits. Devine 
racked up more debt than any government in its history. In 
under a decade he managed to put the province on the brink of 
bankruptcy, and it took years with the hard work of 
Saskatchewan people and under the government of Roy 
Romanow to clean up that mess. 
 
Yet years later we’re into a similar situation, Mr. Speaker. We 
see a government running massive deficits, piling on debt, and 
hiding their bad news from the public for as long as possible. So 
why hasn’t this Premier learned from the mistakes of his former 
boss? Why didn’t he continue . . . Why did he continue to run 
deficit after deficit despite having record revenues? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition 
wants to fight the election campaign all over again. These are 
the same NDP lines we heard for 27 days during the campaign 
and for the immediate run-up before the election campaign. And 
then . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well and he agrees that 
that’s the case, apparently. He agrees that that’s what they were 
saying during and before the campaign. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what people made a decision on, I think, in that 
election campaign in part is the recognition on the part of 
members on this side of the House that there’s more work to do, 
Mr. Speaker. We know we have more work to do, and in this 
case we know we have to get back to balance by ’17-18. 
There’s no question about that. 
 
But there’s also a record. There’s also a record of 
unprecedented growth in the province that’s been assisted I 
think by a government that would cut taxes by $6 billion. I 
think it’s been assisted by the fact that the government took 
some opportunity to reduce the operating debt of Saskatchewan 
by $2.7 billion, earning credit rating upgrades not just for 
people in this place but for the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. It’s why we took steps to increase infrastructure 
investment by $8 billion over the last number of years. 
 
And what’s been the result of all that, Mr. Speaker? The result 
of all of that has been the right economic environment to create 
60,000 new jobs in the province of Saskatchewan, and our 
population now higher than it’s ever been at 1.13 million and 
growing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:00] 
 
They want to talk about what happened in those NDP years. I’m 
happy to talk about that. We said goodbye to a generation of 



246 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2016 

young people. We bought luggage for graduation presents, Mr. 
Speaker. Those days are over for good. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, a record of deficit, of 
growing scandal, and a hidden budget from Saskatchewan 
people. Perhaps the Premier needs to be reminded of just how 
dire things were back in 1991. It was no laughing matter. 
 
By the end of that last mandate, that government was running a 
$1 billion deficit. They had driven Saskatchewan into debt to 
the tune of $14 billion and had us teetering on the brink of 
bankruptcy. Fortunately, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people 
worked incredibly hard to put this province back on track. 
 
They like talking about the past, Mr. Speaker, but this is one 
part of the past that they seem to like to ignore. Mr. Speaker, 
several members of the government opposite were part of that 
government and it seems now that we’re repeating that history. 
Why is the Premier repeating the mistakes of the government he 
once worked for? Why did he run deficit after deficit, add 
billions of dollars of debt, not save a dime, leaving 
Saskatchewan people very vulnerable in tighter times? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. Well I note that the 
question’s the same, and so the answer is going to be much the 
same as well, Mr. Speaker. And again we need to correct the 
record, and this is the case every time members opposite take to 
their feet in this place and ask questions in question period or 
participate in debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, the 
Finance critic — by the way, who we’ve not heard from in 
terms of the breach on the budget release — the Finance critic’s 
just referencing the auditor. Well the auditor, the auditor might 
disagree with her own leader’s supposition about what is a 
balanced and what isn’t a balanced budget, Mr. Speaker. I 
would make that point. 
 
Here is the major difference in Saskatchewan today over those 
NDP years: unprecedented growth, people choosing to come to 
this province to make their home in this province, people 
coming in every quarter — population growth. And the Leader 
of the Opposition references that we’ve had some declining 
growth in quarters because of the price of oil. Do you know 
what happened even during those quarters, Mr. Speaker? Our 
population grew. Our population grew throughout each of the 
last quarters over the last couple of years, speaking to the fact 
that there is attendant and real strength in this economy, that 
this is a province of opportunity, that we have turned things 
around from the days of the NDP government when people 
simply just left. You graduated, and more often than not, you 
just left the province. 
 
That doesn’t happen anymore in Saskatchewan. People are 
staying. People are coming to this province; 60,000 new jobs 
created; 114,000 low-income people dropped from the tax rolls; 
debt reduced on the operating side; new infrastructure 
investment; and $6 billion in tax relief. We campaigned on that 
in April. We’ll do so again . . . well who knows when, Mr. 

Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When this 
government came into power, there was a rainy day fund with 
hundreds of millions of dollars in it. And then they created their 
own rainy day fund. And that’s fine. Any financial planner will 
tell you that saving for the future is a good idea. Their Finance 
minister at the time said, and I quote: 
 

The reality is that in the wildly swinging income gyrations 
of the provincial economy, you need to be able to set aside 
funds in good years so that you can draw on them in poor 
years. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they put over $1 billion into it six years ago. 
Good for them. But now the province is reeling in a drop from 
resource revenue, and it would be a good time to use some of 
those savings. Except, Mr. Speaker, we can’t. The money is 
gone. So, Mr. Speaker, what happened? Does the Finance 
minister regret blowing the money when times were good? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — She just asked what happened, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ve been answering that question now in this question 
period, in the question periods that have preceded this day, 
throughout the campaign, and prior to the campaign. The 
money went to $2.7 billion worth of operating debt elimination, 
Mr. Speaker — $2.7 billion. That number alone outstrips any 
number she wants to portray as what may have been left to the 
government — by the way, which is to a large extent an 
exaggeration. 
 
Six billion dollars in tax relief. So on top of the $2.7 billion in 
operating debt elimination, $6 billion in tax relief. That’s where 
the money went, Mr. Speaker. The money went back to 
Saskatchewan families. The money went back to farmers who 
were getting . . . who were paying far too much in property tax. 
The money went back to job creators in this province, 
small-business women and men right across Saskatchewan. 
That’s where the money went. 
 
But you can understand why that would not be good enough for 
the NDP or would not be agreeable for the NDP. That a 
government would say, look there is some good fortune in the 
economy today and so we’ll pay off some debt and we’ll build 
some infrastructure, and importantly, we’ll give money back to 
the people of the province whose money it was in the first 
place. 
 
Because they took a different tact in government. They raised 
taxes in their 16 years in government 21 times, Mr. Speaker. 
And I would suggest to that member opposite and to the Leader 
of the Opposition that that might explain the current seating 
configuration in this Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What the Premier is 



June 1, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 247 

failing to mention is that he also increased debt $5 billion in the 
last year. The fact is, Mr. Speaker, they had over $1 billion in 
the rainy day fund and now it’s not there. So where did it go, 
Mr. Speaker? Despite years of record revenues, this government 
drained it. 
 
In 2010 the fund had over $1 billion in it. By 2014 that fund 
was down to 600 million. During some of the province’s 
sunniest days, they were using that fund. In their last budget, 
Mr. Speaker, the fund was down to just $190 million, just a 
fraction of what was there just six years before. So will the 
minister admit that they were wrong and apologize to the 
people of Saskatchewan for dipping into the fund when times 
were good, and leaving a fund meant for tough economic 
situations — situations like the one this province is in now — 
with nothing, with nothing? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if I quite heard 
that right. I was going through the NDP costing document from 
the last election and it’s a pretty distracting document. But I 
think that member just asked the Finance minister to apologize. 
That member, who in an unprecedented way, a way I have 
never seen, has breached the privilege of every member in this 
House and broken an undertaking and embargo to keep the 
budget confidential. I expect she would be the last person in this 
Assembly to be demanding an apology, on this day, of someone 
else. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, with respect to borrowing, with respect to 
borrowing for capital, I have in my hand page 10 of the NDP 
costing document from the last election. Mr. Speaker, it looks 
as if . . . It doesn’t look as if. The fact of the matter is, they’re 
going to use, they were going to use, if elected, the exact same 
accounting per capita and operating as the Government of 
Saskatchewan uses, and as the Minister of Finance will rise on 
his feet and use in a few moments. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, towards the end of the document they 
acknowledge that, “we anticipate that some borrowing will be 
required for the capital requirements.” They even put a number, 
they even put a number on it, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Well it’s exactly the same approach. The 
Leader of the Opposition, caught again on his own information 
and saying, well at least we were going to be honest about it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this has been a fact of every . . . of the last number 
of budgets for the province of Saskatchewan. This approach to 
budgeting is used by the NDP in Alberta, used by the 
Government of British Columbia, used in the budget yesterday 
by the province of Manitoba. It was going to be used by the 
NDP if, heaven forbid, they were ever elected, and it’s been 
used by the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the 
Finance critic might want to become familiar with their own 
costing document in the last election before she asks these 
questions and most assuredly before she demands any 
apologies. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, that’s the reason why we’re 
having a budget on June 1st because you, sir, hid the budget 

from the people of Saskatchewan. That is the bottom line. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year the Finance minister shed a tear and 
announced that we could expect a $107 million surplus for 
2015-2016 — a $107 million surplus, great news. But the other 
day in the building, the Minister of Education scooped the 
Finance minister and announced that there’s a $1 billion 
shortfall. And, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan families will have to 
suffer cuts to the services that they need. 
 
What changed between March 2015 and today? Can the 
Minister of Finance even tell us if the price of oil is higher 
today than it was for the budget in 2015? What was the price of 
oil when they tabled their last budget? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Finance critic wasn’t able 
to explain why the NDP are advocating that this government 
adopt a costing process and a budgeting process different from 
what they campaigned on. Maybe the Deputy Leader can, the 
newly minted Deputy Leader of the NDP, this would be a good 
time for him to stand up and explain page 10 and 11 of their 
costing document where they separate operating revenue in the 
government from capital. And they readily admit, right here in 
black and white, that if they were ever elected, they’d finance 
capital. 
 
You know what else . . . By the way, Mr. Speaker, there’s 
nothing wrong with that. That’s what every other province in 
the Dominion of Canada is doing. And that explains, precisely, 
by the way, the balance that we’re going to have in ’17-18 and 
whatever the Minister of Finance is about to announce in a few 
minutes with respect to the current year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the premise of the question though is interesting. I 
think the Deputy Leader is suggesting that there’s no 
explanation for why things might be difficult financially in the 
province today. Mr. Speaker, oil prices have softened. Potash 
prices have softened . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well he 
says, well we knew that before. But it’s still the case today 
though, Mr. Speaker, and so we still know it today. Because we 
checked, I think I checked this morning and it was $49.07 West 
Texas for a moment; I don’t know what it is, so it’s still . . . The 
same thing that was causing difficulty a little while ago, I’d say 
to the member, through you, Mr. Speaker, is still the challenge 
today. 
 
The good news is we’re going to meet that challenge. The good 
news is we’ll engage with third parties across this province, 
with stakeholders, in transformational change. We will deliver a 
balanced budget in ’17-18. And what the minister delivers here 
in a few moments is the first step towards a return to balance in 
that year. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — The fundamental question I have for the 
Premier is, why are we having budget day on June 1st? Because 
this Premier chose to hide the budget from the people of 
Saskatchewan. That is the bottom line, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s a lot of nonsense over there. That side knows full well 



248 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2016 

that the price of oil has hardly changed from last year. 
 
But here’s something that has changed. According to Stats 
Canada, there are 9,400 fewer full-time jobs in Saskatchewan 
than this time last year — 9,400 jobs in one year under this 
government, Mr. Speaker. It’s bad news to be sure, and it 
speaks of how this government has failed to properly diversify 
the economy and create steady growth in the province. 
 
More bad news is that the number of Saskatchewan people 
receiving EI [employment insurance] benefits is up a whopping 
31 per cent, Mr. Speaker, from the first quarter of 2015. 
Another sign of a government that has mismanaged record 
revenue. Again, to the minister: what does he have to say — or 
the Premier — to all those former full-time employees? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister in charge of 
Immigration, Jobs, Skills and skills training. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Let’s review the facts. Saskatchewan continues to have the 
third-lowest unemployment rate in the entire country. For most 
of the last two years, we’ve had the lowest unemployment rate 
in the entire country. From 2007 to ’15, we created 68,000 jobs 
in this province which is a record never surpassed, Mr. Speaker, 
over that same period of time. 
 
And it’s important to point out as well, the previous eight years, 
Mr. Speaker, what did we see under the NDP? We saw people 
leaving. We saw the population actually go down over those 
previous eight years. We saw people losing their jobs. As the 
Premier referenced, we saw our young people having to leave 
 
I know when I graduated, a lot of my friends, they got luggage 
for a graduation present, Mr. Speaker, because they had to leave 
to find employment. That’s not the case today in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. People have opportunity right here at home. We 
have the highest population that we have ever had in the history 
of this province, and we’re continuing to move forward. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Again, Mr. Speaker, the bottom line is they 
hid the budget from the people of Saskatchewan. Why doesn’t 
he tell that to the 3,500 full-time workers who lost their job in 
construction this past year? Why doesn’t he tell that to the 
1,100 full-time workers that lost their jobs in the mining sector 
or the 900 in the manufacturing sector, or the fully one in four 
off-reserve First Nations people that are unemployed? And it 
gets even worse on-reserve, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Instead of growing and diversifying the economy, this 
government has been busy shipping out jobs and projects out to 
out-of-country and out-of-province companies. We’re seeing 
companies from France building the bypass and teaching the 
. . . [inaudible] . . . how to properly run a snowplow across it. 
 
And Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing a company from the UK 
[United Kingdom] build the North Battleford hospital and 
charging $4.6 million a year to maintain it. What is wrong with 
the Saskatchewan workers, Mr. Speaker? And to the minister, 
when can Saskatchewan workers expect real action on jobs? 
 

[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, once again in the premise of 
his question he wants to talk about, where was the budget? Why 
wasn’t the budget released during the campaign? And by the 
way, that issue was well canvassed in the election . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . And now the member is heckling from his seat, 
and he said, well you didn’t have the courage to release it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Here’s a question for the NDP: how come they didn’t have the 
courage to acknowledge that some of them were going to go 
and support the Leap Manifesto in Edmonton? How come they 
didn’t tell anybody that? How come they didn’t come square 
with those same workers and mines in this province, northern 
workers, people in the oil and gas industry, that their Finance 
critic would go to Edmonton and support in principle — 
because that’s what she voted for — support in principle the 
Leap Manifesto which would destroy the Saskatchewan 
economy? 
 
Here’s why, here’s why they wouldn’t . . . Well, now they’re 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . They’re all yelling now, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re all yelling now. Here’s why they wouldn’t say 
that prior to the campaign: because had they said that, the 
member that asked the question would be the only one sitting 
over there. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite may 
not take these job losses seriously, but the people of 
Saskatchewan certainly do. And the members on this side will 
never stop standing up for the workers of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are 5,200, 5,200 fewer educational jobs than 
last year. And these losses have a profound impact on our kids. 
Mr. Speaker, education is amongst the last places that 
Saskatchewan families should be seeing job losses. The reality 
is that classrooms are overcrowded and teachers can’t give 
students the attention that they need and they deserve. Mr. 
Minister, how can you expect these enormous job losses in 
education not to have a negative effect on Saskatchewan 
students and teachers? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister in charge of 
Immigration, Jobs, Skills and Training. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Again, here are the facts: Saskatchewan’s employment from 
2007 to 2015 increased by 68,800 full-time jobs, Mr. Speaker 
— a record in stark contrast with the New Democrats when they 
were in office when we saw job losses and people leaving the 
province. And as the Premier just referenced, Mr. Speaker, the 
Finance critic supports in principle the Leap Manifesto, as do a 
number of other New Democrats in that party over there. 
 
What does the Leap Manifesto call for, Mr. Speaker? They call 
for an end to modern agricultural practice, Mr. Speaker. They 
call for an end to energy development. They call for no more 



June 1, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 249 

pipelines to be built, ever. 

Mr. Speaker, this party will stand for economic growth. This 
party will stand for economic development every day of the 
week. 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND 
SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Finance minister. 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
is my pleasure to submit the estimates and supplementary 
estimates accompanied by a message from Her Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor. 

The Speaker: — Would you please rise for the message from 
the Lieutenant Governor. The message is as follows: 

The Lieutenant Governor transmits estimates of certain 
sums required for the service of the province for the 12 
months ending March 31st, 2017, and supplementary 
estimates — March of certain sums required for the service 
of the province for the 12 months ending March 31st, 
2016, and recommends the same to the Legislative 
Assembly. 

The Honourable Vaughn Solomon Schofield, Lieutenant 
Governor, province of Saskatchewan. 

I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I want to 
join the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition in welcoming 
all of the visitors here to the Legislative Assembly today on 
budget day. I am honoured to rise today to present our 
government’s 2016-17 budget, my first as the Minister of 
Finance in this government, Mr. Speaker. 

Before I do, Mr. Speaker, if you’ll indulge me and colleagues 
will indulge me just to make a couple of personal introductions 
of some family and friends I have here. I would like to 
introduce my mother, Lenora Doherty, who has joined us here 
today. Mom is the mother of six children, I being one of six 
children. She is by far the bedrock of our family, and I’m glad 
to have you here today, Mom. 

I’m joined as well by one of my sisters. I have four sisters, Mr. 
Speaker, and an older brother, and my sister Maureen is the 
youngest. Well she’s a twin, so the two of them are the 
youngest in the family. She’s an RCMP [Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police] officer serving the people of Saskatchewan in 
Wadena and is being transferred to North Battleford here 
shortly, so I’m delighted she could join us today, Mr. Speaker. 

My partner, Nancy, is here. And Nancy makes everything better 
in my life, Mr. Speaker, and I’m delighted that she could be 
here today as well. Nancy is also the mother of two wonderful, 

amazing kids. Her son, Ryder, is going into his third year at the 
University of Saskatchewan, his first year at the Edwards 
Business School, Mr. Speaker. He’s worked very, very hard to 
get into that. He had to work today so he couldn’t be here today, 
Mr. Speaker, but I want to acknowledge her son, Ryder. 

And joining us as well is her daughter, Libby. Now Libby is a 
grade 12 student at A.E. Peacock School in Moose Jaw, 
graduating at the end of this month, Mr. Speaker. She has 
maintained in excess of a 98 per cent average during her entire 
school career. She’s been chosen as the valedictorian for her 
graduating class at the end of June, and she is an outstanding 
athlete, Mr. Speaker, primarily in basketball. She was probably 
the most highly recruited point guard in all of Canada this past 
year by a number of universities. And when all is said and done, 
she has chosen to go to the University of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, and play for the defending national women’s 
basketball champions, the University of Saskatchewan Huskies 
under coach Lisa Thomaidis. So we’re delighted Libby could 
join us here today. 

As well, Mr. Speaker, I have some special guests that are 
joining us, seated on the floor of the gallery here. They would 
be no strangers to this Assembly. They are three gentlemen who 
have been members of this Assembly, and all of them former 
Finance ministers. We are joined here today, Mr. Speaker, by 
Rod and Carole Gantefoer, the former member from Melfort. 
Thank you very much for being here today, Rod. 

We’re also joined by somebody who I’m sure wanted to get into 
the debate a little bit during question period but kept his tongue 
to himself. The Hon. Ken Krawetz and his wife, Gail Krawetz, 
are here today as well, Mr. Speaker. And I am delighted that a 
gentleman who I worked for many, many years ago, who taught 
me an awful lot about politics and brought me into this building 
to begin with, the Hon. Lorne Hepworth, the former member 
from Weyburn, is here today, Mr. Speaker. And I am delighted 
he could be here today. These three gentlemen, Mr. Speaker, 
personified the word honourable, and they gave a long portion 
of their professional lives in serving the people of 
Saskatchewan. I am delighted that they could be here today and 
join in these proceedings. 

Mr. Speaker, our government’s vision continues to be for 
Saskatchewan to be the best place in Canada to live, to work, to 
start a business, to get an education, to raise a family, to build a 
life. To accomplish that, we need to sustain growth and 
opportunities for Saskatchewan people. We need to meet the 
challenges of growth. We need to secure a better quality of life 
for all the people of this great province, and we need to deliver 
responsive and responsible government. This budget, Mr. 
Speaker, will keep Saskatchewan strong by keeping taxes low 
and by controlling operational spending and by continuing to 
make key investments in infrastructure and in government 
services for Saskatchewan people. 

Mr. Speaker, true strength emerges in challenging times. Today 
we are faced with a fragile world economy, coupled with sharp 
declines in oil and potash prices. This poses considerable 
challenges to our province’s economy, its finances, and its 
people. But the people of Saskatchewan are not daunted by 
challenges, Mr. Speaker, not by any type. Together we will 
meet these challenges. This budget builds on the foundational 



250 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2016 

strengths that we have developed over the past eight years, 
those strengths being lowering taxes, investing in people, 
investing in infrastructure, and paying down debt, all to keep 
Saskatchewan strong. We will continue to manage spending 
wisely and we will continue to keep taxes low. 
 
More than 1.14 million children, women, and men — the most 
people in our province’s history — now call Saskatchewan 
home. Last year more people were employed in this province 
than ever before. Our unemployment rate remains one of the 
lowest in Canada, but sustaining our province’s economic 
strength and population growth will be a challenge in the 
shorter term. Continuing low prices for oil and potash is putting 
pressure on revenue, unemployment, and on our province’s 
economy generally. 
 
You can shrink from the type of challenges we are now facing 
in Saskatchewan or you can turn them into opportunities. 
Starting this year, Mr. Speaker, we are commencing a 
government-wide process of transformational change. Our goal 
is to ensure the sustainability of high-quality public services 
delivered in the most efficient, cost-effective way possible. To 
ensure those services remain viable in the long run, everything 
government does will be studied. Every expense will be 
scrutinized. 
 
Change is never easy. Transformational change cannot be 
achieved overnight, and it cannot be accomplished by 
government alone. It will require making difficult decisions, 
beginning with this budget, but also in the years and budgets 
ahead. It will require all of government’s partners, including our 
public sector employees and unions and our third-party 
stakeholders, to work together as changes are made to meet the 
needs of the people of this province. 
 
And as part of transformation, important questions will be 
asked about every program, initiative, and expenditure. 
Questions like, is this program or service the role of 
government? Is it something we should be doing? If so, is it 
being delivered in the best possible manner at the lowest 
possible cost to taxpayers? Where similar programs with similar 
objectives exist, can those multiple programs be combined into 
one that provides better results at less cost? Could a different 
governance model provide administrative savings while still 
remaining responsive to the needs of Saskatchewan people? 
 
For example, Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of Health will examine 
whether there are administrative efficiencies and savings to be 
achieved by reducing the number of health regions. The 
Ministry of Social Services will review its suite of income 
assistance programs and services in order to make them simpler 
to administer, sustainable, and easier for clients to understand 
while still providing the support to people in need. It could even 
involve looking at the space government and its agencies 
occupy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will also take a deep look at government’s 
sources of revenue. The overall objectives of our province’s 
revenue system must always be to keep Saskatchewan strong by 
keeping our economy strong, and to ensure government 
revenues are sufficient to ensure important programs and 
services are sustainable now and in the future. That includes a 
tax system that is competitive, simple, and fair for all 

Saskatchewan taxpayers. Those will be the principles of any 
changes to our tax system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this will be an iterative process, beginning but 
certainly not ending this fiscal year. Even with the current 
challenges, Saskatchewan enjoys a strong economic foundation. 
Last year, despite challenges in oil and potash, our province has 
exported $32.6 billion in goods to countries around the world, 
the second-highest exports total in our history. 
 
Shipments to China and India were up 18 and 60 per cent 
respectively in 2015, and we exported goods to more than 150 
countries in total. Saskatchewan’s agri-food sector led the 
charge with more than $15 billion in exports this past year. That 
exceeded the ambitious target laid out in the Saskatchewan plan 
for growth to export $15 billion of agri-food products by 2020, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our strength as an exporter of goods around the world will 
continue. Nearly three-quarters of Saskatchewan’s Trade and 
Export Partnership members are forecasting an increase in 
exports in 2016. We are a trading province, Mr. Speaker, and as 
such we ought to support efforts to expand trade partnerships 
around the world. 
 
Our growing population is another economic pillar on which we 
can build. Last year, Saskatchewan’s population growth was the 
third highest amongst provinces, and our unemployment rate 
was the lowest in Canada. Still, the impact of low oil prices has 
been felt. Oil producers have cut production and investment, 
contributing to a decline in real GDP [gross domestic product] 
last year in Saskatchewan. Our GDP is forecasted to climb by 
point six per cent this year but, Mr. Speaker, with a return to 
growth of 2.5 per cent forecast in calendar 2017. And so our 
province’s economy is expected to rebound as it has in the past. 
 
Following the global financial crisis of 2008, Mr. Speaker, in 
the five-year period beginning in 2010, Saskatchewan’s real 
GDP growth averaged 3.9 per cent per year. Our ability to 
weather the storm is a testament to our province’s economic 
strength, resilience, and diversity. This budget strives to further 
strengthen and diversify our economy, investing prudently in 
people and infrastructure to keep Saskatchewan strong. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget forecasts total revenue this coming 
fiscal year of $14.02 billion and total expense of about $14.46 
billion. That combines for a projected deficit in 2016-17 of 
$434 million. This deficit is not due to large increases in 
spending, Mr. Speaker. In fact, the expense side of the 2016-17 
budget is up just 2 per cent. By far the biggest factor in this 
year’s deficit is a drop in resource revenues of nearly $1 billion. 
That decrease is offset somewhat by higher own-source 
revenue, including expected net revenue of $148 million from 
land sales this fiscal year. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan is getting out of the farm 
land ownership business and getting these lands into the hands 
of producers, Mr. Speaker. Net income from government 
business enterprises is also up by about $180 million. This is 
largely due to better bottom lines forecast at the Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority, the commercial Crown 



June 1, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 251 

corporations, and the Saskatchewan Auto Fund. And higher 
transfers from the federal government are included, notably 
$200 million related to the transfer of federal dams to our 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, part of weathering the storm means continuing to 
invest where Saskatchewan people need it most — in health 
care, in education, social services. That’s why our government 
has opted for a manageable deficit in this budget rather than 
drastically cutting funding to those priority areas. 
 
There are years with unforeseen events. Drops in the price of oil 
or potash or costly natural disasters make it prudent to run a 
manageable deficit rather than implement severe cuts to 
programs and services or increase taxes on Saskatchewan 
people, both of which could further shock our economy. This, 
Mr. Speaker, is one of those years. However we are committed 
to returning the budget to balance by 2017-18. That is our goal 
and that is our plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government understands that low taxes are a 
key element of a strong economy. Low taxes attract investment 
and new economic activity and help create jobs. Since taking 
office, our government has cut the tax burden on Saskatchewan 
people and businesses by close to $6 billion in total. As a result, 
our province now has among the lowest personal and business 
tax rates in all of Canada. Our government remains committed 
to keeping taxes low, especially during this challenging 
economic time. Mr. Speaker, in keeping with the Premier’s 
commitment during the recent election campaign, this budget 
contains no tax increases and no new taxes. 
 
This budget does contain two tax credit changes, Mr. Speaker. 
To help post-secondary graduates stay in the province and 
afford a home, we have introduced the graduate retention 
program first home plan. The graduate retention program is one 
of the most aggressive youth retention programs in all of 
Canada, providing income tax credits to rebate up to $20,000 in 
tuition fees to post-secondary graduates who stay in 
Saskatchewan after graduation. Since its creation, about 63,000 
post-secondary graduates have received nearly $290 million in 
tuition rebates, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The new first home plan fulfills our campaign promise by 
giving eligible graduates the ability to use up to $10,000 of their 
graduate retention program tax credits towards the down 
payment on their first home. Government’s investment in the 
first home plan is expected to be $8 million this fiscal year, 
making Saskatchewan more affordable for our young people. 
Helping them buy their first home will keep more graduates, 
more of our sons and daughters in the province, and it will keep 
Saskatchewan strong. 
 
This budget also ends the active families benefit, a refundable 
personal income tax credit, saving the government $5.5 million 
a year. We believe, Mr. Speaker, community-based charities 
and organizations such as KidSport and Creative Kids will 
continue to be more effective at helping children from families 
with lower incomes participate and reduce those barriers. A 
similar federal tax credit was eliminated in the most recent 
federal budget. 
 
Despite economic challenges, our government continues to 

invest in health care, education, and social services. As a matter 
of fact, Mr. Speaker, 74 cents of every tax dollar that is paid by 
taxpayers in this province goes to these three areas. 
 
We are committed to providing Saskatchewan people with 
access to timely and high-quality health services. At the same 
time, we need to ensure the ongoing sustainability of our health 
system. In this budget, total spending for health is projected to 
be a record $5.6 billion, an increase of $81 million or 1.5 per 
cent compared to last year. That level of funding will improve 
access to care, will reduce wait times for surgery and diagnostic 
services, and support innovative approaches to meet the needs 
of patients and families. 
 
Regional health authorities will receive nearly $3.4 billion, up 
2.3 per cent compared to last year. This supports programs, 
services, and care provided through hospitals, health centres, 
and long-term care facilities across the province. This budget 
fulfills another campaign promise by reducing health authority 
administration expenses by $7.5 million and reinvesting those 
savings in front-line staff in long-term care homes, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Reducing wait times continues to be a priority for our 
government. Saskatchewan has gone from the longest surgical 
wait times in Canada in 2007 to the shortest wait times in 
Canada in 2015. However we acknowledge wait times have 
begun to creep up again in recent months. That is why this 
budget provides a $20 million boost to the Saskatchewan 
surgical initiative to ensure Saskatchewan continues to have the 
shortest surgical wait times in all of Canada. 
 
We also want to reduce wait times for diagnostic services 
across the province and are making targeted investments 
totalling about $8 million in this budget to ensure that that 
happens. 
 
The Saskatchewan Cancer Agency is receiving more than $167 
million in funding in this budget, up $9.8 million from last year. 
This substantial increase in funding will help pay for the 
addition of 15 new cancer drugs that were approved last year. 
 
This budget also provides close to $15 million more, compared 
to last year, for the drug plan and extended benefits, providing 
for increased utilization as well as the approval last year of a 
treatment for hepatitis C. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this budget our government continues to put 
students first by investing in pre-K [pre-kindergarten] to grade 
12 schools and classrooms across the province. Student success 
and safety has always been a priority for Saskatchewan parents 
and their children, and it’s a priority for this government. That’s 
why this budget increased the school operating funding to 
almost $1.9 billion, up 16.6 million or about 1 per cent 
compared to last year. This budget continues our government’s 
support of early education and child care across the province. 
This includes 810 new child care spaces being developed as 
part of the 18 new elementary schools currently under 
construction on nine joint-use sites in Saskatoon, Regina, 
Warman, and Martensville. 
 
This budget provides $288 million to school divisions for 
learning supports in the 2016-17 school year, supporting 



252 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2016 

students with intensive needs, students in vulnerable 
circumstances, and students who require support with the 
English language. This includes a $4 million increase for 
classroom supports provided through the Ministry of Education 
to meet the needs of a growing and diverse province. In 
addition, Mr. Speaker, $5.4 million of school operating funding 
is being targeted to support the Syrian refugee students. 
 
This budget also includes $1.6 billion for nearly 200 previously 
approved child care spaces, which are now coming online this 
year. This brings total funding for child care to nearly $53 
million in this budget. The number of licensed child care spaces 
has increased by close to 5,800 since 2008, bringing the total to 
more than 14,600. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget also maintains our government’s 
strong investment in post-secondary students and education to 
keep Saskatchewan strong. Since taking office nearly nine years 
ago, our government has invested more than $7.3 billion in 
post-secondary institutions and student supports. In this budget, 
Saskatchewan’s post-secondary schools continue to receive 
strong support, including $475 million for the universities of 
Saskatchewan and Regina and their affiliated and federated 
colleges; $156 million for Saskatchewan Polytechnic, the 
Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies, and the Gabriel 
Dumont Institute; and $29 million for Saskatchewan’s regional 
colleges. That’s a total of $660 million this year in operating 
funding for Saskatchewan’s post-secondary schools, 
comparable to what they received last year. 
 
Our commitment to post-secondary students is also reflected in 
a range of programs aimed at helping them save and pay for 
their school. This budget provides more than $53 million in 
direct support to students, including 32.5 million for the Student 
Aid Fund to provide student grants, bursaries, and loans; more 
than $14 million for the scholarships, including the 
Saskatchewan Advantage Scholarship; and $6.5 million for the 
Saskatchewan advantage grant for education savings. 
 
This budget also enhances or maintains a number of important 
job and skills training programs, including a $2.4 million 
increase for the Canada-Saskatchewan Job Grant, for a total of 
6.4 million this year to provide training that aligns with 
employer needs. The budget also provides for the continuation 
of 9,000 adult basic education training opportunities, and the 
employability assistance for people with disabilities program 
will continue to support more than 2,500 opportunities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, supporting people in need also keeps 
Saskatchewan strong. That’s why this budget continues our 
government’s substantial investments in programs for children, 
youth, families, people experiencing disability, and people who 
need income assistance and housing. This budget invests close 
to $17 million more compared to last year to support at-risk 
children, youth, and their families, including nearly $8 million 
more for medically fragile children and those with complex 
needs, 5.7 million more for foster care and extended family 
care, 2.3 million more in preventive services to keep children 
from coming into the ministry’s care, and $800,000 more for 
assisted adoption. 
 
Over the past nine years, our government has also demonstrated 
its unwavering commitment to helping the province’s most 

vulnerable people. This budget provides considerable support 
for new and enhanced programming for Saskatchewan people 
experiencing disabilities, as well as funding to address 
increased program utilization. This includes $210 million 
dedicated to the SAID or the Saskatchewan assured income for 
disability program for people experiencing significant and 
enduring disabilities, and $3.4 million to address the emerging 
needs of people with intellectual disabilities and support the 
transition of individuals from Valley View Centre as homes and 
programs become available. Work on a third assessment and 
stabilization home, part of the safety net of supports for people 
with intellectual disabilities, will begin this year. Through the 
Ministry of Social Services, this budget includes $494 million 
for income assistance programs, including SAID, that support 
more than 30,000 individuals and families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the 16 years prior to our government being 
elected, the seniors’ income plan and income assistance 
program for low-income seniors had not had an increase by so 
much as a dime. Under our government over the last eight 
years, we have tripled that assistance. But improved seniors’ 
incomes means we’ll need about $250,000 less this year for the 
seniors’ income plan, Mr. Speaker, and that’s good news. 
However, our total funding commitment for that important 
program will continue to exceed $26 million in 2016-17. 
 
Revenue sharing plays an important role in helping the 
province’s municipalities meet the needs of people living in 
cities, towns, villages, and across rural Saskatchewan. This year 
municipal revenue sharing will approach $272 million, up 6.4 
million from last year, and an increase of $144 million, or more 
than 113 per cent increase, since 2007. This is based on our 
government’s commitment to ensure stable, predictable funding 
by providing the equivalent of one percentage point of the 
provincial sales tax to Saskatchewan’s municipalities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, farming has always been important to 
Saskatchewan, but in recent years the agriculture industry has 
really become a key driver of our economy. We will continue to 
offer the programs and services producers need to keep their 
operations and the entire agriculture industry in Saskatchewan 
strong. This budget increases Ministry of Agriculture funding 
by 7.5 per cent this fiscal year to a total of nearly $390 million. 
This includes more than 254 million to fully fund agricultural 
business risk management programs including AgriStability, 
AgriInvest, and crop insurance, a $14.6 million increase from 
last year. This budget also includes more than $71 million for 
strategic initiatives under the federal-provincial Growing 
Forward 2 agreement, with funding of close to $27 million for 
agricultural research to support improvements in productivity 
and enhanced exports. 
 
Investing in infrastructure is another way that we keep 
Saskatchewan strong now and into the future. This budget 
provides more than $3.5 billion for infrastructure, Mr. Speaker, 
the largest single-year capital investment in our province’s 
history. Nearly $1.8 billion will be invested by our commercial 
Crowns and more than $1.7 billion by executive government 
ministries and agencies this fiscal year. Investing in 
infrastructure helps support jobs in construction when other 
sectors are feeling the downturn. Investing in roads, highways, 
and bridges improves safety and expands and improves the 
transportation system, vitally important to an export-driven 



June 1, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 253 

economy. Investing in municipal infrastructure helps build our 
towns, cities, and communities. Investing in schools creates 
better learning environments for children and post-secondary 
students. Investing in hospitals and other health care facilities 
helps ensure quality health care and long-term care for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this budget, for the first time in the province’s 
history, the Government of Saskatchewan will invest more than 
$1 billion into the transportation system. This puts our 
government well on our way to meeting our campaign 
commitment to invest $2.7 billion into the transportation system 
over the next four years. More than 1300 kilometres of 
provincial highways will be repaired or upgraded this year, 
including much needed repairs to many of our rural highways. 
Funding has also been provided to continue work on major 
projects such as the twinning of Highways 7 and 16 near 
Saskatoon and of Highway 39 between Estevan and Bienfait. 
Construction will begin this year on new overpasses at Warman 
and Martensville, two of the most highly congested traffic areas 
in the province, Mr. Speaker. This budget also provides for 
continued planning for future twinning and passing lanes on 
Highways 6 and 39 and passing lanes on Highway 5 between 
Humboldt and Saskatoon. 
 
This year more than 100 kilometres of rural highways will be 
upgraded to improve safety and access, including Highway 354 
near Dilke. This budget also fulfills the first year of the 
highways 2020 plan, a three-year $70 million funding surge to 
fix more highways announced in our recent election campaign. 
Thirty million dollars of that total is being invested in this fiscal 
year to repair many highways throughout the province, 
including Highways 220 and 322 in the Silton-Strasbourg area, 
Highway 924 to Dore Lake, Highway 340 north of Radisson, 
Highway 376 between Maymont and Asquith, Highway 45 
south of Outlook, and Highway 58 between Chaplin and 
Shamrock. 
 
Five hundred million dollars is being committed in this budget, 
Mr. Speaker, to continue work on the Regina bypass, including 
new overpasses at Balgonie, White City, and the Pilot Butte 
access. When it’s complete in October 2019, the bypass will 
greatly enhance the movement of people and goods in our 
province and vastly improve traffic safety. 
 
When we include the funding in this budget, our government 
will have invested more than $6.3 billion since coming to office 
to improve more than 11 000 kilometres of roads and highways 
across Saskatchewan. This budget provides more than $127 
million for municipal infrastructure this fiscal year with plans to 
invest an additional 325 million through 2019 and ’20. And this 
budget provides $10 million for the first year of a three-year 
$50 million commitment towards the north commuter parkway 
bridge project in Saskatoon that will help ease congestion on 
existing bridges. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our growing population means we need more 
schools. This budget provides more than $391 million for K to 
12 [kindergarten to grade 12] schools and other education 
capital, up nearly 143 million compared to last year. This is the 
largest capital spend in the province’s history for the education 

sector. This significant investment supports the continuing 
construction of joint-use schools in the high-growth 
communities of Martensville, Warman, Saskatoon, and Regina. 
Those facilities are slated to open for the 2017-18 school year 
adding much needed classroom capacity and child care spaces. 
 
This budget also provides major capital funding of nearly $42 
million for the renovation and repair of schools in Langenburg, 
Martensville, Gravelbourg, and St. Brieux, as well as Scott 
Collegiate and Sacred Heart elementary in Regina. Meanwhile, 
construction continues this year on the replacement of Regina’s 
Connaught School. This budget also provides $38 million for 
preventive maintenance and renewal for our schools, up 20 per 
cent compared to last year, Mr. Speaker.  
 
Mr. Speaker, over the next four years, almost $700 million is 
targeted for K to 12 schools and other education capital. 
Continuing investment in university, regional college, and other 
training facilities is also vital to keeping our province strong. 
This budget provides nearly $26 million in capital for advanced 
education and training with an estimated $170 million to be 
provided to this sector over the next four years. This budget 
provides $2.2 million for completion of the 17.5 million 
renovation project of the Southeast Regional College in 
Weyburn. This fiscal year maintenance and capital and renewal 
funding in this sector will continue at 23.6 million. 
 
Since 2008, more than $400 million has been provided through 
the Ministry of Advanced Education for capital in the 
post-secondary education and research sector. This includes the 
Academic Health Sciences facility and the international vaccine 
centre at the University of Saskatchewan, a new student 
residence at the University of Regina, and notable projects at 
Southeast, Parkland, Cumberland, and Carlton Trail regional 
colleges. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people deserve the best health care 
possible. To help achieve that we continue to invest heavily in 
health care infrastructure. This budget commits nearly $240 
million to health care capital, part of a $700 million investment 
over the next four years. This budget provides final-year 
funding to complete construction of The Meadows long-term 
care facility in Swift Current as well as the Kelvington 
integrated care facility, both slated to open this summer. 
 
More than $14 million is being provided for electrical upgrades 
at Regina’s General and Pasqua hospitals, and for a power plant 
upgrade at Royal University Hospital in Saskatoon. 
Construction will continue on several major projects including 
the new children’s hospital in Saskatoon and the replacement of 
the Saskatchewan Hospital integrated correctional facility in 
North Battleford. This budget includes more than $50 million 
for health facility maintenance and equipment, up nearly $7 
million compared to last year. And this budget fulfills another 
campaign promise by providing $500,000 to expand a pilot 
project that provides medical robotic technology to more 
northern communities. This project allows health care 
professionals to connect with patients remotely and provide 
real-time assessment, diagnosis, and patient management. 
 
Our province’s Crown corporations will invest nearly $1.8 
billion this fiscal year to upgrade utilities infrastructure and 
keep Saskatchewan strong. Between 2000 and 2007, the 



254 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2016 

Crowns spent on average about $568 million a year on capital 
including both maintenance, capital investment, and new 
infrastructure. Since our government took office, Mr. Speaker, 
Crown capital investment has more than doubled to 1.4 billion 
annually between 2008 and 2014, and we forecast that between 
2015 and 2020 Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations will invest 
an average of $1.9 billion. That’s more than triple the amount 
invested between 2000 and 2007. 
 
Major Crown capital projects for the current fiscal year include 
1.1 billion at SaskPower, primarily to renew electricity, 
transmission, and distribution systems. SaskPower will also 
expand and renew electricity generation assets to meet 
Saskatchewan’s growing power needs. 
 
SaskTel is expected to invest more than $330 million to 
upgrade its wireless and wireline networks across the province, 
improve customer service, and continue the rollout of Infinet, 
its high-bandwidth broadband service. 
 
SaskEnergy will spend more than $290 million, primarily to 
ensure a safe, reliable natural gas network through the renewal 
of its transmission and distribution infrastructure, plus 
expansion of its gas processing capacity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we meet the challenges created by falling 
resource revenue, we will need to continue to control spending. 
Controlling spending means making some difficult decisions as 
we strive to keep government’s programs and services 
sustainable in the long term. This year’s budget includes some 
of those difficult and necessary decisions. 
 
Fees under the children’s and seniors’ drugs plans are rising by 
$5 per prescription to a maximum of $25 per prescription. The 
last time government increased the cost of prescriptions under 
these plans was in 2012, when fees rose from 15 to $20 per 
prescription. Since then, drug plan costs have grown by an 
average of $10 million annually, so we are raising fees by $5 
per prescription to help keep the plan sustainable and 
prescription costs in line with other provinces. Increases are 
expected to impact 66,000 families by approximately $20 a year 
on average, and 120,000 seniors by approximately $80 annually 
on average. 
 
To keep them sustainable, certain Justice and Corrections 
programs are receiving less funding this year and the Buffalo 
Narrows Community Correctional Centre is being closed. At 
full capacity, it houses 18 inmates who will be transferred to 
other facilities in the province. The closure is expected to save 
the province more than $660,000 this year and just over $1 
million annually. 
 
Revenue sharing is intended to provide municipalities with the 
financial means to address their priorities, but if municipal 
funding is to remain sustainable, certain supports need to be 
rationalized as we move forward with transformational change. 
That’s why, in this budget, provincial funding has been 
discontinued for five urban municipal parks: River Valley in 
Battlefords, Pehonan in Prince Albert, Chinook Parkway in 
Swift Current, Moose Jaw’s Wakamow, and Tatagwa in 
Weyburn. This will save the province a total of $540,000 
annually. We believe the funding of municipal parks is best left 
for municipalities to prioritize. 

Also, funding for some labour market training programs has 
been reduced by about $3.5 million to better reflect utilization 
levels, demand, and program realignment. Areas of highest 
priority and need, including the Canada-Saskatchewan Job 
Grant, and employability for people with disabilities, are seeing 
increases, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are removing the grandfathering provision from the 
Saskatchewan employment supplement. In 2015-16, the 
supplement changed to be open to applicants with children 12 
years old and under. However the change included a 
grandfathering provision that resulted in families who were 
already in the program, eligible to receive support for children 
13 years and over. Removing this provision focuses the 
program on those with highest need, and combined with 
projected lower utilization, the province is forecast to save $2.5 
million in 2016-17. In addition a number of social services and 
assistance program changes will be introduced this year to 
increase fairness and equity among clients and enhance the 
sustainability of the programs while ensuring that vulnerable 
citizens receive the supports they need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also as a part of spending control in this budget, 
we have decided to defer funding to various initiatives. We 
have deferred funding earmarked for the health sciences facility 
project at the University of Saskatchewan to future years, 
recognizing that 230 million of the province’s total 250 million 
commitment to that project has already been provided. This 
budget suspends funding for the Canada excellence research 
Chair and water security for this fiscal year. Support will be 
considered in future years. 
 
Those are some of the difficult decisions we have taken in this 
budget. There are many difficult decisions made as well across 
all areas of government to control spending. Moving forward as 
part of the 2017-18 budget process and beyond, we will 
accelerate the government-wide process of transformational 
change. This means ensuring the sustainability of high-quality 
public services for the people of Saskatchewan and ensuring we 
will deliver them in the most efficient, cost-effective manner 
possible. 
 
Despite the challenges in our resource sector, Saskatchewan’s 
finances remain relatively strong, Mr. Speaker. Our budget 
deficit is smaller and more manageable than those of our 
neighbouring provinces. Our debt-to-GDP ratio is the second 
lowest amongst the provinces, and we continue to receive solid 
credit ratings. This year we began a process of transformational 
change to secure a sustainable balance between the costs of 
providing vital programs and services that the people of this 
province need, and the province’s revenue base. 
 
This budget helps keep Saskatchewan strong by keeping our 
provincial finances strong and will help us pursue our goal of 
returning our budget to surplus by 2017-18. This budget helps 
keep Saskatchewan strong by controlling spending by keeping 
taxes low. This budget helps keep Saskatchewan strong by 
providing funding for highways, hospitals, schools, and other 
important infrastructure projects. And this budget keeps 
Saskatchewan strong by investing in people, by ensuring 
support for children, students, families, working people, and 
those who are most vulnerable. Ultimately Saskatchewan 
people will keep our province strong by furthering their 



June 1, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 255 

education, raising a family, starting a small business, 
volunteering for a local charity. “From many peoples, strength” 
— our province’s motto reflects our belief in each other and our 
confidence in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just a few weeks ago the people of Saskatchewan 
voted for a Premier and a party who promised to keep 
Saskatchewan strong. The people of this province expect their 
government to manage through economic challenges through 
prudent and pragmatic solutions. This budget continues that 
approach while laying out a plan to get back to balance. 
Together we will continue building a great province with a 
brighter future and together, Mr. Speaker, we will keep 
Saskatchewan strong. Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member for Regina 
University: 
 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 
policy of the government. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance, 
seconded by the member for Regina University: 
 

That this Assembly approves in general the budgetary 
policy of the government. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
from Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And first 
off, I do wish to take a moment to apologize to all the members 
of the Legislative Assembly for the egregious error that was 
made prior this afternoon. We do take very seriously the 
importance of the embargo, and I sincerely and truly want to 
apologize for that mishap earlier today. That’s very important 
and it should never, ever happen. So I want to take that 
opportunity to the House. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Now before I get into a more detailed look at this budget, it has 
to be said, Mr. Speaker, there’s absolutely nothing in this 
budget that justifies a three-month delay. There’s nothing in 
here that the government didn’t know in February, and there’s 
nothing in here that had to wait until now to be announced. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there’s nothing that refuses the Sask Party’s 
refusal to tell Saskatchewan people their plans before the 
election. But let me tell you, there’s a lot in this budget that was 
not part of the Sask Party’s campaign just a couple of months 
ago. 
 
They didn’t reveal the reality of the state of the finances, and I 
certainly don’t remember any of them talking about the cuts 
they’ve been planning. And I know they didn’t tell anyone 
about the costs that they now want to shift onto the backs of 
Saskatchewan families. 
 
And there was nothing in their campaign that told 
Saskatchewan workers that worry about losing their jobs and 
those that are now looking for one, that they planned on 
abandoning them. 

Bottom line, Mr. Speaker, this government didn’t want people 
to know how badly they’ve squandered their decade-long ride 
through high commodity prices and, through sheer luck, some 
of the best economic years in our history as a province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the truth is, after the price of oil started to drop 
and they had blown through the surplus and the rainy day fund 
that the NDP had left them, the Sask Party chose — now they 
made the conscious choice — to hide these plans until after the 
election. 
 
Now the people of Saskatchewan will be wondering why the 
Sask Party didn’t lay out their plans in an honest way before 
election day so that they could have known what they were 
voting for. Because, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know anyone who 
voted for a government that would abandon people looking for 
work, a government that’s no longer interested in diversifying 
the economy, a government that, in real numbers, is cutting 
health and education, and a government that would lead us to 
two 5 per cent increases to SaskPower rates, a government 
that’s undermining urban parks, holding a fire sale of Crown 
land, and is cutting protection of the air that we breathe, the 
water we drink, and our fertile prairie soil. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget lays out the Sask Party’s plan to spend 
over $3 million per day more than they take in in one day. 
Think about that, Mr. Speaker, over $3 million per day. Mr. 
Speaker, now is not a time to be working without a net, but 
that’s what the Sask Party’s doing. The Growth and Financial 
Security Fund is now empty and instead of raising that as a 
concern, they’re repealing the Act and winding up the fund. 
And this is all a footnote in the budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now they say it will be because they no longer use the GRF 
[General Revenue Fund] accounting. But let’s be perfectly 
clear. Really, they know that they were in violation of their own 
Act by running a second deficit in a row. So rather than 
admitting they’re breaking their own law, they’re scrapping it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this case it’s not only something they didn’t 
promise, but it’s actually the opposite of what they promised. 
They said once oil reached $75 per barrel, they would start 
paying back into the rainy day fund. They said that once the 
fund hit $500 million, they would start paying down debt. How 
can they keep either of these two promises if they scrap the 
fund altogether? 
 
So that’s another broken Sask Party election promise. But what 
do they care? The election’s over and once again it’s 
Saskatchewan families, seniors, and workers who are paying 
the price. 
 
And it goes on, Mr. Speaker. For example, during the election, 
did the Sask Party say that they would once again hike the cost 
of medication for kids and seniors? Nope, they didn’t say that. 
Also just a year ago, Mr. Speaker, despite their cuts, the Sask 
Party told struggling parents with teenagers that the 
Saskatchewan employment supplement would still be there for 
them. Well now they’ve pulled the rug out from under those 
parents and cut the supplement for all children over 13. 
Families who are trying to make it, who are struggling in 
low-paying jobs, can no longer count on this bit of assistance, 
even those families who were grandfathered in just over a 



256 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2016 

year ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also see cutbacks to Aboriginal court worker 
programs and Aboriginal police consulting groups. These 
programs serve the most vulnerable people in our society and 
the most overrepresented in the criminal justice system. 
 
The social fabric in this province needs to be protected. And for 
example, I’d like to mention right now the Gary Tinker 
Federation, whose namesake is here today, Mr. Speaker. This 
program supports northern disabled people and it’s an essential 
part of that social fabric. But there’s nothing in this budget to 
help move forward on the TRC [Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission] recommendations and this province’s necessary 
role in reconciliation. So I ask again, why did this government 
think it was right to hide this from the public before the 
election? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t end there. We heard the minister today 
talk about investments in health care and education, but perhaps 
the minister needs a lesson in inflation and population growth, 
Mr. Speaker. A minimum of 6 per cent annual increase is 
needed just to maintain the status quo programs like health care 
and education. Anything below that is effectively a cut. Health 
is only getting 1.5 per cent more and education is being 
increased by 0.7 per cent. Yes, Mr. Speaker, less than 1 per 
cent. 
 
And so who’s going to have to make the cuts? This government 
is pushing those painful decisions onto the health authorities 
and to the school boards, punting the cuts down the line right 
onto Saskatchewan people. That is shameful and that is 
unacceptable. And the Sask Party didn’t tell anyone about those 
cuts before election day. Top all that off with two 5 per cent 
increases in just six months in SaskPower rates and it becomes 
very, very clear, Mr. Speaker, why this government didn’t have 
the courage to put the real picture before the people of 
Saskatchewan before April 4th. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also have a government that’s no longer 
interested in diversifying the economy. This is a government 
that blames everything on low commodity prices, but they’re 
doing nothing to make sure we’re in a better shape during the 
next struggle. They aren’t doing anything to create jobs in other 
sectors. In fact they are cutting, cutting the services that help 
people get back to work and the programs that support new 
businesses and job creators. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, though you wouldn’t think of it by the 
inaction of this government, the situation is grave. Bankruptcies 
are on the rise in Saskatchewan. Wages are declining. There are 
over 9,000 fewer jobs today than there were a year ago. Jobs are 
being lost across the board, from the media to the Sears 
warehouse to Cameco. And this government is cutting the 
programs that help people get back to work — everything from 
apprenticeship programs; they’re cutting post-secondary 
education; youth and adult skills training; adult basic education; 
cuts to employment development, except of course for $3 
million to SkipTheDishes; provincial training allowances are 
cut; skills training benefit cut. Immigration programs, economic 
development, and trade and export are all receiving cuts. And 
all of these cuts, Mr. Speaker, from a government that said 
nothing about them when they sought the mandate from the 

people. And, Mr. Speaker, all of these cuts by a government 
that is still stubbornly committing another half a billion dollars 
on their failed bypass project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to address one more issue about the 
mixed messages that the Sask Party’s been spinning. First, 
during their campaign their message was, steady as we go. They 
got elected on that message. But they’ve quickly changed it to 
transformational change. Mr. Speaker, now the budget tells us 
they have to look into what this transformational change will 
be. But we know that school boards, hospitals, and all kinds of 
groups of people will now have to continue waiting in fear that 
the Sask Party axe will fall on them next. And no explanation, 
really, of what this transformational change is going to be. 
 
Even the framework they’ve set up is hard to believe. They say, 
“Important questions will be asked.” Mr. Speaker, now I’m 
going to repeat a few of these questions that they are going to 
be asking themselves about government programs. 
 
First question: is this something government should be doing? 
Is this program or service the role of government? If so, is it 
being delivered in the best possible manner and at the lowest 
possible cost to taxpayers? 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have been in government for nearly a decade, 
and how have you not been asking these questions all along? I 
mean that, Mr. Speaker. What is transformational about 
ensuring that programs are effective? What’s transformational 
about the fact that they think . . . responsibly managing 
government programs and services? That’s not 
transformational, Mr. Speaker; that’s frightening. They should 
have told Saskatchewan people that before the election as well. 
And frankly, Mr. Speaker, it explains a lot about how the Sask 
Party got themselves into this difficult situation that they now 
want to pretend is someone else’s fault. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party needs to quit pointing fingers and 
instead look in the mirror. Most of all, Mr. Speaker, they should 
reconsider this budget. They’ve got to stop making 
Saskatchewan people pay for their mistakes and 
mismanagement, and they should apologize for refusing to tell 
Saskatchewan people what their real plans were. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I will have more to say about this in 
upcoming days, but at this point I would like to move that this 
debate be now adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana has 
moved adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 

Resumption of Budget Debate 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I move: 
 

That debate on the motion “That the Assembly approves in 



June 1, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 257 

general the budgetary policy of the government” be 
resumed on Thursday, June 2nd, 2016. 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader: 

That the debate on the motion “That the Assembly 
approves in general the budgetary policy of the 
government” be resumed on Thursday, June 2nd, 2016. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I move that this Assembly do now adjourn. 

The Speaker: — Before I put that question on adjournment to 
the Assembly, I would like to thank everyone for coming and 
witnessing today’s budget. I would also like to invite everyone 
to a tea that’s going to be taking place in the library. If you 
leave the main doors to your right, there is a tea in the library. 
There’s also a tea in room 218 to your left. 

At this time I will place the question. The Government House 
Leader has moved that this House do now adjourn. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — This Assembly now stands adjourned until 
tomorrow at 10 a.m. 

[The Assembly adjourned at 15:11.] 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 241 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 241 
STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 Apology for Release of Information 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 241 
  Harrison ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 241 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 241 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 241 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 242 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Argyle School Wins Environmental Society Contest 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 242 
 Saskatchewan Supports World Partnership Walk 
  Steinley ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 242 
 Saskatoon School Program Promotes Intergenerational Relationships 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 243 
 SaskTel Aboriginal Youth Awards 
  Parent ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 243 
 Wood River Organic Food Company Thrives 
  Marit .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 243 
 New Rental Housing Project Opened in Carlyle 
  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 243 
 Saskatoon Crime Stoppers Golf Classic 
  Lambert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 244 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Government’s Fiscal Management 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 244 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 244 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 246 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 247 
  Harrison ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 248 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 248 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
  Doherty ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 249 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Doherty ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 249 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 255 
 Resumption of Budget Debate 
  Cheveldayoff .............................................................................................................................................................................. 256 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


