






















































Hansard: June 29, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 25A  WEDNESDAY, JUNE 29, 2016, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Hon. Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Hon. Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Merriman, Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 51; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Maurice Riou http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 681 
 June 29, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
introduce to you and through to all members of the House, 
someone who’s seated in the west gallery: a great friend to the 
province of Saskatchewan, and someone who represents an 
amazing success story here in Saskatchewan. It’s Murad 
Al-Katib. Maybe he’ll give us a bit of a wave. 
 
I noticed him when, I think the Agriculture minister was going 
to introduce him, but I noticed — and he still may — but I 
noticed Murad was here. And I just wanted to thank him, by 
way of an introduction on behalf of the entire province, for 
taking his business idea quite literally from a basement to 
offices all around the world. In India, when I’ve been there on 
trade missions, he’s known not just by Saskatchewan members 
of the delegation, but by those that were visiting in India as the 
king of pulses, and for good reason. 
 
There are many, many Saskatchewan farm families and 
businesses that depend on his leadership and his 
entrepreneurship and the vision that he has had for this 
company. And so I just want to thank him publicly for what he 
has contributed so mightily to the economy and the province 
and the people of Saskatchewan. I wish that he will, I know 
he’ll continue. We met in Toronto when I spoke at the Empire 
Club. He was there, just having come back from overseas sales, 
and I think he was having some meetings in that city as well. 
 
So on behalf of the government and, Mr. Speaker, may I say on 
behalf of members on this side of the House, thank you, Murad. 
Welcome here to your Legislative Assembly. I’d ask all 
members to join me in a warm welcome to Murad Al-Katib. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
tremendous honour to join with the Premier and welcome this 
prairie business giant to his Assembly. And certainly Murad 
Al-Katib is a pioneer and somebody who’s added value to 
agriculture within our province and who’s built international 
trade relationships all around our world, someone who’s taken 
Saskatchewan to the international stage and has represented us 
so well and for the benefit of so many here in Saskatchewan. So 
it’s my honour to welcome Mr. Al-Katib to his Assembly. 
 
And you know, I also know that he represents relationships with 
our international community. I know he maintains strong 
relationships with Turkey as well, and I know that he’s a strong 
Turkish-Canadian himself. And certainly at this time where we 
had this horrendous bombing yesterday in Istanbul, I think of 
certainly Mr. Al-Katib, but also all Turkish-Canadians and all 
impacted in Turkey itself and around our world and here at 
home in Saskatchewan who are reeling from this horrific act of 

terrorism, Mr. Speaker. So I ask all members to recognize Mr. 
Al-Katib to his Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
University. 
 
Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
great pleasure to stand in the House today and also welcome my 
good friend, Murad Al-Katib, to the legislature. I do also want 
to echo the voice of the Leader of the Opposition and say that I 
hope that your friends and family, and particularly Huseyin’s 
family in Istanbul are safe. 
 
We’ve known each other for about 20 years, Murad and his 
wife, Michelle, and I. We’re very close family friends. They’re 
like extended family to Kevin and I, and their son, Tariq, is very 
close friends with my son, Kayman. In fact we actually even 
have dogs that are sisters, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Murad is most famous for the astounding success of AGT, but I 
actually just want to take a minute to talk about the fact that 
they’re amazing leaders in our community, both of them. They 
both do tremendous work. Michelle does tremendous work with 
the Red Cross. Murad does tremendous work with the Regina 
Roughriders. They both volunteer constantly for the RMF, 
Regina Minor Football, for the Saskatchewan Selects. Michelle 
in particular is an indispensable member of the schools in our 
communities.  
 
So I just want to say that it’s great to see you here recognized in 
your Legislative Assembly, but that I also want to thank you on 
behalf of those of us on this side for your community 
volunteerism work in the community, not just your business. So 
thanks for that, Murad. And join me in . . . [inaudible]. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you, two special guests seated in 
your gallery. The first is Aaron Nagy — if you can give a wave, 
Aaron — and his friend, Frank Stanisci.  
 
And we all know Aaron’s no stranger to this House, the good 
work that he’s done around Jimmy’s law. But today they’re 
here about football. They work together on a radio program, 
Candid Frank Live. Now Frank apparently is from Toronto, and 
he’s here for the game tomorrow. So he’s here stirring up some 
trouble with that, but Aaron’s going to straighten him out. But 
they’re here early for the game tomorrow. I would ask all 
members to welcome our good friends to their legislature. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, it is my pleasure to introduce some special guests 
to the Legislative Assembly today. Seated in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker, is Greg Magirescu who is the new CEO [chief 
executive officer] of Creative Saskatchewan — give us a wave, 
Greg — and Ranjan Thakre who is the new board Chair of 
Creative Saskatchewan. 



682 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2016 

Greg is a seasoned senior arts and cultural leader who brings 
diverse cultural and business experience to the role. He was 
responsible for bringing the Cultural Olympiad Program to the 
2010 winter games in Vancouver. He worked as a bridge 
builder, connecting diverse groups to design and build the Anvil 
Centre in New Westminster, BC [British Columbia]. And he’s 
also brought music, theatre, and fine arts programs to 
communities in Ontario and Atlantic Canada. 
 
Ranjan is a diversified creative industries executive with more 
than 25 years of experience and a track record of success in 
leadership. Most recently he served as the interim CEO of the 
Saskatchewan Arts Board. Ranjan is a seasoned advocate for 
Saskatchewan’s creative sector and possesses extensive 
experience working with government, business, and other 
stakeholders in the public and private sectors.  
 
We are pleased to have such experienced leaders joining 
Creative Saskatchewan. I ask all members to join me in 
welcoming these two to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 
 
Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all members of this Assembly, I’d like to introduce a 
constituent of mine, Charlotte L’Oste-Brown, who is seated in 
the west gallery. Charlotte was diagnosed with pulmonary 
fibrosis and is in need of a lung transplant. She has been sharing 
her story to promote awareness about organ and tissue donation. 
I ask all members to join me in welcoming Charlotte to her 
Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
While on my feet, Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, seated 
in your gallery are two guests and constituents of mine: Rick 
and his daughter, Haley Maddess. And Haley is very interested 
in politics. They farm, they have a large cattle operation and are 
just a few miles west of our operation down in the Willow 
Bunch area. So I ask all members to join in welcoming them to 
their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d just 
like to join with the Minister of Culture on behalf of the official 
opposition, welcoming and congratulating and wishing well 
certainly, the new Chair with Creative Saskatchewan, Ranjan 
Thakre, and the new CEO, Mr. Greg Magirescu. Wishing them 
all the best and many successes with the important work that 
Creative Saskatchewan does. On behalf of the official 
opposition, Mr. Speaker, welcome to these individuals to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 
and through you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce two constituents of Regina Walsh Acres, and people 
that are known quite well across the city, Katherine Gagne and 
her daughter Isabel. You know, Katherine does amazing work 
with . . . she chairs the public school board. She does fantastic 
work on behalf of everyone across Regina. She’s also very 
involved with Junior Achievement and very involved with our 

Harvest City Church, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But Isabel has a little bit more of an impressive resumé than her 
mom already. She graduates on Friday with a 97 per cent 
average in high school. She’s won over $150,000 worth of 
scholarships already. She’s in TD community leadership, a 
$70,000 scholarship. She’s the first student to receive this from 
Saskatchewan in over a decade. She’s a top honours in SaskTel 
youth Aboriginal award as outstanding female. She has been a 
Sask Junior Citizen of the Year. She was the YMCA Women of 
Distinction’s Young Woman of Promise, and she will study 
international business at McGill this fall with her sister, 
Victoria. One of her highest achievements is she will be named 
a prestiged Greville Smith scholar as well at McGill. 
 
And one thing that her mom and dad are both very proud of is 
that she started Shoe Drive to the Net when she was playing 
basketball and she realized the team she was playing against 
didn’t have proper footwear for the sporting event. And she’s 
raised over $10,000 to help kids that don’t the proper sporting 
equipment to get involved with sports. And I think her parents 
are very proud of her community achievement. 
 
I was able to watch her valedictorian address, and to you, 
Isabel, I say that we are all proud of you and we all believe in 
everything you can do in the future. That was one of the main 
points of your address. I watched it on Facebook, and you did a 
great job.  
 
So I ask all members to join me in congratulating Isabel. We all 
know you’re going to do well in your future. Come back to 
Saskatchewan after you’re done with McGill and be a leader 
amongst our community and probably sit here in this Chamber 
at some point in time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, it is my pleasure to also rise today and to welcome both 
Isabel and Katherine Gagne to this Assembly. Katherine is a 
former colleague and, of course has been mentioned, the Chair 
of the Regina Public School Board. And I know that they 
presented their budget last night, and I’m sure they had a late 
night and an interesting night. So thank you for all your work 
there. 
 
And I’m not going to attempt to list all of the awards that you 
have won, but I’d say that’s a very, very impressive resumé. We 
all wish you all the best in your future endeavours at McGill. 
Thank you for all of your contributions to the community so far, 
and I’m sure we can look forward to more in the future. Best of 
luck. Please join me in welcoming them to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Carlton. 
 
Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you and to all the members of the Assembly, I would 
like to introduce three very special constituents and individuals 
that are seated in your gallery. They were three of the hardest 
working people I had on my campaign team through the last 
election. They are my daughter, Angela Weinrich; my 



June 29, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 683 

grandson, Noah; and my granddaughter, Layla. So Noah, give 
us a wave, guys. They’re a little shy.  
 
Angela worked pretty much every day on my campaign, 
working with the computers and door knocking in the evenings 
when her husband got off work and could watch the kids, and 
she’d come out door knocking with me. But the kids were there 
pretty much every day, and they’d do any of the jobs that 
involved stickers. And of course, Layla was very instrumental 
in making sure Grandpa had a fresh picture on his desk every 
day, and so I very much appreciated that. 
 
It’s so wonderful for me, Mr. Speaker, to have all my children 
and my grandchildren live so close to me and take such a keen 
interest in my political life and work hard for me and show me 
the support that they do. So I ask all members to join me in 
welcoming then to their Legislative Assembly. Thank you very 
much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. To you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to join 
with the member from Saskatoon Centre and welcome Aaron 
Nagy to his Legislative Assembly. I count Aaron as a fairly 
good friend from Yorkton, very well known in the area. 
Something that wasn’t mentioned is he’s very active at the 
Lions Club; in fact I believe he’s on the national board. So I ask 
all members to join me in welcoming Aaron to his Legislative 
Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition to improve PTSD 
[post-traumatic stress disorder] coverage for Saskatchewan 
workers. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that 
post-traumatic stress disorder can severely impact the lives of 
Saskatchewan workers, and they point out that delaying both 
diagnosis and treatment can be detrimental to recovery.  
 
They’re simply asking for this government to acknowledge that, 
while on the job, if the worker’s exposed to a traumatic event 
and then gets a subsequent diagnosis of PTSD, that the 
traumatic event is presumed to have caused the PTSD, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Saskatchewan government to 
make the necessary changes to ensure that if Saskatchewan 
workers are exposed to traumatic events on the job and are 
then diagnosed with PTSD, it is presumed to be caused by 
the worker’s employment, and the worker will 
subsequently be covered under workers’ compensation and 
receive the same benefits as others with work-related 
injuries. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens of 

Strongfield, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, White City. Frankly they’re 
coming in from all over the province, Mr. Speaker. Regina 
again, and Balgonie. I so submit. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition from individuals who are concerned about the status of 
wetlands in our province. Wetlands serve a very vital function 
in our ecosystem. They take the form of marshes, bogs, fens, 
swamps, and open water. Wetlands are home to wildlife, 
including waterfowl. They clean the water running off of 
agricultural fields. They protect us from flooding and drought, 
and they are a playground where families can explore and play. 
In the worst cases, such as some areas on the prairies, as much 
as 90 per cent of our wetlands have disappeared. But I’d like to 
read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the Government of Saskatchewan to: 
 
Increase funding to do the proper inventory work, putting 
Saskatchewan in a better position to manage the water 
resource. 
 
Speed up the evaluation of high-risk watersheds where 
there is significant damage annually from flooding. This 
evaluation must include a recognition of drainage works 
that could be closed or restored that will alleviate some of 
the issues downstream with respect to flooding and nutrient 
loading. And, 
 
Create a sound and transparent mitigation process that 
adequately addresses sustainable development. 
 
The sequence should first focus on avoiding environmental 
harm whenever possible before a secondary focus on 
minimizing the harm, with compensation being sought 
only when the development is deemed essential and the 
first two stages cannot be met. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by individuals from Regina. I so 
submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition in support of funding for heritage languages 
here in Saskatchewan. And we know that after 25 years, the 
Government of Saskatchewan is discontinuing all support for 
heritage language learning in Saskatchewan. Since 1991, 
heritage language schools have depended on this modest 
funding from the Ministry of Education to help sustain their 
programs. As a result of the announcement made by the 
Ministry of Education, many of these non-profit heritage 
language schools will be faced with the difficult decision of 
whether or not they can continue to operate. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 



684 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2016 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to reconsider this decision and restore funding for heritage 
language education in Saskatchewan heritage language 
schools. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from all 
over the province here in Saskatchewan. Thank you so much. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Donation Supports Project Triple Play 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Prince Albert is 
well known for its hard-working volunteers, and the 
committee members of Project Triple Play are no exception 
to this rule. 
 
Project Triple Play is an initiative to build world-standard 
softball diamonds in Prince Albert. Last week this committee 
received a huge boost when it was presented with a cheque 
for $93,175 from the Federated Co-op, $40,000 of which 
came from our local Prince Albert Co-op. 
 
Felix Casavant from Prince Albert minor ball association, Dean 
McKim, general manager of the Prince Albert Co-op, Ian 
Litzenberger, Co-Chair of the Project Triple Play committee, 
and Mayor Greg Dionne took part in the cheque presentation. 
The money has been earmarked to purchase stadium lighting for 
one of the new diamonds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with this generous donation from Federated 
Co-op, the committee has raised close to $1 million and are 
well on their way to surpassing their $1.5 million goal. 
Construction of the new ball diamonds is expected to start this 
September and will no doubt be put to good use by the people 
of Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in 
acknowledging the hard work of the Project Triple Play 
committee and in congratulating them on their latest donation. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 

2016 Global Citizen Laureate 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I stand 
to congratulate Mr. Murad Al-Katib on being recognized as the 
2016 Global Citizen Laureate, awarded by the United Nations 
Association in Canada. 
 
The Global Citizen Laureate pays tribute to a leader with a 
uniquely Canadian model of success. Mr. Al-Katib’s leadership 
has led AGT Food and Ingredients to develop 

Saskatchewan-led solutions to feed the world. He has played an 
integral role in the agriculture industry in Saskatchewan and his 
expertise and achievements are certainly well worth celebrating. 
 
With 2016 designated as International Year of Pulses, it’s 
particularly fitting that the 70th anniversary of the Global 
Citizen Laureate recognizes Murad Al-Katib’s achievements. 
Our province has always been recognized as a producer of 
high-quality agricultural products but Mr. Al-Katib’s innovative 
spirit has helped to establish Saskatchewan as one of the largest 
pulse producers in the world. 
 
Pulses have become an integral part of our province’s economy 
and the Saskatchewan story. Mr. Al-Katib’s expertise has 
helped to shape our primary agriculture and value-added 
processing sector and expand our export potential. His 
philanthropic efforts and entrepreneurial spirit benefit people 
beyond Saskatchewan’s borders. The benefits of his 
contributions are far reaching and I applaud his continued 
efforts. 
 
Please join me in congratulating Murad Al-Katib in being 
awarded the 2016 Global Citizen Laureate. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 

Journey to Fitness and Health 
 
Mr. Vermette: — When Alex Bird first applied to go for 
bariatric surgery, the doctor told him he was too heavy and 
didn’t qualify. Teco says he felt so embarrassed, he decided to 
make a huge change to his life. When he stepped on the scale, 
he was 543 pounds. He decided to change the way he ate, and 
he was going to exercise regularly. The first week into his 
program, it was hard for him to walk from his truck to his office 
door without getting back spasms and losing his breath. He met 
with a number of health professionals including his surgeon, 
exercise therapist, and a dietitian. He was determined to get fit. 
 
Two years later, a lot of miles walked, he now weighs 288 
pounds. He peaked last June. At one point, he lost over 300 
pounds, an amazing journey over a two-year period. Alex Teco 
Bird is a true role model in the sense he went against the odds 
and proved to himself that anything is possible with 
commitment, dedication, and hard work. He now enjoys things 
he could never do like fly on a plane, run, golfing, horse ride, 
and even a roller coaster ride. 
 
Today Teco gets emails, letters, and messages from folks who 
thank him for motivating them to get fit and healthy. He speaks 
at schools in front of large groups of kids to talk about bullying 
and how kids can lead healthier lives with more confidence and 
better self-esteem. His message is, you can change too. Great 
work, Teco. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Stonebridge-Dakota. 
 

Habitat for Humanity’s Women Build Projects 
 
Ms. Eyre: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise in the House 
today to inform members about a Habitat for Humanity Women 
Build barbecue that I was invited to attend in Saskatoon on June 



June 29, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 685 

24. We all understand that some families need a helping hand to 
make their dream come true of living in a safe, comfortable, and 
affordable home. Home ownership can change a family’s life, 
and that’s where Habitat steps in. On May 12, ground was 
broken at 211 Slimmon Road in Saskatoon to mark the start of 
construction for 12 more affordable homes for Habitat partner 
families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to note that one of these homes is 
being sponsored by Habitat’s Women Build program. This 
volunteer program brings together women from all walks of life 
who want to learn construction skills and to make a difference 
by building homes and communities. I’m proud to say this is 
Habitat Saskatoon’s fourth Women Build project. Including the 
Slimmon Road project, nine homes across the province have 
been Women Build projects. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are proud to support Habitat’s work, which is 
part of what keeps Saskatchewan strong. Our government 
commends Women Build and all the men and women who are 
taking on the task of building homes for families in need across 
the province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
University. 
 

Recognition Dinner Showcases Tourism Professionals 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On June 15th I had 
the privilege of attending the 23rd annual Tourism Professional 
Recognition Dinner hosted by the Saskatchewan Tourism 
Education Council. Mr. Speaker, this event celebrated the 
professions that make up the robust tourism sector we have here 
in Saskatchewan. I don’t have to remind my colleagues about 
the tourism opportunities that exist here, from the amazing 
natural wonders stretching from the south, north, east, and west 
to the festivals and shows we host. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the backbone of tourism in Saskatchewan are 
tourism-related jobs. Nearly 65,000 or 1 in 10 workers has a job 
in a tourism-related sector and there are a growing number of 
these employees who are attaining their national certification. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the dinner showcased some of the tourism 
professionals that have demonstrated excellence in their fields. 
There were dozens of honourees in 28 different occupations. I 
would like to give a special mention to Cari Lemieux, GM 
[general manager] of Days Inn Regina East and Mark Regier, 
CEO [chief executive officer] of Prairieland Park for winning 
Employer of Choice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members of this Assembly 
congratulate the Saskatchewan Tourism Education Council on a 
successful event and to thank and congratulate all the honourees 
for their skill and contribution to tourism here in Saskatchewan. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 
 

Need for Organ and Tissue Donors 
 

Mr. Marit: — Mr. Speaker, for someone waiting on an organ 
transplant list, the call saying that there is an available organ for 

transplant could give them a whole new life. Charlotte 
L’Oste-Brown knows all too well about that reality. She was 
diagnosed with polymyositis, which triggered her second 
diagnosis of pulmonary fibrosis. This means she will need a 
double lung transplant. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Charlotte has had to alter virtually every aspect of 
her life, including her job, and has been forced to give up many 
of her favourite pastimes such as golf, curling, and dancing. 
She’s become an advocate for organ and tissue donation and 
promotes awareness about the importance of organ donation 
through sharing her story. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government wants to help those like Charlotte 
who are waiting for that call. That is why we are asking the 
Standing Committee on Human Services to review the current 
approach to organ and tissue donation and to recommend ways 
to improve Saskatchewan’s rate of donation. Mr. Speaker, a 
single organ donor can save up to eight lives and a tissue donor 
can save up towards 75 lives. 
 
Today I ask all of you to consider becoming a donor by putting 
the red organ and tissue donor sticker on your health card and 
letting your family know your wishes. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Shooting Stars Foundation Fundraisers 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Shooting Stars 
Foundation held two great fundraisers recently: the Black Tie 
NHL [National Hockey League] Play-off Draft and the Sticks 
on Rose street hockey tournament. 
 
As some of you may know, I was lucky enough to participate in 
the playoff draft alongside the rest of Casino Regina’s team. We 
may have been ridiculed for picking the San Jose Sharks, but 
I’ve been picking them for the last decade, so I figured I finally 
had the chance to get the last laugh as our Casino Regina team 
finished first in the black-tie draft. Mr. Speaker, the Casino 
Regina team was awarded $20,000 for winning the playoff 
draft, and we decided to hand the cheque right back to the 
Shooting Stars Foundation who will use it to help even more 
sick children and their families in and around Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Shermco Industries finished second and Greystone 
Bereavement finished third. 
 
I also had the pleasure of attending the annual Sticks on Rose 
charity street hockey tournament to cheer on the member from 
Gardiner Park who played in the tournament. And I must say, 
for a lineman, he showed very soft hands around the net and 
had a scoring touch which you wouldn’t believe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking everyone 
who made Sticks on Rose and the Black Tie NHL Play-Off 
Draft a success, and also in thanking the Shooting Stars 
Foundation, Jamie Heward, Mike Sillinger, and Jordan Eberle 
for all their support for people across our province.  
 
Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. 
 



686 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2016 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Development of Mining Projects 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, they call it confusion or 
lack of transparency. But whatever they call it, there’s a lot of it 
coming from members opposite. Whether it’s saying that 
Cenovus was contracted to take 100 per cent of the CO2 
guaranteed, even though that simply wasn’t the fact, or the 
supposed $70 trillion — that’s with a “t”, Mr. Speaker — to sell 
technologies that we don’t own and can’t sell. Mr. Speaker, I 
could go on and on. But time and time again, they get their facts 
wrong. 
 
Now we have the member for Last Mountain-Touchwood who 
told a group of citizens that the BHP Jansen mine was “. . . at a 
stage now where if the board of directors doesn’t authorize any 
more expenditure on this project, they’re going to walk away.” 
 
And then the Minister of Energy said, “They’ve never given 
any indication like that at all.” 
 
Now I know we have to be a little careful with what we hear 
from the scandal-plagued minister, but still. Will the Premier 
clarify what is happening with BHP and explain to this House 
the obvious consequences of this kind of speculation from his 
government? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to report to the 
House that, notwithstanding the challenges in terms of 
commodities worldwide, challenges that have affected BHP 
Billiton, one of the . . . if not the largest mining company in the 
world, I’m happy to report to the House that that project 
continues, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The pace of due diligence and the pace of the preliminary work 
on the project has slowed, has slowed commensurate with the 
prices for potash and also with the worldwide financial and 
economic situation. So that would have been an opportune time, 
I guess, for some . . . another company perhaps to do as the hon. 
Leader of the Opposition has indicated that they might be doing 
with respect to cancelling or stopping the project. I am happy to 
report that’s not the case. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue to work with BHP 
Billiton in ensuring that the government’s responsive from a 
regulatory standpoint, from a royalty standpoint, Mr. Speaker. I 
think the company is on record as saying they have liked the 
approach of the Government of Saskatchewan, have welcomed 
the fact that we have reached out and in a proactive way, 
wanting to make Saskatchewan a great place to make what is a 
multi-billion-dollar investment in the province. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Two very different messages, and now I 
guess three messages from government. These are important 

projects. It’s important that the facts are communicated in a 
direct way that reflects reality. This is also the same member 
that apparently told farmers in his own riding that local 
concerns have to sometimes be sacrificed for desperately 
needed economic development. He said, and I quote, “In the 
world, sometimes things happen.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of us are supposed to be bringing our 
constituents’ concerns from our communities to this place, not 
simply bringing that Premier’s, that Premier’s agenda back to 
our ridings, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One community member said, “We have been left with the 
impression that our community is going to have to sacrifice 
itself for the sake of the government’s resource revenues.” And 
government can laugh and guffaw all they want, but I can tell 
you the people and farmers through the Southey area deserve a 
heck of a lot better than that, Mr. Speaker. This is a community 
that’s not saying no to potash. They’re saying no to being 
ignored, to being treated like an afterthought. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after meeting with the MLA [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] and then the ministers, this community 
seems to be even less clear than before. Will the Premier take 
the extra step, the right step, and make sure that the 
community’s concerns are adequately listened to and 
addressed? Rushing approval and railroading valid concerns 
isn’t right and it’s not fair. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the words or the quotations that are referenced by the 
Leader of the Opposition with respect to the member in 
question were taken out of context, Mr. Speaker. I think that’s 
certainly been made clear by the member. 
 
I would also want to point out to the House that it was this 
government that extended the environmental assessment time 
period by another 15 days. Mr. Speaker, the point is that we do 
want to go through the process . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
Well 15 days on top of a significant environmental process — a 
period of time, by the way, that was once prescribed by 
members opposite for major projects. So let’s not forget that 
we’ve actually extended the period of time . . . Well the 
member, the Finance critic wants to chirp from her seat. 
 
The bottom line is this: we’ve actually extended what the 
previous government, the NDP [New Democratic Party] 
government, thought to be a reasonable time for an appropriate 
examination of projects of this scale. That has occurred, Mr. 
Speaker, because we do want to hear from local residents. We 
do want to take the time to make sure we get the environmental 
assessment right. And at the end of the day, we hope there’s the 
right balance. We can address those concerns, protect the 
environment, and also have a welcoming atmosphere for the 
creation of brand new jobs in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, if the Premier thinks 15 



June 29, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 687 

days is going to cut it for a community that’s up against very 
deep pockets, very deep pockets of a state-owned potential 
potash company impacting families that have farmed for years 
in our province, that’s wrong, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, the waste and mismanagement of this government 
have led to some very damaging decisions. Let’s look at Regina 
Public Schools. Last night they were forced into passing a 
deficit of over $800,000. Mr. Speaker, this is a growing school 
division here in Regina. They’re expecting nearly 600 new 
students next year, and without the adequate funding. 
 
One division director admitted, “The level of government 
funding continues to be a challenge.” And one trustee said, 
“This has been a very, very troubling year.” Troubling, Mr. 
Speaker, because the government is failing to provide our 
schools with what they need, with what they were promised, 
and it impacts all the students. And the Finance Minister can 
heckle all he wants, but the impact is for students here today. 
Clearly this government’s method of underfunding school 
divisions isn’t sustainable, and it’s hurting classrooms today. 
 
Why has the Premier dismissed this reality, broken his promise, 
dug his heels in instead of ensuring that our classrooms all 
across Saskatchewan have the resources they need today and for 
tomorrow? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we spend a lot of time in 
this House correcting the things that the members opposite say. 
Yesterday the member from Regina Lakeview asked a question 
about Regina Public staffing levels. In her question she said, 
“Currently three occupational therapists have heavy caseloads 
of close to 20 schools. Now, due to funding cuts . . . one of the 
three will be gone.” We checked with the director of education. 
The director of education said, actually they turned one of the 
. . . from a half FTE [full-time equivalent] into a child 
psychologist. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite was either wrong or leaking 
information from a meeting that didn’t happen until two hours 
later, Mr. Speaker. That’s the question we have from the 
members opposite because it’s fearmongering. It’s unnecessary, 
Mr. Speaker, and it’s something that ought not happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Regina Public School eliminated 8 consultant 
positions, 7 through attrition, but what did they do? They hired 
15 EAs [educational assistants] and 16 teachers. Mr. Speaker, 
they balanced their budget. We commend them for their very 
good work. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — 1993, Mr. Speaker. Wayne’s World was out on 
VHS [video home system]. I was 18 years old, working for the 
summer at Camp Easter Seal. Sure, a lot happened 23 years 
ago. But we’re here to talk about, in this place to talk about cuts 
to education caused by this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, instead of objecting to the premise or reading old 
quotes, I am asking the minister to finally take some 
responsibility for the Sask Party cuts that have left our 

children’s classrooms under-resourced and acknowledge the 
reality today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last night it was Regina Public, but for weeks 
we’ve heard from division after division, board after board 
about the cuts. Seventy-four staff positions cut in Prairie Spirit, 
positions lost in Prairie South, budget shortfalls in both Regina 
and Saskatoon, and everyone scrambling to make up for the 
money that this minister committed to and then walked away 
from. 
 
Will the minister at least acknowledge that his bad faith 
bargaining and refusal to provide proper funding is hurting our 
kids’ classrooms? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, let’s talk about a different 
time frame. Let’s talk about February 3rd of this year. The 
member opposite tweeted out her support for David McGrane’s 
report. The report makes the allegation that education is 
underfunded by $2.4 million and advocates tying education 
funding to GDP [gross domestic product] using a 3 per cent 
figure. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, due to the drop in resource prices, GDP in 
our province has declined by 1.4 per cent this year. Mr. 
Speaker, my question to the member opposite is this: does she 
still support the McGrane report? Does she still want to see a 
1.4 per cent or does she want to see the things that we did, 
which was an increase in funding, Mr. Speaker? Our funding in 
our province is now $2.2 billion, an increase of 34 per cent 
since ’07-08, not the cut that she’s talking about. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, how many people have to speak out 
before this minister takes this situation seriously? We’ve heard 
from people all across the province who have said that this is 
one of the most challenging budgets in years. School divisions 
have faced record difficult decisions. And this government’s 
budget will have a negative effect on our children’s classrooms. 
 
We’ve heard from a mother whose child is losing the EA that 
they’ve had for six years. We’ve heard from teachers concerned 
about class sizes and a lack of available resources; an 
occupational therapist whose caseload, because of this 
government’s cuts, will be simply too difficult to manage; and 
from the school board trustee who says that the level of funding 
provided from this government is simply unsustainable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, students and teachers across this province face a 
challenging year ahead of them. What is this minister’s plan to 
fix the damage done to schools because of this government’s 
cuts? And how does he plan to bring education funding back to 
a level that is sustainable? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we won’t apologize for 
asking the school divisions to look for economies and look for 
good and valuable ways to spend their money. Mr. Speaker, 



688 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2016 

there is only one taxpayer in the province. I have a quote I’d 
like to read: 
 

But I think the reality is, despite having lots of money, one 
should not simply throw money at a problem. That isn’t the 
issue here, Mr. Speaker. One should . . . simply throw 
money at a problem. One should make good investments. 
That’s what good governance is about, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
about making good investments. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s from Hansard May 19, 2016, the member 
for Saskatoon Riversdale. Mr. Speaker, I agree with the 
member for Saskatoon Riversdale. We want to make good 
investments, practical investments to make sure we support the 
students and we support education in our province because 
that’s what this side of the House is about. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Coroner’s Inquest 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, the handling of the investigation 
into Nadine Machiskinic’s death continues to draw more and 
more criticism. Mr. Speaker, Nadine’s family deserved so much 
better for their daughter, mother, and sister. The family is still 
looking for answers and now Dr. John Butt, the former chief 
medical examiner of Alberta and Nova Scotia, has told the CBC 
[Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] that a full coroner’s 
inquest is needed to get to the bottom of what really happened. 
 
Concerns have been raised and acknowledged about the 
investigation. The toxicology report was delayed for months 
and Dr. Butt specifically points out that there are systemic 
problems with the death review process here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the minister agree that a coroner’s inquest is 
needed to review this mismanaged investigation? And will he 
examine the death review process to ensure this confusion and 
mismanagement never happens again? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
every death of course, every suspicious death requires the full 
attention of law enforcement when we’re looking at those kinds 
of things. And certainly, our sympathies go out to the family 
and the friends of Nadine. 
 
But I also say, Mr. Speaker, we have full confidence in the 
coroner’s office to do their work. I will remind the member that 
they, the coroner’s office is independent of the Ministry of 
Justice and we have great respect for the decisions that they 
make. 
 
But I also know, Mr. Speaker, it’s very important that the public 
maintain confidence in the administration of justice, which is 
what I’m responsible for, Mr. Speaker. We do understand 
though, Mr. Speaker, that the chief coroner will be announcing 
an inquest into the death, into Nadine’s death very, very quickly 
and I’ll be working with him. Our office will be working with 
him just to determine what the scope of that inquest will be, Mr. 

Speaker. But I’m pleased to stand in the House today and 
confirm that that inquest will be held. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Capacity of Health Care Facilities 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That’s very good 
news. 
 
We need greater accountability from this government. Hospitals 
are bursting at the seams. It has gotten so bad, it’s not just 
people in hospitals who are affected by this over-capacity. Now 
ambulances are stuck waiting at the hospitals with patients who 
can’t get in. Numbers provided to us by the Minister of Health 
show that off-load delays have doubled in the Saskatoon Health 
Region. Ambulances are not able to get back to work, out to 
save more lives, because they are waiting at the hospital. Will 
the minister acknowledge that this is a huge concern? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it is a concern and that is why, through a number of 
initiatives that the Ministry of Health is working with, in this 
case the Saskatoon Health Region, to look to ways to alleviate 
the challenges that are taking place and the capacity issues that 
are taking place in our major tertiary hospitals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we knew as a government with a growing 
province and a population that’s growing each and every year as 
well as changing demographics of this province, Mr. Speaker, 
that our hospitals needed to ensure, we need to ensure that we 
have the proper complement of beds. That’s why in our seven 
major tertiary hospitals the number of acute care beds is up by 
12 per cent from the times when the members opposite were in 
the government. Mr. Speaker, in fact I think in Saskatoon the 
number, when you look at all three hospitals, it’s closer to 17 
per cent increase in hospital beds in those, in that city. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s why we’re also funding, through a number of 
our initiatives, some pilot projects in Saskatoon that is helping 
to relieve some of the burden and some of the pressures that are 
caused in our emergency departments. And I’d be pleased to get 
into those if there would be subsequent questions. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, I know this minister likes to use 
health statistics from 2013-14. And yes, I’ll give him this: it is a 
couple of decades closer than the numbers used by his 
colleague, but still not acceptable when we are talking about the 
current state of our health care system. Mr. Speaker, we know 
that in March of this year — yes, 2016 — almost half of the 
ambulance calls in Saskatoon had off-load delays. The amount 
of time they spent waiting in hospitals totalled 800 hours. If 
these ambulances are waiting at the hospital, then they aren’t 
able to do their job, and people needing their help will be left 
waiting. What is the minister’s plan to address this situation this 
year? 
 



June 29, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 689 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. Mr. 
Speaker, I’ll try to provide the member with some information 
that is perhaps a little bit more to her liking when it comes to 
being more timely. 
 
In 2016 — that would be this year — the Regina pilot of the 
seniors’ home care pilot project had already served 202 distinct 
clients resulting in a 28 per cent reduction in emergency 
department visits. Saskatoon Health Region, Mr. Speaker, has 
also conducted, using a lean event in Saskatoon . . . resulted in a 
58 per cent reduction in ER [emergency room] wait times at 
Royal University Hospital for cardiac patients in the last year. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can indicate to the members that the member had 
talked about Sanctum in Saskatoon. Since November 2015 that 
project will reduce HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] 
patients’ visits to emergency departments by 40 per cent 
annually, freeing up an average of eight hospital beds per year. 
Those are just three initiatives, and I would be pleased to go on. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, 800 hours just two months ago. 
The amount of time they spent waiting at hospitals totalled 800 
hours. That’s more than a month of waiting squeezed into just 
one month, Mr. Speaker. And if ambulances have to wait for 
hours in an ER to get their patients in, other people in need will 
be left waiting for them. 
 
We’ve heard from the minister that they have policies for one 
ambulance unit to watch several patients so that others can get 
back on the road. Well paramedics say this isn’t working 
because they physically don’t have beds to put people in. Does 
the minister agree that this solution doesn’t seem to be working 
because his lean approach certainly hasn’t transformed the 
health system, and over-capacity is a problem both in and out of 
our hospitals? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, we know that the answer isn’t just adding more beds 
to the hospitals even though, as a government, we have done 
that because we knew that as a growing population and 
changing demographics we didn’t have enough acute care beds, 
especially in our tertiary centres. So, Mr. Speaker, under the 
members opposite there were 1,321 acute care beds in our seven 
largest hospitals. Today there are 1,473, an increase of 152 
beds. 
 
But the answer doesn’t lie just in increasing the number of beds. 
The answer doesn’t lie just in improving the services in the 
emergency department. We need to look at other ways of 
ensuring that we’re providing more appropriate care like the 
policing crisis teams, like our seniors’ house call program, like 
our Connecting to Care program, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, but I’ll also tell you this. We know that this was a 

very difficult budget and we have ensured that our ED 
department waits, our emergency department waits still does 
have money this year, $4.7 million to provide support to a 
number of our health regions. But, Mr. Speaker, the members 
opposite ran on a platform — and I assume the Health critic had 
a hand in writing it — that actually would have saw us spending 
less money in health care this year than what is actually in this 
budget that we will be passing tomorrow. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, once people finally do get into 
the hospital, there still isn’t space for them. The deputy minister 
said that “So those situations when hospitals are in extreme 
over-capacity where, as a last resort, patients are placed in 
hallways . . . ” The Health minister himself then said, “. . . they 
have produced private areas using, trying to curtain off or 
cordon off areas using, the staff using supplies they do have on 
hand.” We think what he’s referring to here is the blanket and 
the IV [intravenous] pole forts that I mentioned recently, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We have heard from health regions that these practices can pose 
fire hazards. And we have heard from sick patients that don’t 
want to be in the hallways with only a blanket for privacy. Now 
that the minister has finally acknowledged this issue, what is the 
plan to deal with it? Is this transformational change? Is the Sask 
Party hoping that hospital tents will be a pseudo-camping 
experience that will make up for the funding that they’ve cut to 
our parks? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, with respect to the member’s previous question where 
she wanted to bring up continuous improvement or lean, Mr. 
Speaker, I do not understand how the member opposite could 
stand and say that this has not helped patients, Mr. Speaker, 
when in Saskatoon at RUH [Royal University Hospital] the 
results for cardiac patients is a 58 per cent reduction in ER wait 
times for those presenting to RUH. Mr. Speaker, there is a 
significant reduction, I believe 95 per cent reduction, from the 
time a patient arrives in Regina at our tertiary centre at the 
General Hospital, Mr. Speaker, for when their first diagnostic 
test takes place, a 95 per cent reduction. 
 
I don’t know how that doesn’t improve outcomes for our 
patients, Mr. Speaker, but the member opposite is opposed to 
that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite is saying that we’re not 
spending enough money, I don’t know what her plan would 
have been when in fact their own budget, which I assume . . . 
Most people thought that Cam Broten was actually the Health 
critic. But surprise — he wasn’t. It was the member opposite. I 
assume that she would have actually had a hand in writing their 
platform. And their platform called for them to spend point 
eight per cent this year when we’re going to spend over 1 per 
cent this year. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 



690 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2016 

Funding for Wakamow Valley Authority 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, layoff notices were delivered 
yesterday for four of the eleven Wakamow Valley Authority 
staff as a result of this government’s cuts. Bill Lawson, 
president of Unifor Local 3, which represents the workers, has 
stated the following: “Moose Jaw residents have been betrayed 
by our own MLAs. This was not announced as part of any plan 
or public consultation before the election.” 
 
Can the minister tell me this: is this the reason why the Sask 
Party didn’t say a darn thing about the coming attack on the 
Wakamow Valley Authority, which would have resulted in 
Sask Party Moose Jaw MLAs getting fired on April 4th instead 
of the layoffs now faced by a third of the Wakamow Valley 
Authority staff? Can he tell me that? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think the 
member opposite would know that due to budgetary process, 
which I know should be well understood at this point, Mr. 
Speaker, budget decisions are made known to the stakeholders 
and the public when the Finance minister rises to deliver the 
budget, Mr. Speaker. The process was followed as standard, and 
the parks were informed at the appropriate time, Mr. Speaker. 
This certainly is a difficult budget decision, Mr. Speaker. And 
the process, the correct budgetary process, Mr. Speaker, was 
followed in respect to this decision. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe in municipalities. They’re in the best 
position to make decisions on their local priorities. And I look 
forward to the next question. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, the Wakamow Valley Authority 
was founded in 1981, which means that it had survived the 
disastrous Devine years of 1982 to ’91 and the tough decisions 
of the ’90s to clean up that unprecedented mess. Can the 
minister tell me this: have the last nine years of the Sask Party 
government been so disastrous as to necessitate . . . 
 
The Speaker: — It’s becoming increasingly difficult to hear 
the answers and questions today. I would ask the Opposition 
House Leader to rise and ask the question again. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Can the minister tell me this: have the last nine 
years of the Sask Party government been so disastrous as to 
necessitate a complete cut of provincial funding for the 
Wakamow Valley Authority, something which has survived and 
endured since 1981, through the tough years of Devine and 
through the tough decisions made in the ’90s to clean up that 
mess? Is it that disastrous, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, just this day we heard the 
Education critic mock the erstwhile and hardworking Minister 
of Education for using a valid reference to decisions that were 
taken in the 1990s, Mr. Speaker, by the previous government. 
 

We’ve heard the Finance critic, the one who supports in 
principle the Leap Manifesto. We’ve heard her from her chair, 
doing the same thing that the members opposite are doing with 
respect to decades, I guess, Mr. Speaker. And not 24 hours 
later, they couldn’t wait 24 hours later to engage in this irony, 
but we have now the critic referencing the Devine years — 
surprise, surprise. They’ve tried it in campaign after campaign, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me just say to members opposite with respect to decisions 
that were taken in the budget with respect to urban parks, and 
not just in Moose Jaw, this government had a look at the 
revenue sharing we provided to municipalities. Up 120 per cent, 
Mr. Speaker. We took a look in the case of Moose Jaw where 
we changed the old NDP rule. Under the NDP when you built a 
health care facility, the local municipality had to come up with 
35 per cent of that. We changed that so Moose Javians would 
only have to come up with 20 per cent. 
 
And here’s why that’s germane, Mr. Speaker. The old formula 
never mattered much with respect to the NDP in Moose Jaw 
because they refused to build a hospital that was needed. That 
hospital is built, saving — with the help of MLAs from Moose 
Jaw — saving Moose Javians $15 million. And more 
importantly, finally, rather than NDP talk, there’s a brand new 
hospital in Moose Jaw. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I caution the members. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING  
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report 
Bill No. 23, The Liquor Retail Modernization Act without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on bills? I recognize the Deputy 
Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — I request leave, Mr. Speaker, to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 
the bill be now read a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The deputy minister has requested leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 23, 
and the bill be read the third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 23 — The Liquor Retail Modernization Act/Loi de 
modernisation du commerce des boissons alcoolisées 

 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — I move that this bill be now read a 



June 29, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 691 

third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Premier that 
Bill No. 23 be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING  
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 
24, The Liquor Retail Modernization Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2016 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the Deputy 
Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 
leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this 
bill and that this bill be now read a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Deputy Premier has requested leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 24 
and that the bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 24 — The Liquor Retail Modernization 
Consequential Amendments Act, 2016 

 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Premier that 
the Bill No. 24 be read the third time and passed under its title. 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING  
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report that it has 
considered certain estimates and to present a second report. I 
move: 
 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 
Crown and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair: 
 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 
Crown and Central Agencies now be concurred in. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from Regina 
Gardiner Park. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by the 
Standing Committee on the Economy to report that it’s 
considered certain estimates and to present its first report and 
move: 
 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on the 
Economy be now concurred in. 

 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Regina Gardiner Park has 
moved the concurrence of the Standing Committee on the 
Economy be now concurred in. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



692 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2016 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I move that this House do now adjourn in order to 
accommodate . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move that this House do now recess to 
accommodate committee later this day. 
 
The Speaker: — This Assembly now stands recessed until 2:45 
today. 
 
[The Assembly recessed from 14:31 until 14:45.] 
 
The Speaker: — Bring the House back to order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
Clerk: — Committee of Finance. 
 
The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 
The Chair: — I’ll call the Committee of Finance to order. 
Before I call on the Premier to introduce his officials and make 
some opening comments, we have quite a number of new 
members in the House, and I thought perhaps I’ll just take a 
couple of minutes to explain the difference between Committee 
of Finance and our standing committees. 
 
The Committee of Finance is part of the House, and the rules of 
debate do apply. One of the more significant things that 
members will quickly realize is that in Committee of Finance, 
and we are dealing with Executive Council estimates, the 
Premier’s estimates, so the Premier is the only person who can 
respond to questions and make comments, unlike standing 
committees where the ministers can call on their officials to 
provide answers. Something else that is a departure from our 
standing committees: when members are speaking, they rise to 
speak as we do in the House. So those are just a few differences 
between this committee and standing committees. 
 
So what I will do is I will ask the Premier to . . . Well first of 
all, as I’ve indicated, we are dealing with the Executive 
Council, vote 10 estimates found on page 55 of the Estimates 
book. And before we begin, I will ask the Premier to introduce 
his officials. I will then call the vote and the Premier can then 
make his opening statement. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair of 
Committees. I’m looking forward to this afternoon’s discussion 
and debate and I am happy to introduce the officials that have 
joined us today in the Assembly. I’ll introduce first and 
foremost my deputy minister, the head of the public service in 
Saskatchewan for just a few more hours, sadly. Doug Moen is 
just to my left, and perhaps towards the end of today I’d like to 
say a few things more about Doug on the record of this place. 
 
Reg Downs is a senior adviser on Executive Council, to my 

right. Kent Campbell is the deputy minister of 
Intergovernmental Affairs. James Saunders, associate deputy 
minister, cabinet planning, is immediately behind Mr. 
Campbell. Jarret Coels, the executive director of House 
business and research was . . . He’s right here now, right behind 
me. And Bonita Cairns, the executive director of corporate 
services and a long-term experienced professional within 
government spanning different administrations, is also here 
again for estimates. And so in advance I thank them all, 
knowing I’ll have the chance to more properly thank them at the 
end of the estimates debate. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Executive Council 

Vote 10 
 
Subvote (EX01) 
 
The Chair: — Thank you, Premier. The business before the 
committee is Executive Council, vote 10, subvote (EX01), 
central management and services. The Premier may make his 
opening comments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair of 
Committees. And I want to say to my hon. friend, the Leader of 
the Opposition, that I’m looking forward to the next several 
hours of discussion and debate with him, and perhaps with 
colleagues if that’s his choosing. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, I think Premier’s estimates are an important 
opportunity for the questioning of government, of the Premier’s 
office in particular, with respect to specific budgetary matters 
within Executive Council. That’s the area of government for 
which I’m responsible as well as Intergovernmental Affairs. 
 
But it’s also the opportunity for both sides to contrast and 
compare, on the broader scale, on the larger issues, our vision 
perhaps for the future of the province, and perhaps even a 
discussion of sort of overall policy matters of government. I 
look forward to both of those elements of Premier’s estimates 
tonight. 
 
And just if I may though, I think it is important for those that 
are watching to note that this is really actually about the 
Premier’s budget in Executive Council. And so I have a bit of 
some introductory comments along those lines that I want to 
share with the House. 
 
Political staff in this building would notionally fall under the 
purview of the Premier’s office, working together with 
ministers’ offices. And I want to inform the House and the 
members of the Finance Committee that the Saskatchewan 
Party government has 43 fewer political and other staff, or 24 
per cent less than the government we replaced. Overall monthly 
salaries for our government are 307,899, pertinent to estimates I 
would say, or 25 per cent less than what was the case under 
members opposite when they were the government. 
 
With respect to travel, our government is the first in history — 
and this very much was a matter of debate in the House and 
certainly affects the business of Executive Council — our 
government is the first in the history of the province to post 
biannual reports on the cost of cabinet ministers’ travel, 



June 29, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 693 

including the cost of accompanying staff. In ’15-16, the number 
of out-of-province trips was down 67 per cent compared to 
2006-07, the last year of the previous government. The cost of 
our out-of-province trips was down 71 per cent since 2006-07, 
$77,000 in ’15-16. It was $263,000 unadjusted for inflation 
when members opposite were the Government of Saskatchewan 
in ’07. In- and out-of-province travel was down 63 per cent. 
The cost of executive air was down 72 per cent in ’15-16 
compared to the last year of the previous government. 
 
From a communications standpoint, also the purview of the 
budget we’re talking about today, the value of the 
communication services tendered in ’15-16 for all ministries 
and Crowns is down 28 per cent since ’06-07, a 16 per cent 
reduction from just last year. So political staff, travel, and 
communications, all part of the debate tonight, as it should be, 
all significantly down since the previous government was 
replaced, and a trend that we’ll need to continue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Those are some introductory comments on the specific matter 
of the budget of Executive Council, but I know we’re going to 
have a much broader, wide-ranging debate. I look forward to 
that as well and I thank the Leader of the Opposition in advance 
for his work tonight. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you to 
the Premier and to the officials that have joined us here today. 
And our officials are a little leaner on this side of the equation 
here today, but I certainly stand with good hon. members and 
I’m proud to stand with them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would like to join with the Premier in acknowledging the 
distinguished service of the individual who is sitting beside him 
today, that being Doug Moen, somebody who has served his 
province with distinction, who’s provided leadership to many 
governments and to the people of the province. And certainly 
I’d like to thank him for that leadership and that service here 
today on behalf of the official opposition. 
 
I think that, you know, the Premier said we’ll have questions, 
obviously, and we’ll go forward here today. This is an 
important opportunity to raise concerns on behalf of 
Saskatchewan people, to expand on certain items that hopefully 
greater clarity can be brought to Saskatchewan people. And I’m 
happy to engage I guess in my first round of Premier’s 
estimates. And as an interim leader I’m here for a good time, 
not a long time, so I maybe . . . I think I’ll have two of these 
experiences, Mr. Speaker. So we’ll get into it for now and I 
appreciate everybody’s participation. 
 
When we look at the Global Transportation Hub and the deal 
that went down that’s under investigation here right now, my 
question to the Premier would be, when did he learn that he 
required the 204 acres that was acquired? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — I thank the Leader of the Opposition for his 
question. I think it’s fair to say that the idea, the concept for a 
global . . . a transportation hub pre-existed our government. I 
think it’s fair to say that the previous government was looking 
carefully at the opportunities around a hub, a logistics and 
transportation hub. And perhaps it was only at the officials’ 

level, or perhaps it made it up to the political level at that time 
and they rejected the idea. I don’t know the answer to that, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
But I can say that our government was keenly interested in the 
opportunity. We knew that Manitoba was proceeding with their 
inland port, I’m forgetting the name just now. 
 
A Member: — CentrePort. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — CentrePort. Aptly named, I guess. And we 
did believe and industry believed and officials, I believe, at the 
time in Highways really believed that Saskatchewan should also 
be heading down this road. And so in a very general sense, 
discussion on this particular idea and on the concept, and on the 
fact that our government wanted to look very carefully at the 
opportunity, would have began shortly after the election. I 
would expect probably the discussions were more in depth and 
in detail years, you know, going forward. 
 
With respect to the actual 204 acres, I want to share this with 
members of the committee. We ought not to preclude the work 
of the auditor here today. The auditor’s doing good work, and a 
report, we expect to have that released. And I think there’ll be 
some attention paid to all of these questions because the auditor 
by definition will have looked through minutes of the cabinet. I 
can tell members of the committee that our government’s made 
sure to make all of those minutes available, every document that 
the auditor might have needed to conduct a fulsome and 
complete study into the matter. That co-operation has been 
forthcoming. 
 
The original . . . The 204 acres, even if it wasn’t that specific 
number, but the need to have a large land assembly to achieve 
the aims and the goals of a global transportation hub would 
have happened, could have happened as early as 2012 and, 
more significantly, later on in 2013 when specific parcels were 
being identified, I think, by the GTH [Global Transportation 
Hub] as necessary to achieving the goals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know we’ll get into the GTH here a bit today. 
And we’re probably not going to be getting into that much 
specificity because the auditor’s reporting, and I don’t want to 
preclude that report in Premier’s estimates. But I want to share 
with members that this has been a significant economic 
development achievement for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
There are hundreds of permanent jobs at the Global 
Transportation Hub that exist there today that would not exist 
there before, had we not reversed the decision of the previous 
government just to walk away from this opportunity. There 
were thousands of construction jobs and new private sector 
companies that were never here before now located at that 
facility. There is considerable interest on the part of others to 
continue to locate at the particular hub. I’ve been meeting them 
over the last number of months, as the minister has, because we 
now have this to offer those who are interested in locating here 
in Saskatchewan. We have something unique with respect to the 
hub that didn’t exist before. 
 
So we’ll, I’m sure, have some discussion about it. I don’t think 



694 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2016 

it’s right to get into too much detail about it because I have 
asked the auditor to do a complete and fulsome review of this 
matter. Whatever is reported will be made public, and we will 
be looking forward to following the recommendations that 
come from that report. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — So the Premier said that the particular 
parcel that includes sort of this 204 acres, this parcel, that it was 
about 2012 is what the Premier has said. I just wanted him to 
clarify and make sure that that’s correct. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — I can get the specifics, which I think have 
already been provided, and cabinet minutes have been provided 
to the auditor. So we can summarize what was provided the 
auditor if the auditor doesn’t have that information. 
 
But my recollection here today is that the broader issue of a 
larger acreage needed was around that date, I would say to the 
member opposite, not necessarily specific to the exact parcel, 
the 204 acres. That’s my memory of it. I stand to be corrected 
and will be happy to check specifically if it was that detail, 204 
acres, or just the notion that a larger acreage was needed for 
assembly to achieve the hub’s objectives. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Could the Premier possibly check with 
his officials just to see where, you know, where the 
consideration was? So if it was 2012, at that point, just to make 
sure that he has his, that he’s comfortable with the facts he’s 
presenting. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Sure. We can try to provide that in the next 
number of hours that we’re meeting here today. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — I mean, it is a bit passing strange that 
this isn’t rather well known. This has been, has had significant 
attention, and of course it involves a large amount of money 
and significant concerns and investigation. So it’s passing 
strange that that information wouldn’t be here. 
 
And I guess my question to the Premier would be, just a couple 
of years ago when I would have questioned the minister on this 
in committee, he said that this land, these parcels had been 
identified right back at the start as being needed. So that’s in 
direct contrast to what we’re hearing from the Premier today . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . It certainly is. So if you go back and 
check the committee record, it’s a record of Hansard for us 
here. 
 
Today my question to the Premier is, why would the minister 
who’s sitting just two over from him here today, and there to 
consult with the Premier, why would he answer that this was 
known pretty much from the get-go, the genesis of the GTH, 
and early on in those very early years of 2008 that this land 
parcel was identified as being needed? So that was the 
minister’s answer. Why is the Premier’s different? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, I should say that there isn’t a 
discrepancy. That’s the first point I would make. From the very 
beginning of our interest in the hub there was . . . It was well 
known to those involved on the board and the ministers that 
were responsible for the file that a large parcel of land, 
geographically where the current, you know, parcel that’s under 
some discussion and debate is located, would be required for 

the hub to be successful. 
 
In a general sense, in a general sense, the board had identified 
those parcels south and east late in ’11. Some cabinet discussion 
early on would have happened in ’12, final decisions happening 
then in ’13, late ’13. And this is also a matter of the review by 
the auditor as a result of the government ensuring that all 
cabinet documents were turned over to the auditor. And so 
beyond those general dates, I think we’re going to wait on the 
auditor to do her good work, report back to the Assembly and to 
the public, and accept her recommendations. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — This is in disconnect from what’s been 
shared. And it’s not highly believable that there wouldn’t be 
incredible detail on this file by the Premier with what’s at stake 
and the amount of attention that’s been on it. So I’m certainly 
not satisfied with what’s been offered forward. 
 
I asked the question directly to the Premier, and I gave a chance 
for him to seek information from officials. And he stated that 
2012 was when it would’ve been learned that these parcels were 
needed. But when in committee with the minister, the minister 
. . . First, government was less than clear about these parcels 
being required, but when pushed a little bit further said, well 
that goes “. . . back a little ways [this is the minister] beyond the 
estimates here tonight, but fair enough. I don’t think there’s any 
problem in responding to that. And he goes on with a little more 
information. 
 
And then specific to it, this is my question to the minister: 
“Okay. So when was it known to the GTH that you required 
that land?” And the minister answered at that point, oh it would 
go right directly here. I recall the flow of information:  
 

Oh it would go [right] back before my time as minister. I 
think probably right at the very outset of our government 
taking over in 2007 would’ve been, that would’ve been a 
priority of the GTH, to acquire those lands to accommodate 
that free-flow access. 
 

And my question back, just to clarify to make sure that “The 
two smaller parcels accounting to 204 acres, those were 
identified back in ’07?” That was my question, and the 
minister’s response was, “A long time ago, yes.” 
 
And so I guess my question to the Premier: just what’s the 
discrepancy here, stating here today to the people of 
Saskatchewan, with a lot of time and a lot of resources before 
you here today, that it was 2012 that government was aware of 
this, when clearly the minister has, on the record and direct, 
already that this was . . . that this parcel, in fact very clear the 
204 acres in question, that they were required right back to the 
start of things, right to the start of government. That’s his 
response. 
 
So my question to the Premier: provide some clarity as to why 
his answer was what it was initially here, or why the minister’s 
answer is what it is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member’s question 
was, when did I know about it, the specific parcel. And having 
then reviewed the specifics, which he asked me to do, I 
answered that question fully. When the board had identified the 



June 29, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 695 

need is another matter. When the board of the GTH has 
identified the need for the hub to be successful is quite a 
different matter than the first question he asked. 
 
And so I know that it’ll be in his interest to try to portray some 
sort of discrepancy that simply does not exist. We’ve seen that 
throughout this session. And we’ve seen the NDP have to back 
away from comments that they’ve made and allegations that 
they’ve made that have been factually incorrect. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I would also say to my hon. friend that the NDP 
asked for the auditor to look at the matter. I agreed with them 
and asked that that occur. So there’s been a considerable 
amount of work that’s gone on by an independent officer of the 
province of Saskatchewan. The auditor has undertaken a 
significant amount of work. We expect the report to be out 
shortly; we would assume. The report will be released publicly. 
The members of the House will have a chance to look at the 
report, on both sides. 
 
And so I would say to my hon. friend, we’re going to let the 
auditor do their work and not go over the details of the work 
that she’s doing, to preclude the work that she’s doing. And 
when the matter is reported out, I’m sure the Leader of the 
Opposition will have questions in this place and outside this 
place, as he should, as members opposite should. And I’m sure 
the government will be required to answer them as we are 
happy and more than willing to do. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — The Premier is right. My question was, 
when did the Premier learn of this. So he’s saying he learned in 
2012. Now my question before to the minister was, when was 
he aware? . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And so he knew a 
long time before that. Sorry, the Premier? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Read the quote again. Read your own 
quote again. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — So the minister identified that he knew 
back to 2007. So fair enough, if the minister, if the Premier is 
saying that he wasn’t aware until 2012. I just want to confirm 
that the minister was aware well in advance of 2012, as the 
minister stated in committee. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — So here’s what the Leader of the Opposition 
has just attempted to do: to quickly read a quote — and I would 
argue mischaracterize the quote — from Hansard, from 
estimates, of what the minister said in an answer and then try to 
fabricate some sort of controversy with respect to that quote and 
what I have just said. Well I’m going to read the quote back to 
the member. Here’s what he quoted the minister saying: 
 

Oh it would go back before my time as minister. [So in 
other words, the original discussion of the land that would 
be required for the GTH.] I think probably right at the very 
outset of our government taking over in 2007 . . . that 
would’ve been the priority of the GTH to acquire those 
lands . . . 

 
And I have shared for members of this House — including the 
member opposite who’s asked the question — that the board 
itself, together with the CEO, will have been . . . Perhaps it — if 
the process was working right — would have identified the land 

assembly needs prior to any minister knowing because that’s 
how it works. We’re going to let the professionals in the public 
service and the boards that are duly appointed by the 
government to do the due diligence to operate government 
entities, in this case the Global Transportation Hub. They’re 
going to take some time to do that. They’re going to do their 
homework as they identify, in this case, parcels that are needed 
to purchase before it’s ever brought to the attention of a 
minister. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — I appreciate that, and this is getting the 
facts on the record here, so I’m not characterizing anything in a 
way that’s other than what we’re seeking here, is clarity. So the 
Premier says that he learned in 2012. The minister was 
commenting about this before and stating that the GTH had 
known for a long time, back to 2007. When was the minister 
aware of these 204 acres? Is the Premier suggesting that it was 
just the board that knew, or when was the minister aware of the 
need to acquire those lands? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — November of 2012, Mr. Chair . . . 2011. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — So the minister, from the Premier’s 
perspective, wasn’t aware that the lands needed to be acquired 
by the GTH. The suggestion is then that the GTH itself, their 
administrative team, their board of directors was aware of this 
before that, but the minister wasn’t until November of 2011. 
Was that when he was then aware of this parcel of land that 
needed to be acquired? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — I think that’s correct. I think I follow that 
correctly. The board and the CEO of the GTH identifying the 
parcel that would be required happened around almost the same 
time as the minister assuming the portfolio. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — The land had been identified by the 
board before that. There was ministers prior to that. Was the 
minister that had responsibility prior to that, did they have 
understanding that this parcel needed to be acquired? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’ve just conferred 
with the previous minister, the member for Rosetown, and he 
recalls that there would have been, again, general discussions 
on the part of the board and the CEO in terms of the need to 
acquire more land, but it’s highly unlikely that it would have 
been related to this specific parcel because the route, the bypass 
route had not yet, as you will know, been established, had been 
formalized. But it is not his recollection that there was specific 
discussions of the parcel that we are currently discussing, the 
204 acres. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — I guess that’s just strange in the sense 
that the minister certainly stated on the record very specifically 
that it was those parcels that accounted for the 204 acres, was 
known by the GTH right from the get-go, 2007. That’s the . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Let’s make sure we get this onto the 
record properly. I have no desire to have anything but the facts 
on there . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . You can yell if you 
want, folks, but the fact that it was laid out there was, to the 
minister, was that the GTH needed this land at that point. 
 



696 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2016 

If you check the Hansard record, I specifically entered back 
into the . . . to ensure that that was the right one. So my question 
was, “Okay. So when was it known to the GTH that you 
required the land?” And the minister said, “Oh it would go back 
before my time as minister. I think probably right at [the time] 
the very outset of our government taking over in 2007 would’ve 
been, that would’ve been a priority of the GTH, to acquire those 
lands to accommodate that free-flow access.” And then just to 
clarify, my response was, “The two smaller parcels accounting 
to 204 acres, those were identified back in ’07?” And the 
minister’s response was, “A long time ago, yes.” 
 
So now we can move on from this for now, but the point being 
the minister over a year ago sat in committee and said that those 
204 acres were known by the GTH a long period ago that they 
needed to be acquired. The minister was aware that they needed 
to be when he was in committee. I don’t when he was briefed 
otherwise. My question is, you know, fairly simple here. If the 
GTH and if the board of directors and the ministers responsible 
were aware that that land was required, it also sort of 
contradicts the response from the Premier just now around the 
previous minister not knowing those lands were necessarily 
needed because of changes to the route. The minister said in his 
response before that those lands were needed in 2007. The point 
being a whole bunch of other lands were acquired through that 
period of time. They laid out the footprint that was needed for 
the GTH and the lands were acquired, and for much smaller 
amounts per acre of course than what this land went for. 
 
So I guess my question to the Premier is, what’s his 
understanding? I’m sure he’s asking this question of his team 
and his cabinet. Why were these lands not acquired sooner? 
Why were they not acted on in a way that was sooner to save, 
certainly save dollars for the public? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, I just would disagree with my 
hon. friend’s characterization of his time in estimates with the 
current minister. The comments with respect to the land needed, 
notionally the area, southeast parcel, being known for some 
time I think is the correct answer the minister gave him. Of 
course that would be the case if you were to have a successful 
Global Transportation Hub. Now he did say in estimates with 
respect to the two parcels accounting for 204 acres identified by 
the board and the CEO, that general land, that area. I’m sure it 
would have been identified very early on by the board and the 
CEO where you’re going to actually have the parcel once the 
route is determined. But the timeline in terms of specific 
knowledge for cabinet or even the minister is quite different, 
and I think that’s reasonable. I guess we’re anxious to see what 
the auditor’s report would reveal about that, Mr. Chair. 
 
I think a challenge that faced this particular project — and, I 
would argue, faced any private or public sector entity that was 
involved in land assembly during this time period — is the 
nearly exponential growth in the prices of land that we saw 
across this province, driven by economic growth, by 
unprecedented economic growth. And so in the case of GTH, 
when we established it, we did not establish it with the powers 
of expropriation. And so the short answer to the question of the 
member is, you’re into then a willing buyer, willing seller 
proposition in a very, very hot market. 
 
 

Mr. Chair, I think we’re aware in general that this was the 
nature of the real estate market at the time in Saskatchewan, and 
the auditor, you know, may well comment on some of this as 
well. But I think that’s what drove much of this process, was 
the reality that the government, through the GTH, needed the 
land. The GTH did not have powers of expropriation, and so 
then the willing buyer, willing seller dynamic unfolds in a very, 
very active and robust real estate market. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — So it goes directly to the question that I 
finished with on that. So why didn’t government move sooner, 
recognizing that the GTH needed this land right from the onset? 
Small parcel, why was that small parcel . . . When government 
acted on a whole bunch of other larger parcels of land to 
assemble this land in a very hot market, why did government sit 
idle while this land potentially was driven up in value? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. To my hon. friend I 
would say, knowing what we know now, and even shortly 
afterwards in terms of the market . . . The answer’s yes. I wish 
we would have been able to buy this land sooner. We would 
have been able to buy it at a lower cost. I think there’s probably 
a number of developers and homeowners and businesses that 
could probably say the same thing about the events, the real 
estate transactions that they may have delayed in 2011 through 
2014-15. 
 
The short answer to the member is, we should have moved 
more quickly, in hindsight. Perhaps we could have granted 
some temporary powers of expropriation to the Global 
Transportation Hub. I think government should be a bit 
circumspect about expropriating powers for the reasons that 
actually members opposite have canvassed in the debate. But I 
think it’s a fair criticism of the government with respect to 
assembly in this regard. And perhaps it can be a criticism of 
other entities in the province that, you know, hindsight would 
clearly show purchases should have been made more quickly 
and, perhaps on a temporary basis, more powers granted to the 
GTH to move from a more expropriative position. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — It was identified, as the minister said 
clearly, by the GTH. We haven’t quite had clarified for us what 
the GTH was . . . That it was identified by the GTH that this 
land was needed right from 2007, right from the get-go. And the 
Premier’s now saying, well that didn’t mean that the minister 
knew before that, or didn’t mean that he did. He knew in 2012. 
 
Now there was the . . . You know, the Sask Party did have 
representation on the board of directors, I believe right back to 
about 2009. Does the Premier have . . . I suspect this has been 
reviewed by officials. It’s an important file to the province of 
Saskatchewan. What about the former MLA that was on the 
board back to 2009? Does the Premier have any understanding 
of what he knew about this project at that point in time? I think 
it would have been a former MLA that would have been on it. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — The former member for Cypress Hills was 
involved as minister early on, and on the board. And no, the 
answer to the question is no; I’m not aware of his specific 
involvement or knowledge at this time, I would say to the 
Leader of the Opposition. 



June 29, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 697 

I would also want to point out though, that in discussion with 
officials, that the Highways ministry was aware that they would 
need some portion, some part of this parcel that’s now in 
discussion — not all of it and, I would argue, probably a modest 
part of it — dating back to 2008. So there’s a knowledge and a 
need that there’s going to be some land required, not only for 
the hub, but for the bypass once the route is resolved. 
 
But it’s just not known . . . The specific parcel, the specific 
route, both of these things are unknown. And I think we all 
would rather that we could go back in time and consider all of 
the options with respect to the assembly of land at a time of 
fast-rising prices in real estate. 
 
I would also point out that when we had worked with 
stakeholders and consulted with the business community on the 
establishment of the hub, the reason why we didn’t originally 
grant it expropriation powers is that it’s effectively a business. 
In fact there’d be other entities in the province today, one in 
Saskatoon, that would argue there’s a competitive element to 
this. And so to provide it that competitive of an advantage of 
expropriation was not the decision that we wanted to take at the 
time. I’m glad we didn’t. But there perhaps would have been 
other things that government could do to speed up the 
acquisition and the process in a market that had these fast-rising 
prices. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Just to maybe get the Premier to clarify 
the point that was made around Highways and having 
knowledge of the need to assemble certain parcels of land back 
to 2008. That’s a bit, it’s some new information that he’s 
sharing here today. So now this is 204 acres. So it’s very small, 
a little over a quarter section of land, very small parcel. And 
Highways would have maps; they’d have their information as to 
what they were considering back to 2008. So back to 2008 for 
Highways, was this parcel directly under consideration? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — I can share with my friend that it’s just a 
general conclusion in the Highways ministry that more land 
might be needed. The route’s not determined yet and, in fact as 
you’ll know, Highways cannot move on assembling land 
without routes first being determined. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Okay, sure. But they’ll be doing 
preparation and they’ll be laying out plans as to what land 
would be potentially impacted or needed to be assembled. So 
just to clarify the comments around knowledge back to 2008 
and Highways, some of the considerations at that time, did 
those considerations impact some portion of or in entirety the 
small little parcel, the 204 acres being discussed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — I don’t have the specific amount of acreage 
that Highways would have been identifying because I’m not 
sure it existed at the time, other than to say a modest portion of 
the 204 acres. Highways was looking forward past 2008, as 
they do for planning. 
 
For example, I think we’re working together with the city of 
Saskatoon to do some very early looks at the perimeter road 
locations for Saskatchewan’s largest city. We’re a long ways 
away from being able to move on that project in a meaningful 
way. But I think Highways is going to begin to do the planning, 
identifying generally what might be needed and where and what 

the options might be. Until a route is approved, they simply 
can’t assemble, as you’ll know, they can’t move to assemble 
land. And so in 2008, Highways identified a modest portion in 
that area of the same 204 that may be required for transportation 
purposes. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — So what portion had they identified at 
that point in time? Of course there’s planning documents that 
would be in place. It’s only 204 acres; I mean, a little over a 
quarter section. So are we talking half of this or how many 
acres are we dealing with that the Ministry of Highways would 
have identified back in ’08? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well in conference with the Highways 
minister, unless this was a completely unique situation, there 
would just not be a specific acreage parcel because that’s just 
not identified until a route’s been determined. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — So fair enough, we don’t have the exact 
number, the amount of acreage that was needed, but the 
Premier’s been clear that Highways had identified that they 
needed some portion of this 204 acres. So he has that 
understanding and that knowledge, and he says it would be 
some piece of that. So maybe we can’t get that full piece, but 
just the fact that Highways certainly needed a portion of this 
land is knowledge that the Premier has and that Highways had 
back in 2008 — the Premier states — and never acted upon it. 
 
Meanwhile though, if you look in this whole region, a lot of that 
land had been assembled back in that period of time. In fact 
some of it had been purchased. Expropriation had been utilized 
in other cases. There was lawsuits that were in place. So we’re 
talking about a very small portion of land though in the 204 
acres, a very small parcel that sat not acted upon by government 
that certainly by inaction has wasted a whole bunch of money. 
But let’s set that aside. I mean, that’s a massive problem for 
Saskatchewan people, but we’ll set that aside. I think that 
people need to know, deserve the answer. 
 
Now he mentioned, the Premier mentioned expropriation. 
Certainly that isn’t what happened here. The sum that was paid 
was incredibly handsome, didn’t reflect land purchases on any 
of the other pieces, or even the land that was, had gone through 
court processes. And then after that, the land was acquired for 
103,000 an acre, I believe, which is astronomical, despite even 
the fact that that’s a hot market in that area at a hot time within 
the province. 
 
But then the Highways ministry afterwards paid far less for the 
land. They purchased back the 58 acres, almost like they 
expropriated back from government but, you know, didn’t pay 
the same sum that the GTH had. I guess, how does the Premier 
explain why Highways would have acquired this land, why 
Highways would’ve acquired this land back from the GTH at an 
amount per acre much less than, you know, than government 
had acted upon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — I just want to clarify something again. Just 
very quickly we see the Leader of the Opposition, at the outset 
of his preamble, try to move towards a representation of the 
facts that I would argue is not accurate. 
 
If in 2008 the Ministry of Highways is notionally identifying, 



698 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2016 

not just around Regina but around other communities, land that 
might be needed, that does not automatically imply that the 
minister or the Premier’s office or the Premier knows about 
these things. This government’s going to go about its business, 
and officials will do that. And at the appropriate time, it’ll come 
through the process. 
 
And while he’s agreeing, I would just ask the hon. member to 
not characterize things as knowledge of premiers or ministers 
when the answer’s been given that the ministry, which is quite a 
different matter altogether, has been early on identifying land 
that is needed. And with respect to the questions, now he’s 
asking very specific to what goes to the heart of the auditor’s 
report. I look forward to the auditor reporting and the 
recommendations therein. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — No, that’s not acceptable, Mr. Chair. 
The question was . . . Without a doubt we have this Assembly 
for a reason. This is the people’s Assembly. This is the 
Premier’s estimates, so it doesn’t cut it. The question relates to 
land was initially acquired by the GTH for $103,000 an acre, 
and then at that point Highways acquired it back, 58 acres. And 
what did they pay? They paid 50,000 an acre at that point. So 
I’d like to understand why there’s this discrepancy in place, 
why the GTH would have paid the enormous sum, and why 
Highways would have then, you know, paid a very different 
rate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — First of all, Mr. Chairman, I want to point 
out for members of the House that this Assembly is a place for 
these answers to be provided and for there to be accountability. 
And I’m assuming that’s why the NDP called for the Provincial 
Auditor to look in the report, who is an officer of the province 
of Saskatchewan, an independent officer of this Assembly. 
 
And so they have asked for a detailed report, I’m assuming so 
that this thing can be properly reviewed and inquired into, 
which is what I believe would be happening. I’m sure members 
opposite agree that the auditor will be doing that work. That 
report is accountable then to this Assembly. So let’s just be very 
clear here: every single question that the Leader of the 
Opposition has, that the NDP have about the matter is going to 
be subject to the debate that will follow the auditor’s report, 
which will be public. 
 
So what we ought not to get into here in these three hours of 
Premier’s estimates is whether or not we’re going to be serving 
the interests of democracy in terms of all the details coming out, 
because we most assuredly will be. The report was requested by 
the government and we fully expect all of the 
recommendations, whatever they say, whatever they might say, 
will be the matter of debate here and across the province and 
will also be acted upon by the provincial government. 
 
I will say this with respect to the 58 acres. Part of the deal is 
that the Ministry of Highways agreed to move soil off the land 
at no cost to the GTH, which would account for the 
compensation differential. This amounted to additional 
compensation that resulted in GTH receiving roughly the same 
amount it paid for the land, roughly the same amount it paid for 
the land. The auditor reviewed the transaction in 2014, didn’t 
find any particular issues with it, this transaction. And you 
know, there might be further comment when the auditor reports. 

We’ll wait and see. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Just to be clear, we’ve also, not only 
have we called for the auditor, we’ve called for some specific 
measures that weren’t supported on that front by members 
opposite. We’ve also called for hearings and for committees, 
and we supported a judicial inquiry on this front. So certainly 
this is something that Saskatchewan people care about. 
 
Just if we’re looking at this land here again too, certainly part of 
the question has been what potential relationship or conflict 
may have been in place with government or with ministers or 
with MLAs. And I know of course that’s been some of the 
question that’s existed around this. I suspect the Premier will 
have reviewed this very closely, and I suspect he’ll have made 
sure he has the details on this front as it relates to relationships, 
to government in a larger sense, to cabinet, to MLAs, to those 
that would have information. Has the Premier identified any . . . 
I guess, can he speak to the relationships of those individuals 
that flipped the land that was then purchased by the GTH? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chairman, in the preamble to the 
question, the member cites the judicial inquiry that they asked 
for. And so that means the NDP would believe there would 
have been a criminal wrongdoing. That means the NDP would 
believe there was a chance, I think their terms was “breach of 
trust,” which would be criminal. And so I would just ask him, 
what is he alleging specifically? What conversations or 
clarification would he have me seek, and of which ministers? 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — So we have a Premier that’s before us 
here today who will, I would hope, have reviewed this with a 
fine-toothed comb, who has had a story, who’s had a story with 
. . . And the very fair question, the very fair question to the 
Premier, the question to the Premier . . . And he can shout and 
he can heckle and not answer questions, as we’ve seen, or have 
discrepancies in his answers as we’ve seen here today. 
 
But what we would prefer is some . . . the answer to the 
question. Has the Premier, in his full review of this deal, has he 
found relationships? And could he describe the relationships of 
those that owned the land or flipped the land that was acquired 
by the GTH with government proper, MLAs, cabinet minister, 
cabinet ministers. Simple, straightforward question to the 
Premier. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — The answer is no, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — The auditor’s report I suspect is fairly 
soon here, and at that stage typically of an auditor’s report, 
government should have a very strong understanding of what 
those recommendations coming out of the auditor’s report 
would be. At this point in time, does the Premier have any 
commitments on this front, or actions that’ll be taken in 
response to this land deal or the review by the auditor? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, we’ll respond fully to the report 
when it’s released. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — As far as the acquisition of SaskPower, 
of their land out at the GTH, can the Premier speak to that 



June 29, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 699 

acquisition and how that land is being utilized? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — There remains plans on the books, and 
acquisition has been made of land. SaskPower identified the 
need to centralize and consolidate a number of logistical 
operations that they have in terms of facilities in different parts 
of Regina and area and thought it was reasonable to centralize 
them at a logistics centre. I can tell members of the committee, 
however, that given the current fiscal challenges that face not 
just the government proper, but the Crowns, that those plans are 
currently on hold. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — So the land that was acquired and raised 
with some concern at the time, I know by myself anyways in 
committee with the minister, if not another forum, was that you 
had a minister that was the Minister for SaskPower as well as 
the Minister for the GTH with the hat on of being the Minister 
For SaskPower acquiring land. And I believe at the time it was 
23 million. I think or I guess the Premier could probably clarify, 
and that was in December of 2013 just a couple of months 
before the purchase of the 204,000 acres for $21 million. So I 
guess my question: is there any . . . Was that cash needed to 
move for the GTH, for the GTH to acquire the lands in 
question? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, there’s no connection between 
the two. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — And the questions that we’ve had in the 
past as well is what due diligence was done around the decision 
to take the people’s money, those paying power rates across 
Saskatchewan, and to acquire land for 23 million. And I think 
then it was going to be a couple of hundred million dollars of 
supposed project work for SaskPower out at that facility. But 
there wasn’t much detail as to what the economics or the value 
case was for SaskPower on this front. 
 
The Premier’s now saying that he’s stalled this project because 
of the economic conditions. Has the Premier reviewed the 
merits of the case for the acquisition of those lands and the 
development of that parcel of land for SaskPower, the 
consolidation of facilities that’s been referenced? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, I don’t have SaskPower officials 
here, but the minister has pointed out that officials at the 
corporation identified the need for the project. And I hope that 
members on both sides of the House will understand that we 
have an excellent team over at SaskPower. Although I 
sometimes doubt whether the members believe that, given their 
line of questioning on previous occasions with respect to energy 
generation in this province. 
 
But I think we need to give the benefit of the doubt to the 
executive suite at SaskPower. The project was needed. Things 
have changed materially in terms of the fiscal state of the 
province, the economic state of the province, and I think it’s 
reasonable that corporations, private and public, may delay 
things in light of those changes, in light of economic factors, 
and that’s been the case. There isn’t a connection between these 
two inasmuch as the hon. member would like there to be. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — I’ve got nothing but respect for folks 
over at SaskPower, but certainly the ministers and their answers 

that vary by the day are subject to scrutiny. And I hope it won’t 
encumber the Premier too much to be accountable to the people 
of Saskatchewan with a few more questions on various fronts. 
Maybe he has a place he’d rather be, but you know, this is part 
of the process and it’s something you’ve signed up for; it’s 
something I’ve signed up for. 
 
Just as far as the actual GTH itself and the actual . . . So the 
question is, was there the right . . . Was the case something that 
the government’s confident in as to why they require land and 
consolidating projects over for SaskPower? That’s a question 
that’ll stand. Of course we do know that the actual GTH has 
underperformed expectations. Lots of lofty, boastful language 
about the number of trucks that would be coming and going by 
this stage right now that aren’t there. And certainly we see 
parking lots and lots of weeds, but not a whole lot of uptake 
with the private sector, something that’s certainly important to 
Saskatchewan people to be able to get value back out of the 
investment that they’ve made. 
 
Something that we’ve never quite been able to get from the 
minister on this front is any sort of a report on full value for 
money for the GTH, an understanding of what the investment 
has been to date, what the investment is that’s needed both on 
site by way of utilities, but of course as well by way of 
highways infrastructure to support the GTH. A very sizable 
investment that Saskatchewan people have made with their 
hard-earned tax dollar and no adequate report yet as to what the 
payoff is for Saskatchewan people, what the return on 
investment is. 
 
So just looking to the Premier, if he can provide to the people of 
Saskatchewan if there is information as to the total sum that’s 
been invested not just on site but also the related infrastructure 
to support the GTH, and what assessments he has that he could 
share with us that provide confidence and value for money. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chair, first let me just say that I 
am happy to be here in this particular position serving with 
these colleagues on this side of the House, Mr. Chair. I hope the 
member opposite’s happy as well. 
 
I would also want to highlight for the member that we’ll get 
him the total numbers of public sector investment in the GTH, 
but I completely disagree with his characterization of this being 
a failure. I know that the NDP desperately want these things to 
fail. It fits their political narrative. It’s why they have attacked 
things like BD3 [Boundary dam 3] even when frankly the 
federal government and the International Energy Agency, 
they’ve moved on. Even when IBEW [International 
Brotherhood of Electrical Workers] sent out letters when they 
were attacking that project not very long ago, criticizing the 
NDP. This is a major trade union criticizing the NDP for being 
myopic in its view of Boundary dam 3. 
 
You know, Mr. Chairman, this is part of the reason why I think 
politically the NDP have struggled is because they need to 
separate what they think to be their own political interests from 
what the interests of the people in the province and the 
economy of Saskatchewan is. And I thought this new leader, the 
interim leader, would have a shot at doing that, but frankly I’m 
not sure he’s even reached the standard of his predecessor in 
this regard. 



700 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2016 

Let me just say this about . . . Oh the Finance critic’s shaking 
her head. The first challenge I think is some of the 
appointments that he’s made and the signal that sent to the 
economy with people who want to debate about the Leap 
Manifesto. He made them the Finance critic. He wants to renew 
his party and he handpicked someone who didn’t just vote for it 
in principle, who signed the Leap Manifesto, someone who’s 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well I do have it memorized. It 
doesn’t take much to memorize that because I’d say to the hon. 
member for Saskatoon Centre, it is shocking that the province 
of Saskatchewan have an official opposition that would 
handpick someone that signed the Leap Manifesto, which is 
basically a death certificate for the economy of this province, 
and say, you’re the right person, Nicole White, to renew the 
NDP party along with other renewers like Pat Atkinson and 
Eldon Lautermilch. You know, Mr. Chairman, I would just say 
that it’s important for the members opposite and for us on this 
side of the House to separate our political interests from the 
interests of the province. 
 
I want to point out to my hon. friend that while this hub — and 
I think that CentrePort in Winnipeg would be in the same 
situation — the creation of a hub, there is going to be some time 
as it gains momentum. I would argue there is momentum with 
respect to CP Rail being one of the clients; Loblaws, there’s a 
private sector company; Consolidated FastFrate, another one; 
Emterra Group, another one; Morguard Investments, another 
one; Slinkemo Enterprises, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The private sector investment in the GTH has topped $485 
million so you simply can’t stand in this place, in Committee of 
Finance, and say, well it hasn’t been a success, when the 
numbers I don’t think bear it out, especially for a project that 
for this kind of an infrastructure facility is in its nascent years. 
 
Employment during construction years — 1,800 jobs — and 
there are 1,860 full-time jobs; 860 families that are benefiting 
because that hub’s there. And if you folks had been in power of 
course it never would have happened because it just languished 
on the books. 
 
I think the 860 families would be very interested in the Leader 
of the Opposition’s characterization of the hub being a failure. I 
think those 860 families that are working at the Global 
Transportation Hub, who would not be if it were not there, 
would be very interested, as those coal mining workers and as 
the BD3 workers were very interested, and members of IBEW. 
They’re hearing the NDP say that those jobs don’t count either.  
 
We on this side of the House think those 860 jobs are very 
important, and there’s going to be more. We are going to see 
more investments at the hub and when we do, I welcome the 
opportunity to hear from the Leader of the Opposition with 
respect to his reconsideration of his remarks here today, and his 
characterization of the hub. 
 
He said he doesn’t want to hear about truck movements. Well 
I’m sorry to tell him there’s 4,800 truck movements a week in 
and out of the GTH. And maybe he doesn’t want to hear about 
them because it generates for the province $16.4 million in 
diesel fuel tax alone, and 14.2 million in personal income tax. 
Maybe that’s not important to members opposite. Maybe that’s, 
I don’t know, maybe that’s something to scoff at or you write 

off as not being particularly important. 
 
But I think those trucks that are coming in and out of that GTH, 
I think they represent jobs in Saskatchewan. I think they 
represent almost 500 million in private investment. I think they 
represent around $15 million in diesel fuel taxes alone, and the 
chance to see that logistic centre continue to grow and attract 
investment. You bet we’re proud of it on this side of the House, 
and we hope and wait for the day when members on that side of 
the House will also be proud. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — What a strange response from the 
Premier again, Mr. Speaker, somebody who, you know, takes 
his office of Premier and is every day of the week ready to go 
into the petty politics. And I’ll leave that to, I’ll leave that to 
him. And he says that he’s proud to serve the members of his 
caucus. We’re proud to serve Saskatchewan people, Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatchewan people. And we’re happy to stand up 
and make sure that we’re asking the questions required. 
 
And the Premier can go on and try to mischaracterize what the 
discourse has been here today, but he got all worked up, all 
worked up and off track and distracted with a question about the 
value for money on this investment. 
 
Now the Premier’s endeavoured to . . . saying that he’s going to 
get the full scope of that investment, and he’ll report that out. 
He doesn’t know it here today but finally, after many questions 
on this front, it’s going to be coming. So we’ll know what the 
total amount of dollars invested is, as well as related 
infrastructure. And I’d expect as well a thoughtful 
value-for-money report back to Saskatchewan people and, if 
we’re not meeting expectations, plans to achieve expectations to 
make sure that the public is served. 
 
And as far as predecessors, I mean, you know, the Premier was 
referencing a very fine guy, but as far as predecessors and 
meeting different levels, I guess this Premier knows something 
about meeting his predecessor’s debt level, Mr. Speaker. But 
we can get into that in a little bit as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I do have a question that’s been asked multiple times in the 
Assembly, Mr. Chair, that hasn’t been answered, and I’m not 
looking for lots of political rhetoric on this stuff. I’m looking 
for answers. On the bypass that’s being planned, there’s close to 
about $2 billion that’s at play of the public’s dollars at this 
point. The question’s been asked repeatedly: how much of that 
money will stay within Saskatchewan? We know that the 
government’s lead proponent is a large conglomerate from 
France. The question to the Premier is, of that $2 billion, how 
much of that is staying in Saskatchewan? 
 
[16:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, I have to confess to not 
necessarily agreeing with or maybe even understanding this line 
of questioning that we’ve heard the member opposite . . . And 
he made this point during a relatively unsuccessful campaign 
debate, I think, an election campaign. 
 
And so I don’t understand it, you know, and here’s why. Yes, 
the consortium is led by a French company. But Areva is a 
French company. And so profits that Areva makes here in 



June 29, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 701 

Saskatchewan go back to Paris where their head office is. We 
had a chance to meet with the folks at Areva when we were at 
the climate change conference there. And you know, they’re 
happy with the business climate here, wish the price of uranium 
would be higher. But I mean the point is, I was in the offices of 
Areva. That’s their headquarters, and so revenue profits are 
going to go to that company. 
 
There are some companies that operate here in the province, a 
company that you celebrated quite rightly, sir, in this Assembly. 
Crescent Point Energy is headquartered in Calgary. And so they 
do a lot of work here, as we talked about and you, again quite 
rightly, thanked them for the billions of dollars of work. And 
some of those profits go to Calgary. It’s the nature of an 
economy. It’s the nature of, in our case, open procurement. And 
in some cases it’ll be the nature with respect to P3s 
[public-private partnership], not in all of them. 
 
I think what has been lost a little bit in the opposition’s rhetoric 
is the fact that 71 per cent of the businesses working on the 
bypass are Saskatchewan companies. The largest two, Graham 
and Broda, have a rich Saskatchewan tradition here in 
Saskatchewan. 150 Saskatchewan businesses, by the way, are 
participating in P3s across the province. 
 
And I just think it’s important for us to remember that, in this 
market with open procurement, that comes with the Agreement 
on Internal Trade . . . Never mind New West Partnership. I 
know the members opposite, they don’t like the New West 
Partnership. But they did like the Agreement on Internal Trade. 
They signed onto it under Premier Calvert, the latest version of 
AIT [Agreement on Internal Trade]. And we’re working hard to 
actually improve it now but . . . all the provinces. 
 
But there’s an element of open procurement to that that 
members opposite, I think, practised when they had the chance 
to govern. We’re going to be doing the same thing. We’re 
always going to be looking for top-quality service and the 
lowest price possible getting that best quality that we’re 
seeking. 
 
But let’s just remember that the Broda group of companies is a 
long-standing and important corporate citizen in the province of 
Saskatchewan that started out, I think, in the Preeceville area 
before they moved eventually to Prince Albert. And Graham 
Construction can trace its roots back to Moose Jaw, 
Saskatchewan. And there are 54 other businesses that are 
working on the bypass. 
 
So I can also report to the House that the savings of 
approaching . . . The members opposite might say, well yes, 
that’s fine. Your Areva analogy is fine, but we would never 
build it this way. We would just have it all built at home, so no 
French companies involved in anything. And then they would 
have paid 17 per cent more of taxpayers’ money for the deal. It 
would have cost them $380 million, I think, more — $380 
million of taxpayers’ money — but they would do that for 
ideological reasons because interestingly, Mr. Chair, in this 
country, I’m aware of few political parties — maybe none other 
than this one across from us — that’s ideologically opposed to 
P3s. 
 
The former leader or the current leader — I can’t keep track — 

Thomas Mulcair of the NDP has said P3s are a good thing. The 
Alberta government is moving forward with P3s. That NDP 
government is moving forward with P3s. Liberal governments 
are pursuing them. It’s not an ideological proposition. 
 
In Swift Current, we have a new long-term care facility that 
came in $16 million less than a conventional build, on time and 
on budget, and an outstanding facility. And if you ask the 
people in Saskatchewan how they felt about that particular . . . 
in Swift Current, I should say, about that facility, you know, 
they’d be glad it’s done. They’d be glad that it got done on time 
and on budget much more quickly than it would have been 
happening if the NDP had been in power and just exclusively 
cash flow conventional builds. 
 
So I mean I know we’re going to debate about it. We’re 
probably going to agree to disagree because he’s going to say 
that well, if we just built it ourselves, there would be no 
partners from anywhere else involved in these projects. 
 
And we fundamentally disagree. If we can get these 
infrastructure projects built much more quickly and when 
they’re needed — which is now — and we can do it at a lower 
cost than conventional builds, then we’re going to also open it 
up to procurement opportunities for others knowing that, in this 
case, 70 per cent of the work is being done by Saskatchewan 
businesses. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — It’s just strange, though, that we can’t 
get an answer on the question. Setting aside the actual debate 
and the points that the Premier’s putting onto the record here 
today, the question is of the $2 billion, and pretty much $1 
billion overrun that’s occurring on this thing. How much of that 
is occurring? How much of that is staying within 
Saskatchewan? 
 
And you know, and the Premier might, you know . . . We know 
that this French company doesn’t have any specific capacity 
that was needed or essential for this project. In fact we fleshed 
that out when we were dealing with some questions on this a 
while back. And if government came into a problem with this 
vendor, I know at that point the minister had committed that 
they would simply move out of the consortium and they’d work 
with the rest of them. So obviously they don’t have some 
technical expertise that they’re bringing to the table that can’t 
be accomplished here. 
 
What we do see though is a project that’s gone through the roof, 
bloated in cost, that not long ago was four to 800 . . . well first 
400, then $800 million, now close to $2 billion. Now the 
Premier’s cited that there’s been some scope changes to this 
project. And there’s been some scope changes. But I would like 
to . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Right. And I’ve sat in 
committee with officials on this front to seek what those scope 
changes are. And I’ve had identified a couple overpasses, and 
the cost attributed to those. 
 
I guess I would like the Premier to just lay out in . . . not all the 
political stuff and the rhetoric, just the facts. This was once 
pitched at $400 million. At that time, government said they’d 
studied it to death. Now, a couple of years later, we’re dealing 
with that, you know, $2 billion-plus in a French company 
leading the consortium. 



702 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2016 

My question to the Premier: walk us through what those scope 
changes are in a succinct way, so we can get to many other 
questions in this estimates and the overrun that have contributed 
to the overrun. 
 
[16:15] 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, let’s be very clear about the 
$400 million that the member keeps saying as that was the first 
cost of the bypass as it is now proposed because that’s what 
you’re doing. You’re trying to present to the public of 
Saskatchewan that this $400 million number was the first price 
on the bypass as it is currently constituted. This is just incorrect. 
You know this to be true. 
 
You know that the $400 million references the southeast Regina 
bypass only. Eight hundred million more — 800 million more 
which takes us to 1.2 — is the west Regina bypass, Highways 1 
to 11, three interchanges in the east, and service roads. And 1.2 
billion are the capital costs of the project. This is a P3, so 
there’s an operational element to this. That gets you to the 1.88 
billion. But the capital cost for the bypass is $1.2 billion. 
 
So let’s be very clear about that in this committee, members. 
And I hope we can be clear about it moving forward. And 
further I hope that we will be very clear with all that we talk 
about, that that $400 million that that member has bandied 
about has no relationship to the project currently before us. 
 
He asked for a layout of the addition. I provided it in terms of 
the highways and the interchanges. This does not even include 
the Pinkie Road connector. He has been tabling petitions in this 
House with respect to the Dewdney road situation. The $400 
million concept wouldn’t have contemplated that at all. This 
one does, $800 million in these additions to make it an actual 
bypass and not sort of a half loop. 
 
That’s the answer to the member’s question, and so I do invite 
him . . . He can use the $400 million number. We do, but to say 
when the project was much smaller, when it was less of a 
bypass, that was the number. And then when the project 
expanded to be a true bypass to deal with the elements, with the 
pieces that I’ve laid out, it grew to 1.2 — not 2 billion, not 1.88 
billion. That’s the total contract that involves management. In 
terms of the capital construction costs of the bypass, it’s 1.2 — 
400 when it was tiny and now added 800 million. One point two 
when it’s complete and when it will serve the city of Regina for 
years to come. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — And the record will serve itself as to 
how governments characterize bypasses and what the costs will 
be. And at one point, there was a discussion of 400, went to 
800, and it kept climbing. And we have a company . . . oh and 
this scope change we have. But we have, you know, the big 
dollars of course tied up in this consortium. We certainly have 
many, many companies that could be working on this in a 
meaningful way as well, beyond what they are right now. 
 
My question, just on the actual surfacing on Highway 1 East, 
it’s being resurfaced. Now it was resurfaced about . . . I guess 
I’d like to hear from the Premier when it was resurfaced last, 
and then what’s the resurfacing program on it right now? 
 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, I thank the member for his 
question with respect to the surfacing history of Highway 1 
East. We’ll get that information hopefully before we’re done 
here today. I also want to add that the $1.2 billion construction 
cost for the bypass — he asked for a complete list — includes 
system interchanges at Tower Road and Highway 1 West and 
the Hill Avenue and 9th Avenue interchanges as well. 
 
And he did say this, and here’s where we agree. He said, and 
we hope that Saskatchewan companies will be a part of projects 
like this. Well, Mr. Chairman, I would suggest that Cowessess 
First Nation, who is supplying the fuel, is a great Saskatchewan 
business. PSI Technologies sand/aggregate supplier, this is for 
the bypass. Dart Services, steel pilings; Inland Concrete, 
another Saskatchewan company; Broda Construction out of 
Prince Albert. A&B Rail, they’re a Saskatchewan company. 
Access, a Regina-based co-op, Mr. Chairman; Armada Homes; 
Alliance Energy; Anlin Welding and Steel Fabrication; 
Carmacks Enterprises; Clifton Associates; Consumers’ 
Co-operative Refineries; Crestview Chrysler; Enbridge, the 
portion located in the province; Fraser Strategy; Giesbrecht & 
Son Cranes; Golden Acres Tree Services; Graham 
Construction; Graham Pilings; Harris Rebar; Hydrodig; 
Hymark Services; Inland Aggregates; Jardeg Construction 
Services — oh the list goes on — JR’s Welding Ltd; Keller 
piling; Mr. Chairman, Crown corporations from the province 
obviously. 
 
These are Saskatchewan companies. They’re all engaged in the 
bypass. Seventy per cent of the companies that work on that 
bypass are Saskatchewan companies. Members of chambers of 
commerce in this province, corporate citizens in their 
community, not all from Regina certainly but from the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
And by the way, I think that truth is becoming more known. I 
think the characterizations that we saw from the NDP about this 
project — the bypass, the routing, the costing, and who actually 
was benefiting from it — I think what they were talking about, 
the rhetoric from the NDP prior to the election, was slowly 
being exposed during and since the election. And people 
understand this as they see the highway bypass trucks, as they 
see that Broda camp, the Broda Construction camp on the east 
part of Regina, as they see Saskatchewan people and know 
them. They have family members that are working on that 
bypass. They understand that once again this project maybe 
didn’t fit the narrative for the NDP, and so they’ve attacked it, 
and they’ve been critical about it. But it will be good in the long 
term for Regina, and it is employing Saskatchewan people and 
benefiting Saskatchewan families. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Chair, you know, there’s a lot of 
topics I want to get to, but you know, this is important. Of 
course the Premier’s going on at length here to important 
questions. There’s no answer to, of this bloated cost on this 
project, how much was going to stay within Saskatchewan? 
 
And you know of course, there’s other elements like the 
overpass that was built just a couple of years ago for $43 
million that’s now being torn apart and rebuilt and reconfigured 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And so the minister is heckling 
here. I guess what is the cost of that work right there then? The 
minister’s . . . I was going to get onto another point, but the $43 



June 29, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 703 

million overpass that’s being pulled apart and being 
reconfigured, what’s the cost of that work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chair, I’m happy to correct the 
record again. And again right after . . . I guess maybe there were 
five minutes that passed between me laying out the facts that he 
asked for, that highlight the fact that the $400 million number 
that he uses is not reflective of reality, and the $2 billion, 
characterizing that as a capital cost is not reflective of the 
reality. He uses the word bloated project, bloated costs; it’s not 
true, Mr. Chair. The 17 per cent savings over a conventional 
build, over $300 million saved over a conventional build, and 
the scale of the project has changed, so yes the cost is going to 
change. The cost of the $400 million project was sort of for this 
half loop, this incomplete bypass. The new project with all of 
the interchanges, with the Pinkie Road connector, with all of the 
bypasses — by the way 10 more of those, there were two in the 
original proposal — 10 of them, takes you to $1.2 billion. 
 
So I would just say to the member, he’s going to try in his 
preamble to slip in what I don’t think is necessarily the case 
when he describes the project, and I am going to correct him 
every single time. I will correct the record. And members of this 
side of the House will work to do the same thing with respect to 
facts that are in debate. The existing Pinkie Road interchange 
overpass will remain intact. The access ramps will be upgraded. 
The overpass was designed for the upgrade actually, knowing 
that the project is coming. The Pinkie Road interchange is being 
upgraded so that traffic can free-flow in all directions. It’s part 
of the bypass project, and it’s contemplated in the budget that 
I’ve just highlighted. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Okay. I respect the Premier said he’s 
going to get information to us on the resurfacing, when it 
occurred before, what’s happening now, and also the cost I 
suspect on this item itself, I would hope. 
 
But I want to shift gears just a little bit. Certainly we know that 
as an exporter our economy depends on our ability to get 
product to market and our rail transportation system. Of course 
we’ve got multiple avenues to get product to market, and we 
need improvements on all of those — whether they be 
highways, certainly on pipelines — but I want to focus more 
specifically on rail transportation right now. 
 
We have a down cycle within the commodity cycles right now, 
so we have less pressure on getting that product to market, 
which is unfortunate. That being said, it’s incumbent of us to be 
acting right now to make sure that we have a system that will be 
able to perform to get product to market, to make sure that 
when we get a bumper crop in the bins that it’s moved to 
market and that producers aren’t gouged and that all of other 
exporters through our resource sector and our manufacturers 
and everyone else are able to do the same. 
 
So this is actually a very important piece, to fix our 
transportation system for the future economy of Saskatchewan, 
to make sure that as different commodities come back into 
demand as we take that bumper crop off here — you know, 
fingers crossed that all the rest of the summer aligns; the 
producers have done their hard work on this front — that we 
can get that product to market. 
 

So just around rail transportation, we know this system is 
broken. We know that the duopoly is failing the people of 
Saskatchewan, certainly producers but also businesses and our 
economy at large. And just wanting to hear what specific 
actions and recommendations the Premier’s bringing forward to 
fix this very important system for the future. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks very much for this question. This is 
a very important question for the province, especially as you 
know . . . and there’s not enough wood to knock in this 
Assembly — although there’s a lot — for us to talk about 
harvest this year. But you know, we’re hoping and praying, 
along with our producers, that what has been an auspicious start 
to the growing season finishes strong as well. 
 
And so the Leader of the Opposition is quite right to point out 
that while oil-on-rail pressures have lessened and while, 
generally speaking, commodity pressures have lessened, we 
know that the kind of crop that’s possible now in this province 
can change all of that, and we just simply don’t want to get 
back to where we were a couple of years ago. 
 
I do want to point out and share with all members of the 
Finance Committee, or the Committee of Finance, that I was 
grateful that ministers, the Minister of Agriculture, the Minister 
of Economy, and the Minister of Highways at the time were 
working very directly with the federal government, the previous 
Harper government, two years ago to try to get some interim 
measures in place to help alleviate some of the pressures. 
 
And a lot of what Saskatchewan was advocating found its way 
into C-30, Bill C-30. Although it was imperfect, we were happy 
to see some moves with respect to transparency for the rail 
companies themselves, as well as the question of interswitching 
addressed to some extent. So in February of this year when the 
federal Transport minister announced that he would be 
extending those provisions of C-30, we were grateful for that 
and said so publicly. 
 
[16:30] 
 
But more importantly now, what’s been initiated as a result of 
the work of the federal minister on his announcement in 
February is a consultative process with all the stakeholders 
where we’re going to be reviewing the recommendations of the 
Canada Transportation Act review that Mr. Emerson has 
completed. 
 
There are some disappointments we have with respect to the 
draft. I’ll share with all members of the committee and, Mr. 
Chair, with you, that there’s no recommendation to give 
shortline railways and small shippers more rights to service; 
that there does not seem to be a fulsome dispute settlement 
mechanism, which I think is very key, we do; and that no 
extended interswitching distances were originally contemplated, 
notwithstanding the extension. 
 
The other thing I want to share with members is that . . . Well 
there’ll be more questions, but I should share quickly that 
Saskatchewan hosted a New West Partnership summit, and for 
those members who are new to the House, New West 
Partnership is the three Western provinces coming together as a 
co-operative trading region. We decided, because this was 



704 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2016 

affecting whether it was oil in Alberta, grains in our province, 
and the port, of course, in BC, that we should get together and 
have a summit with all of the players there, all of those involved 
in logistics, in the rail companies, and trucking companies. 
 
And so as a result of that, the premiers recommended that the 
provinces be more involved, directly involved in the Pacific 
Gateway Alliance, and the Saskatchewan Minister of Highways 
and Transportation is a member now of that board. That board 
is also attended thankfully by companies, by those involved in 
shipping. And the minister has assured me that there is an 
interest there. 
 
And so this might seem to be common sense, but I think for 
those Canadians who know this well, and farmers would, it is a 
welcome development that the companies are actually there at 
the table on a regular basis hearing first hand from 
policy-makers about what is needed. We have seen some 
improvements, the Minister of Agriculture advises me, with 
respect to the port itself on the West Coast side of things. 
 
So this is a work-in-progress but we’d better be vigilant about 
it, and we will be. We need to be proactive. We are, through the 
work of the New West Partnership, but we welcome the support 
and the ideas that the opposition might have to make sure we 
are getting the right message to this particular consultative 
process in the wake of the Canadian transportation Act review. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — I appreciate the recognition in the 
Assembly here today of the importance of the matter, and 
certainly some of the recommendations that government’s 
bringing forward. I guess I just couldn’t emphasize enough just 
how important this sort of discussion and then action is for the 
people of the province. 
 
And as we potentially adjourn the House tomorrow, this is a file 
that needs sustained focus and attention by government to make 
sure that we end up building a system that’s going to perform, 
certainly for producers, and making sure that there’s fairness 
where right now of course the risk is all on them. The costs are 
all on them. So if shippers and rail companies fail to perform, 
the impacts are right back to producers, and of course this 
impacts all of our exporters in our province and our entire 
economy as a whole. 
 
So this is an important area of focus, one that you should be top 
of desk, top priority for the Government of Saskatchewan, 
along with addressing other transportation matters. I think the 
reality is is that a broken rail transportation system also has a 
very costly consequence on the very infrastructure we’re 
speaking of as well when we’re talking about maintaining 
roads, highways. Whether it’s the grids that RMs [rural 
municipality] are maintaining or whether it’s highways of the 
province, there’s a direct cost that we bear for the people of 
Saskatchewan if the system isn’t performing. 
 
Another issue that’s important . . . Now it’s different this year 
than it’s been in years previous just by way of moisture, but 
water management is still a very important issue across 
Saskatchewan. And in some parts, it’s having dramatic impact 
on livelihoods and land and poses a significant risk to many 
across the province. Certainly illegal drainage and non-enforced 
drainage has been a concern, and we have specific areas of the 

province that are under great pressure, the Quill Lakes being 
one of them, with no plan being brought forward yet at this 
point in time. Certainly we need a comprehensive water 
management strategy, one that respects our agricultural 
producers, one that values the role of wetlands, one that 
understands climate change, and we also need action and a plan 
specifically for the Quill Lakes. 
 
So I guess my question is to the Premier: where are we at, 
where’s he at, where’s his government at, on that 
comprehensive strategy and the very meaningful actions that are 
required, as well as the plan and action on the Quill Lakes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — I want to thank the member for his 
question, the Leader of the Opposition for his question, Mr. 
Chair. Obviously in a province like Saskatchewan, water 
management is key and so our government has been, not just 
recently, but from the very beginning, working to improve and 
to build upon water management strategies for the province, 
and that includes managing unwanted water. 
 
And I think it’s also important for us in Saskatchewan to come 
to terms with the fact that, and I think this fact, this basic fact, is 
still right, that about as much water evaporates from 
Saskatchewan as it goes through our province in the river 
system as we irrigate. This has got to stop. This is just a huge 
opportunity lost. And obviously there’s some important 
irrigation projects that happen in Saskatchewan, but we have an 
opportunity to really build something of an even greater 
value-added component in agriculture, if we were to turn that 
around, if we were to lead. And I think the private sector . . . I 
would not advocate the public sector, the government sort of 
take the lead in developing irrigation-based businesses, but in 
terms of providing infrastructure, why that’s what governments 
can do and can do well. 
 
So I just set that aside because I know your question, the 
question from the Leader of the Opposition, was about drainage 
and management. We have committed to creating brand new 
drainage regulations for the province. It will be the first time in 
35 years. And also the agricultural water management strategy 
has been launched, Mr. Chair. We want to take a practical 
approach to the regulations, and so we’re going to phase them 
over 10 years, at least the enforcement of what we would 
notionally term sort of the unauthorized drainages. The numbers 
we have — this is a general estimate; it’s very difficult to get a 
specific number — but between 100 and 150,000 unauthorized 
drainages in Saskatchewan. We’ve removed the 1981 
restriction, prior to 1981, post-1981. They’re all now on the 
table for action by government and we’ll take, we’re going to 
take about 10 years to do that. 
 
With respect to Quill Lakes, here’s a challenge for our 
government, for previous governments. You know, there have 
been 26 different options canvassed thereabouts by government 
and again not led politically, but engineers that have either been 
private sector or with the Water Security Agency or in the 
Ministry of the Environment, engineers who have looked at this 
very difficult situation and canvassed 26 different options. And 
all of them by the way, if I could summarize them maybe a bit 
unfairly, but for the most it’s true — very, very high cost, very, 
very low result. 
 



June 29, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 705 

Members of this House will know that the government basically 
put a stop to a project that we had, I know the member would be 
very personally interested in because of where he enjoys some 
quality of life in the province and likes to catch the odd walleye, 
even some big ones, I think. And so we heard, directly from 
people in the lake chain, concerns with respect to the plan and 
just decided that obviously, if a consultative process was about 
listening to stakeholders and people, we better do that. And so 
that project was halted. But it didn’t obviously provide the . . . 
There was no immediate solution to go to. There were other 
options, but all of them again high cost, low result. 
 
And so drainage has been identified as one particular response 
to this. The minister tells me that just roughly there’s probably 
about 100 unauthorized drainage been identified so far. It could 
be more. That’s going to help if we can change that. There are 
some other Ducks Unlimited areas in the lands in the area that, 
if there’s some action taken there, could possibly help. And so 
the minister and officials are close to a much more direct 
engagement with farmers in the area, who are very concerned, 
and also with those down, you know, notionally downstream. 
So we continue to work on it. And you know, I think we’ll hear 
more from the Minister of the Environment soon on some 
specifics to move on the Quill Lakes situation beyond the 
project that the government stopped. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. Thanks . . . Or 
Mr. Chair. And thank you as well to the Premier. The Premier 
referenced 26 different options that have been canvassed and 
that have been laid out by engineers. I would just seek by way 
of the Premier whether or not he’s able to . . . Well he might not 
be able to table them at this moment, but we would certainly 
request that information. Is that something the Premier can 
commit to here today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I thank the Leader of 
the Opposition for the question. I want to say to him that I know 
the minister would want to sit down with the critic, the shadow 
cabinet member over there, to talk about, in a general sense, 
what are these specific issues, and sometimes in greater 
specificity to the extent they went that far down in 
consideration. Some of them were probably not considered fully 
after price and efficacy were weighed early on. For example, I 
think there was a proposal for a deep-injection well solution 
which ranged in cost from 980 to 1.2 billion with questionable 
. . . well maybe not questionable, but not the kind of results that 
we would want for that sort of an investment. 
 
The focus will be on the drainage issue. We’ll also be looking 
very carefully at management around Ponass, and that’s related 
to some of the DU [Ducks Unlimited] projects that are there. 
That will be part of the solution. 
 
The biggest part, though, the biggest part of the solution will 
come from drainage and that’s not . . . You know, that’ll be a 
challenge because these have been long-standing practices by 
farmers who are already under a lot of stress in the area because 
of the levels of the lake and the salinity and any number of 
other issues. Certainly I’ve been there with the member for 
Melfort and others and met with farmers there, and they’re very 
concerned. 
 
But we do believe, we have an estimate of 38.6 per cent, pretty 

specific estimate in terms of a reduction of levels, I guess. If we 
can complete the focus on drainage, those 100 or so that we 
know of unauthorized drainage pieces that are going on, we 
think levels will be assisted by that much. 
 
[16:45] 
 
So between that and sort of reserve, or DU reserve 
management, whether it’s Ponass or the other DU reserves, we 
think this is a solution that can work. It’s not without its 
challenges, but that can work and in a way that would be cost 
effective as well. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Well thanks for the responses. Certainly, 
thanks as well to the Minister of the Environment to meet with 
our Environment critic. I know she’ll look forward to that and 
to go through an exchange of information. 
 
And thanks again as well . . . Last summer when the Kutawagan 
project seemed to be advancing at a very rapid speed, and 
certainly whether it was landowners and producers or those that 
enjoy our fishery, so many across our province recognizing 
what was potentially being threatened when you look at the 
Qu’Appelle Valley watershed and Last Mountain Lake, 
certainly it was good to see the recognition that this was a major 
problem. And I guess just to the, I think, literally hundreds that 
I would have met with during that period of time in some of the 
meetings and engaged with, thanks to them as well for taking 
up the cause and stopping something that, at the time, had no 
environmental review on it and had marginal impact — a cost 
to it — and marginal impact on addressing the problem. 
 
Moving along to the matter of the consideration of the Yancoal 
potash mine. So this, from my understanding, is a state-owned 
entity of China which would be a new entrant and a different 
type of entrant into our potash market. Of course we’ve got 
world-class reserves, a resource within our province, and 
world-class companies and workers that mine that resource. 
 
And the jobs are important to the people of Saskatchewan. The 
royalties are important to the people of Saskatchewan. The 
investment of those companies and the stability of that industry 
is very important to all the people of the province. And it seems 
that, and you can correct me here if I’m not aware of some of 
the analysis that has been done on this front, but it seems to be 
sort of an afterthought as to whether or not we’re compromising 
our industry, our companies, our jobs, our royalties by having in 
essence our customer, a large customer with allies as well, 
owning a mine — we own the resource — owning that mine. 
 
So certainly on this front, before we would ever want to 
approve and proceed, we would need a very thorough analysis, 
independent analysis that gives us a high level of confidence 
that a state-owned potash mine won’t undermine that very 
important industry to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I guess to the Premier: what sort of analysis do you have? Who 
have you engaged in this process, and what conclusions have 
you found? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — I thank the member for the question, I thank 
the Leader of the Opposition. You know, this is an issue that’s 
important because we have, when we’re dealing with 



706 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2016 

investments from a customer country and state-owned 
enterprises, we need to make sure that it doesn’t necessarily 
erode the position of incumbents in the province. 
 
And so that’s why our ministry has been working very directly 
with Finance but also communicating to Yancoal that should 
this project ever go ahead, and I mean, it’s a long way from 
that, but should it ever go ahead, the price will be deemed, the 
price that they can sell the potash from their mine will be 
deemed by the Government of Saskatchewan through Finance 
— on advice of the Ministry of the Economy or perhaps directly 
from the Ministry of the Economy — to be reflective of the 
world price. Because I understand what the question is. The 
question is, well there is state-owned enterprises that buy 
potash, and now there’s a state-owned enterprise that’s mining, 
potentially mining potash in Saskatchewan. Are they going to 
sell it to themselves at a great discount? That would not be 
possible as a result of actions we’ve taken to ensure that price 
would be deemed at the world level in this case. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — So I just urge caution on making sure 
that there’s really due process in understanding all the potential 
unintended consequences. This is, you know, a big deal, and 
you don’t have . . . It’s hard to undo these sorts of things. So 
this is the time to really make sure that we understand the 
consequences and also have the mechanisms in place if you’re 
proceeding, and if you’re confident that the mechanisms will in 
fact serve the best interests of Saskatchewan, the people of 
Saskatchewan who are the owners of the resource. 
 
I guess the question around having a mechanism, the minister 
and I had this exchange maybe a year and half ago in 
committees, but we’re at a more advanced stage of 
consideration on this project here. So as far as the world price 
of potash, I mean it’s set through a market and through 
purchases and sale. And if you have a new entrant into the 
market, the concern is that they can undermine, it could 
potentially undermine that price in a significant way, or the 
industry, and have a host of different impacts. 
 
So I just want to get a better sense of . . . And I’d be interested 
in having a report or whatever analysis the Premier has on what 
sort of mechanism government is contemplating, including how 
do you establish what the world price of potash is. Because if in 
the end the supply has increased, the production’s increased, 
and supply and demand, the price is impacted, how do you 
choose the world prices of something that, you know, the 
concern is could be directly impacted in a very significant way 
by the operation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To my hon. friend, I 
would say we can provide the details that Finance and the 
Economy are using to answer that question. It’s a reasonable 
question. If we had those sorts of sweeping powers from this 
capital here, we might . . . I’m not sure we’d want to be that 
interventionist, but some might advocate we deem 500 bucks a 
tonne right now and remove a lot of debate in this legislature 
about funding and budgets and that sort of thing. 
 
But that’s not to take away from the importance of the question 
because there is . . . K+S comes online and, arguably, though 
it’s a replacement of German production, there’s some market 
impact. BHP does continue, although they slowed down their 

due diligence and work. They’re going to spend another $200 
million in the province this year. 
 
And so all of these things will impact price, and we’ve got to 
make sure that what we’re deeming is also fair to incumbents. I 
think that would have to stand . . . That would be an important 
test. But we can make sure we provide some of the mechanics 
and details to, he’s right, what is a complex notion here. It 
sounds easy to deem the price, but there’s complexities 
involved. And we’ll undertake to provide the briefing that 
would be helpful perhaps to the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — I appreciate the commitment and I look 
forward to the information. And again, I think there’s a level of 
caution in setting whatever a government thinks world price is. 
But you know, you have to be very cautious as well to 
recognize the reason you’re putting some mechanism in place is 
that the world price may be directly impacted and undermined. 
It’s a different industry than oil. It’s a different industry than 
uranium. You know, we’re talking about 50-some billion tonnes 
of potash as a world market, thereabouts. So you know, a new 
entrant as a mine can have a significant impact on supply and 
thus price. 
 
I’d like to shift just a little bit into very important work that’s 
needed as it relates to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission 
and actions taken by government — and some that I guess 
haven’t been taken as well — and other actions that are 
important to First Nations and Métis people all across 
Saskatchewan. But we addressed some of these issues last week 
and had, you know, a bit of a . . . glossed over some of the 
responses. I’d like some specifics as it relates to the timelines 
on those recommendations that haven’t yet been actioned upon 
by government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, I’m just searching for the very 
best way to answer this question as directly as I can to the 
Leader of the Opposition and would provide him as much 
information. It’s very difficult to . . . We’re sort of poring over 
the 12; where we can’t say that things have been fully addressed 
or partially addressed, going through those and trying to 
identify, where’s the timeline on it? Because for each of those, I 
want to assure all members of the committee, for each one of 
those, the internal senior deputy committee that’s been focused 
on our response to the recommendations is working on all of 
those. 
 
But I would say to my hon. friend, there’s just no . . . We don’t 
have a deadline yet. There is a summary of work that’s been 
done by category — child welfare, education, health, justice, 
missing children, and professional development and training for 
public servants even — that actually touches on a number of 
recommendations beyond the 34 to ones that the federal 
government . . . You know, we would make the case, that are 
mostly in the federal area. 
 
So there’s work under way. I just don’t have a timeline. I would 
say this, that as soon as the minister has an idea at least of 
timeline to the extent that’s possible for some of these 12, that 
we would want to share them both publicly and obviously with 
the opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Again this is some of the most important 



June 29, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 707 

work for our province and for our future. It’s about fairness. It’s 
reconciliation. And it’s about building a bright future. So I 
appreciate what the Premier is saying, and I’m recognizing the 
limited time that we have here today, although the information 
and the actual responses and the actions by government on 
these recommendations is incredibly important. 
 
[17:00] 
 
And so I would request that information. I’d invite that 
information and laying out, you know, what specific actions are 
being taken, who’s involved in those actions, what’s involved, 
and what timelines are in place until we would be into 
compliance with those recommendations, or accomplish those 
recommendations. 
 
When we look at economic conditions across the province 
certainly there’s been a significant impact for many families, 
many workers all across Saskatchewan. We’ve had discussions 
in this Assembly about the impact of job loss and 
unemployment and we’ll look forward to very important 
measures on this front and discussion as well. 
 
But it’s incredibly challenging when you look at the reality and 
the statistics for First Nations and Métis people within 
Saskatchewan. And when you look at a year-over-year statistic 
of an increase of 8 percent for off-reserve First Nations workers 
in Saskatchewan, an increase to 25 per cent unemployment, it’s 
alarming. It’s worrisome. This is about hope and opportunity 
for many across Saskatchewan. It impacts so many households 
and so many communities and it’s an area that just requires so 
much more of all of us to partner and to make change. 
 
So I guess on the front of — in a more specific way — 
employment for indigenous people, unemployment for First 
Nations and Métis people in Saskatchewan, building the 
opportunity that of course strengthens opportunities and 
conditions for all of us in the province, I’d like to hear what 
specific actions are being taken to this very alarming reality 
that’s limiting the future of too many across Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, I think one of the most important 
things we can do with respect to a more fulsome engagement by 
all Saskatchewan people in the economy, and specifically about 
Aboriginal employment, is to focus on education. That seems to 
certainly have been, over my time in this place and the 
opportunity I’ve had to meet with First Nations leaders, to be 
the consistent advice that we are receiving from First Nations 
leaders in Saskatchewan and, I would argue, also from 
employers across the province. 
 
And so when we had a chance to form government in 2007, we 
certainly took that to heart. And part of our growth plan was to 
have a real focus on Aboriginal training, job training, but also 
things like adult basic education. And we have seen in the last 
eight years a significant increase in ABE [adult basic education] 
availability both on-reserve and off-reserve through different 
institutions. I can tell members of the committee that in this 
budget, a very challenging budget where there were some 
reductions in areas, the budget for adult basic education 
on-reserve training: $6 million. 
 
And there was a time when, I think, governments — not in this 

province only but all across the country — would rather debate 
about whose jurisdiction these matters were when it came to 
things like ABE on-reserve, and we do have to have that debate. 
At some point the federal government needs to live up to their 
responsibilities. But this is too important, as the member has 
said, and so we’ve made that increased investment. I’m happy 
to report to the committee that there’s been a 93 per cent 
increase in First Nation and Métis post-secondary education 
training since 2007, 2008. That’s between the Ministry of the 
Economy and the Ministry of Advanced Education. 
 
And one of the partners that we have reached out to in a 
significant way has been SIIT [Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 
Technologies]. This is an excellent trades school by any 
definition and so I think we’ve increased funding to SIIT by 80 
per cent. They have this reputation, this track record of ensuring 
that the training they are providing connects graduates to actual 
jobs. They have a great relationship with industry, and so we’ve 
tried to support that. Even in budgets that are a little tighter, 
we’ve said to SIIT, we just want to keep — not rewarding — 
supporting success. And so we’ve provided those dollars. 
 
But there is work to do. The gap exists and it’s not an 
insignificant gap between Aboriginal employment and overall 
employment. But I can report to the House that since 2007 . . . 
to the committee, off-reserve Aboriginal employment has 
increased by 19.6 per cent, 7,000 more Aboriginal people 
employed in this province since just before 2007. So the 
Aboriginal unemployment rate more currently is at 16.2 per 
cent. That’s what it was in April. In March it was 15.1 per cent. 
 
And obviously these numbers are not acceptable because even 
as we’ve seen some challenging times in the economy, we still 
have the second-lowest unemployment in all of Canada at 
around 6 per cent. So we’re going to continue to work on the 
gap and identify opportunities to work with First Nations in 
terms of training, in terms of basic education, but then advanced 
educational training. 
 
There are specific goals set out in the growth plan. They are 
featured prominently in the growth plan. Not very long ago we 
had a very acute labour shortage in the province and we still 
had a significant number of unemployed Aboriginal people in 
Saskatchewan which just doesn’t make sense. So there’s more 
work to be done certainly and we’re going to continue to do that 
work, difficult fiscal times notwithstanding. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — It’s so critical to all of our futures, to 
our province’s future, and certainly to many across the province 
to see meaningful action on this front. And we do see 
concerning measures in this budget that aren’t improving 
conditions and opportunities for our First Nations and Métis 
people across the province. 
 
There was a reference to the TRC [Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission] summary of work to date. Would the Premier be 
able to signal to me whether or not you’re able to table that at 
this point or . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — We’ll find . . . not this document. We have 
a larger document we can table. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Sure, okay. So thanks for the 



708 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2016 

information that’ll be committed there. 
 
Just going back and it’s touching on employment and labour but 
also the Chinese state-owned potash proposal. And I believe the 
EIA [environmental impact assessment] has a request to 
outsource some of those workers that would be needed. Of 
course if this project were to be moving forward, it’s important 
to ensure as fulsome of opportunity for Saskatchewan workers 
as possible. I guess I’d look for . . . And I think when the EIA 
was, when the company would have engaged in it, they were 
citing labour statistics from a couple of years ago and certainly 
we know in Saskatchewan things have changed for 
Saskatchewan families that have . . . not just First Nations and 
Métis workers but many workers across Saskatchewan. 
 
So I’m just looking for the Premier’s comment on that 
provision. I know in other cases there has been concern about 
workers being brought in from China to do that work. We want 
to make sure that in the EIA, that we’re protecting the interests 
of Saskatchewan people. So just seeking that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, we would want to take steps as a 
government, should the project go ahead, to ensure that . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Speaking of water management. To 
ensure that this proponent, Yancoal, that they would not have 
access to any streams of employment that any other business 
was not eligible for, notwithstanding what’s in the impact. We 
would want to make sure that we have a level playing field, and 
whatever labour streams are available to PotashCorp, for 
example, those would be the only available sources for any of 
the potash companies. 
 
But we are on a topic of Aboriginal employment, and I want to 
offer this in good faith. And we can follow it up if you want 
with subsequent discussions. But during the last session when 
your predecessor sat in your chair, we proposed . . . and we 
didn’t want to have any surprises. We reached out over a 
weekend with the help of the current chief of the AFN 
[Assembly of First Nations], Perry Bellegarde. And we reached 
out to Mr. Broten, the leader at the time, to see if there was an 
interest on the part of the NDP working with us on a consensus 
or unanimous support in the House for allowing First Nations, 
SIGA [Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority Inc.] in 
particular, a greater involvement in the Sask Gaming 
Corporation. 
 
And I was disappointed, not in the response of other members 
opposite, because I didn’t hear from other members. But I was 
disappointed in your predecessor — he was probably 
disappointed in me as well — but because we had engaged in 
good faith over that weekend and he sort of held a scrum and 
accused us of trying to hide something or railroad something 
through in the middle of the night. That was never the intention. 
The intention was we actually reached out to him and through, 
in good faith, through Perry Bellegarde. 
 
Since the election, before the election, we’ve had SIGA and 
First Nations say, you know, we have a good model. I think 
we’d all agree that SIGA does a very good job of operating 
their casinos. I think we’d agree that SGC [Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation] also does a good job of operating their 
casinos. 
 

But we would like to . . . We’d be willing to explore different 
relationships with the First Nations with respect to the 
government-owned casinos. And we are prohibited from doing 
that by the legislation, which we, you know, campaigned on 
only making one change to — the liquor retailing. And so we 
would never make any change to that unilaterally. As I said in 
. . . earlier on, months ago, the only way we would contemplate 
any sort of change to even the spirit of that Act as it relates to 
the Sask Gaming Corporation is if we had a unanimous consent 
of the House. 
 
And so this isn’t about, you know, high pressure. And I’m not 
asking for the Leader of the Opposition to stand up and say, yes 
or no. I’m saying that if there’s an interest in exploring that, 
we’re willing to do that to the benefit of First Nations, but also 
gaming in the province, because I think SIGA has, does have a 
good track record of operating these things effectively. 
 
So the leader doesn’t even have to comment on it. I don’t want 
this to be one of those moments. But I just want to put that on 
the record that we’re still interested, and maybe since there’s a 
new leader over there, they have, they’d also be interested in 
exploring different options that might exist to the benefit of 
SIGA, First Nations in the province, economic opportunities 
perhaps, and the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Well thanks to the Premier. Sort of, of 
obviously you’re sort of springing something in Premier’s 
estimates. That’s fine. Last time there was very quick 
consideration of what it was. The details were really not there 
for an official opposition, to be frank. You know, I’d do more 
due . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Do you want to heckle? I’d 
do more due diligence if I’m buying a Dodge Coronet than if I, 
than what I had at that point in time. 
 
I respect that you’ve stated this today. I would say though that 
we had an election just recently, and there was an opportunity if 
plans were there that government wanted to seek and a mandate 
that a government wanted to seek, to lay out plans to 
Saskatchewan people and to seek that mandate. 
 
We never chose to go that route to Saskatchewan people; your 
party didn’t either. And so the . . . When we’re dealing with a 
matter of a Crown corporation and lots of jobs in place and 
revenues that are drive back to Saskatchewan people and also 
First Nations and Métis people across Saskatchewan who need 
and deserve better opportunities all across our province in many 
different industries, I want to make sure that I’m being direct 
and consistent with them. 
 
So certainly I’m not going to, you know, I’m not going to . . . 
I’d be very cautious to opening that consideration. Government 
had a . . . If this was what government wanted to do, if this was 
their plan, if this is something that’s been considered for some 
period of time, there’s a way to go about that in gaining the 
support from Saskatchewan people. 
 
So I would want to comment here that we would have a level 
of, high level of concern with that potential proposal on many 
fronts, and I think that’s in speaking in good faith to the people 
across our province as well. 
 
Just shifting gears just a little bit, the government I guess on 



June 29, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 709 

Christmas Eve went to the heritage language organization and 
told them that their funding was being peeled back and then 
scrapped for next year. Pretty strange day at best to 
communicate that kind of information. And what you’re 
looking at here is 80 schools thereabouts that serve our 
province. And actually we get incredible value out of this, 80 
schools that serve thousands of students at $50 per student per 
year, at a total cost of $200,000. Something that we derive great 
value out of, recognizing that language is your foundation of 
culture and that we’re a very proud multicultural province, a 
province of many people and many faiths. 
 
[17:15] 
 
It’s a regressive, short-sighted, devastating move for the 
Government of Saskatchewan to scrap the $200,000 thereabouts 
that fund these 80 schools and that leverages the goodwill and 
care of volunteers and cultural associations all across 
Saskatchewan to deliver this important learning but also this 
very important aspect within our community that certainly 
strengthens us from a social perspective and from an economic 
perspective. This is regressive and wrong and I’m just simply 
looking to the Premier. I recognize that you’re not going to 
change a whole bunch of items in your budget, but I hope this is 
one that you can reconsider here today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chair, once again in the 
member’s preamble he referenced that discussion that we had 
with respect to the casinos in the province. And he knows full 
well, because we made the case to the former leader, that we 
would provide all the details to members opposite and work 
with members opposite. We were earnestly trying to 
accommodate a request that had come from the First Nations. 
 
And with respect to timing, the ministers have referenced the 
fact that since the election, post the election, Bobby Cameron, 
the chief of the FSIN [Federation of Sovereign Indigenous 
Nations], has raised this possibility. And I think the member’s 
right though to quickly canvass some important issues, 
especially the revenue part. Right now in the history in this, 
where we are in the fiscal life of the province, I don’t think we 
want to be giving up revenue. 
 
But there are a number of other options, including management 
options with SIGA. And the extension of the offer, not 
necessarily privatizing, but all of . . . any management change 
even would materially perhaps put the government in a bad 
light with respect to the legislation that we have on the Crown 
corporation protection side of things. So that’s why we raise it 
again today if there’s an interest. It does not have to be, nor 
should it necessarily be, privatization in a technical sense. But 
do we want to at least have a discussion with Bobby Cameron 
and the FSIN and SIGA? I would hope the answer to that is yes. 
Do we want to have it, you know, exclusive of all sides of the 
House? We can’t in my view, because the legislation would in 
principle, for me anyway, preclude that kind of a unilateral 
action. So I want to make those points on the matter. 
 
You know, with respect to the heritage language situation, 
there’s going to be difficult decisions that a government makes, 
regardless of perhaps how long a program has gone on. I think 
it’s important for government to ask the question: well is this, 
given health needs and infrastructure needs and education needs 

and needs in social services, is this on the list of priorities that 
makes it? And we came to the decision that it isn’t, in many 
respects I think using similar arguments to what the Leader of 
the Opposition just said: $50 per year per student, that might be 
something that parents want to come up with. 
 
You know, my parents’ first language was Plattdeutsch, low 
German. And I kind of wish they would have, they could have 
taught me, as their parents taught them, both languages at home. 
And I think there will always be, there will always be that 
option for heritage language education in the province. But if 
it’s $50 per student per year, that might be something that 
families want to get involved with while we focus on core 
funding in education and the priorities in health care. 
 
And the member may say, well it’s only 200 grand. Well all of 
those things add up. And you know, you can’t on one hand sit 
on that side of the House and sort of decry the fiscal state of the 
province, if there’s an operational deficit for example, and then 
refuse to accept or even discuss what things might have to, what 
funds might have to be reduced. 
 
I could tell the member opposite . . . I know he’ll take the 
opportunity the next question to state that if they were the 
government, they would restore this funding and we should 
reconsider it. That’s not the feedback I’ve had from 
Saskatchewan people. They think that this sort of thing can be 
provided by families, that when we want to focus on the 
classroom, we should do so and we will. And there are many 
families across this province who, for a very, very long time, 
have been teaching heritage languages at home without the 
benefit of any government assistance. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — I think it’s short sighted. I don’t think 
the analysis has gone into it to understanding the kind of value 
in partnership that those dollars leverage all across the province, 
and the goodwill. And I think if it was analyzed, the actual 
impact, it would be a positive fiscal impact for the future of our 
province as well when it . . . in the key role these organizations 
play in positive settlement and community building within our 
communities as well. 
 
As far as wanting to scrap this to keep commitments in 
education, well of course that’s laughable. Mr. Speaker, we 
have strained and in some cases deplorable conditions occurring 
in education because of the underfunding and strained 
conditions of this government, and a broken promise, an 
unprecedented move to not honour the signature on a teachers’ 
contract, something that we are focused on in a big way and 
something that needs to be addressed by this Premier. 
 
I do want to pass the torch on some very important issues to be 
addressed by the member from Riversdale, and specifically HIV 
within the province. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just pointing out that 
in health committee last week we learned that there were 160 
new cases of HIV in 2015, up from 112 in 2014. We learned 
that in 2015 there were two HIV-positive babies born in 
Saskatchewan, something that hadn’t happened for a few years. 



710 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2016 

And actually we’re waiting on a confirmation for a third baby, 
obviously which would put it into 2016, but there’s another 
baby who may possibly also be HIV-positive that was identified 
in 2015. 
 
So this government had an HIV strategy that expired in 2014, 
and I know the minister’s talked about increasing testing, and 
that that has been the work that’s been done. But aside from 
testing, Mr. Chair, I’m wondering what else this government is 
going to do about this growing epidemic. This has been 
described by many people who work on the front lines in health 
care as an epidemic. Simply increasing testing is only 
identifying the fact that we do have an epidemic, so I’m 
wondering what the Premier’s going to do about putting this in 
check. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — I want to thank the Health critic opposite 
for the question. Just before I do that, before she got up, the 
Leader of the Opposition made some comments about 
education, and again there was a characterization of chronic 
underfunding. And I just really do need to point out that that’s 
just not been the case since we formed government, in terms of 
education. 
 
Members opposite will often say, well you’ve had record 
revenue, and that’s true. The province has enjoyed record 
revenue, which we have shared with the school divisions, for 
example. They have also had record revenue incoming from 
government. Municipalities have had record revenue coming in 
from government. That’s been our approach to this. 
 
Members opposite ask, well where has the money gone? Well 
the money’s gone to fund education. The money’s gone to hire 
754 more teachers and 164 more student support teachers; a 44 
per cent increase in psychologists; a 39 per cent increase in 
speech-language pathologists; a 64 per cent increase in 
occupational therapists; a 6 per cent increase in social workers; 
a 34 per cent increase in operating funding to school divisions 
when the total enrolment growth has been 9.3 per cent. 
 
And so yes, now that fiscal times are tight, we have an 
expectation and a hope that we can partner with school 
divisions and they can work to find ways to provide greater 
efficiencies, given the fact their revenues, their operating 
budgets from the Government of Saskatchewan are up 34 per 
cent in the same period of time enrolments are up 9 per cent. 
That begs some questions that we think deserve asking, 
especially at a time such as this in terms of the fiscal challenges 
facing the province. 
 
I do thank the member for her consistent and important concern 
around HIV in the province. And I know she’s been asking 
questions, not just this session or the last session, but 
throughout her time here. 
 
The four-year strategy, because it’s called that, certainly does 
imply that it’s ending. The fact of the matter is it’s not ending. 
The funding will continue to be provided for what came from 
the strategy, which is the hiring of 10 RNs [registered nurse] 
dedicated to HIV treatment and 30 full-time positions added to 
increase services for the continuum of HIV care, and increased 
access to testing for HIV. 
 

And I know the minister has referenced this in answers and the 
member’s heard it before, but there’s been 48 per cent more 
tests in 2015 than just in 2009. And so the number of diagnoses 
will increase. And it is true then that our strategy, the resources 
that were put in place by the strategy are under review as to 
optimum deployment to deal with the fact that because we’re 
reaching out to a greater extent, there are more diagnoses. 
 
The strategy has been paying and will continue to pay for 
increased access to risk-based testing; infant formula program 
for infants born to mothers with HIV; outreach clinics in 
remote, northern, and First Nations communities; and $460,000 
to the Westside Clinic right in the member’s constituency, close 
to the member’s constituency, that provides physician and 
outreach services. 
 
But as I said, you know, notwithstanding the fact that in RQHR 
[Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region] there’s been a 16 per cent 
decrease in the number of newly diagnosed cases since ’14 and 
a 37 per cent increase in the Saskatoon Health Region since ’14, 
we do see in other areas an increase in access to testing for HIV 
and so therefore in diagnoses. So the four-year report continues. 
And is it enough? Well we’re going to have to find ways to do 
more as more cases are diagnosed. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. And, Mr. Chair, just 
to clarify, it certainly is not enough. These numbers are going 
up. People who work on the front lines say the testing simply 
confirms what they already know, and the strategy has expired. 
I know the minister said in committee that the resources were 
not gone. But the reality is we need better resources and further 
resources, Mr. Chair. 
 
Last week in committee we also had an opportunity to talk 
about the fact that this government . . . The Health minister 
informed committee that Ministry of Health will be looking for 
a $40 million efficiency measure this year, and that this number 
was agreed upon by cabinet. I’d like to ask the Premier if he can 
confirm that the cabinet has asked the Minister of Health to 
make up $40 million in this year’s budget. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, this is not new that governments 
would ask third parties to find efficiencies. It certainly wasn’t 
new when members opposite were in government. In 2004, the 
then Health minister, John Nilson, made a similar request. It 
was $20 million not 40. But it was a $20 million efficiencies 
request from regions. And that’s what happens when times are 
tight, notwithstanding who the government might be. It 
happened as a matter of, I think, good government practice 
when the NDP did it. Mr. Nilson was the Health minister. And I 
think the same is true as well now given the situation that the 
province faces. 
 
[17:30] 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you, Mr. 
Premier. So in terms of other ministries needing to come up 
with efficiency targets then, what other ministries have been 
asked to do the same and what were those numbers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, it’s true that we’re asking all 
ministries and we’ll be asking third parties to come up with 
efficiencies. That’s exactly what the government’s asking. We 



June 29, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 711 

intend to do the same thing ourselves. We are doing that, and 
it’s been done in the past by governments of different stripes. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Just to be clear, having spoken to people in 
the health regions after last week learning about the $40 
million, the reality is the budget is not the budget. I asked if 
these estimates would in fact be what should be reflected next 
year in actuals, and I was told no. In Health it would be a $40 
million expectation that it would be lower. And speaking to 
people in Health, I heard from a few people who used words 
that are not very parliamentary, Mr. Chair, some serious stress 
on our health regions. 
 
But again to the Premier, what targets? Was there a formula 
used? We’d like to know. The people of Saskatchewan would 
like to know what other ministries are expected to come up with 
in terms of this budget this year, in terms of efficiency targets. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, this whole debate around health 
care funding is interesting. The member has been a member of 
this Assembly for some time and worked as a Health critic for 
some time, as well with members opposite. I’m sure she helped 
fashion the health care platform that they ran on which, we 
heard very clearly from the Minister of Health earlier today, 
would result in less funding, less funding for health care than 
what we’re proposing in this budget. So that’s the credibility 
gap that she personally has as the Health critic, and I think it’s 
the credibility gap that the New Democrats have. 
 
We have their platform document. Their costing would show 
clearly for all to see . . . notwithstanding the protests we see 
about health care funding every day in the House, which is easy 
to do when you’re in opposition. When they were running to be 
the Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Chair of 
Committees, they proposed less funding for health care than 
we’re offering so that . . . Yes and the Finance minister said that 
causes a lot of unparliamentarily language as well. When people 
find out that the people that are advocating, that are critical of 
another group because they’re not properly funding something, 
just two months ago campaigned on funding it to a lesser 
degree, there’s a bit of a credibility issue there. It strains 
credibility. 
 
Mr. Chair, in 2004, the Minister of Health announced they were 
requiring regions to find $20 million in efficiencies. This is not 
new, and it’s going to happen again at this particular time 
because of where we’re at from a fiscal standpoint. 
 
I would also point out that with respect to health care . . . I 
mean early on in this session we’ve had a number of positions 
advocated by both the Leader of the Opposition and by the 
critic that has asked the questions, Mr. Deputy Chair, including 
I think near the first day of the session where I think in what he 
was hoping to be a gotcha moment, the Leader of the 
Opposition stood up and asked why we weren’t implementing 
the Fyke Commission which, by the way, was a report not done 
by our government. It was done by members of the NDP when 
they were in government. 
 
And here’s why. If we would have had the chance to be in 
government when we received that report, we likely would not 
have implemented it because it would have closed an additional 
15 facilities in the province of Saskatchewan. A reduction, 

sorry, in the number of acute care beds and 20 acute care 
facilities and there would be more health care managers in the 
system. 
 
That’s what they were advocating for on the first day of the 
session. I think on the second day, they raised the compelling 
case of Preeceville. Ironically enough, Preeceville would have 
been closed by the Fyke Commission recommendations that 
they demanded the government . . . was the same day, the same 
day, save Preeceville hospital — and by the way, I think there’s 
been progress there — but adopt the report that the NDP passed 
that would actually close the Preeceville hospital. So there is a 
credibility issue here. 
 
We’re going to continue to ask the regions to find efficiencies. 
But also in this budget is important and significant investments 
in the surgical wait times initiative, so we can continue to see 
the transformation of the longest surgical wait-list in all of 
Canada. We inherited from members opposite, the social 
democrats, the party of Tommy Douglas, had this province dead 
last for surgical wait times in all of Canada. That’s changed and 
now Saskatchewan has the shortest surgical wait times in all of 
Canada, and in this tough budget there’s money for that as well. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — You’ll note there was no answer to the 
question, hon. member’s question to that, as far as what the 
actual number was, and you know we can push that further. 
You will note that the Premier took a long time answering — 
well not answering — a question, and I think he’s cognizant of 
the time here today. 
 
My question, you know and some of the comments . . . We 
could spend all day here on education and the failings of this 
government when it comes to students across this province and 
the broken promise to properly fund education across 
Saskatchewan, the consequences that has for our students in the 
next generation. 
 
But I have a question that I want to be more specific about: will 
the Premier support legislation to enshrine the right to form 
gender sexuality alliances, GSAs, in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, I thank the member 
for the question. I’d hope that the member will agree that the 
government takes the matter, gender matters, seriously on this 
side of the House including changes that we made with respect 
to gender identity a year ago and then just very recently 
removing the surgical requirement in terms of vital statistics. 
And with respect to GSAs, we want them available wherever, 
right across the province. 
 
And I’m happy to report to the House that the system that we 
have today is working. The resources that are available online 
from Education have been downloaded, I think, a thousand 
times. The Minister of Education tells me there’s resources 
available for every single school. 
 
The school divisions themselves, some have indicated that they 
would prefer, rather than to have this a prescriptive thing, to 
continue the process as it is where students aren’t required to 
have to go to the extent of law enforcement in some manner, in 
some form or function, but rather that these things would just 
exist and be supported and fully resourced by the government. 



712 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2016 

And that’s the situation today in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — We’ve noted certain measures that we 
fully support, and we’ll call for more. But it’s a matter of 
human rights, and we have a role each and every one of us can 
play, standing in this Assembly, to provide some protection to 
young people and all people across Saskatchewan. And it’s an 
important measure, and I think there’s incredible work being 
done in school divisions. There’s good work being done by 
partners on this front. 
 
But this is a step that we should be able to take on our two feet 
in this Assembly, and I’m disappointed with the response. Far 
too many are way too vulnerable on this front. Just look at the 
horrifying suicide rates as it relates to the queer community 
within our province. 
 
When we look at another measure that was brought forward 
recently out of extensive consultation with many across the 
province, changes to include post-traumatic stress disorder 
within workers’ compensation, a private members’ bill 
introduced by the member from Riversdale . . . This is 
important to make the changes to ensure that it’s covered and 
that it’s assumed to be presumptive under workers’ 
compensation. 
 
I’m seeking from the Premier his support for this legislation or 
if there’s some sort of constructive amendment, but this is the 
kind of change we should be able to bring forward to the people 
of the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, the review, the member’s aware 
of, is ongoing and legislation will be introduced in the fall. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — We look forward to that work. It’s 
important. Let’s get it right though, and let’s make sure that it’s 
there for all workers across Saskatchewan. Far too many have 
been impacted, and it impacts not just that worker but the entire 
family and our community and our economy as well. 
 
We don’t have ample time here, Mr. Chair. I don’t know if our 
House leaders can move for a couple extra hours or days of 
debate here or not. I am suspecting, reading some body 
language, that may not be a possibility. If the Premier’s game, 
I’m game. Let’s do it. We’ll burn the midnight oil. There’s lots 
of important questions. 
 
You know, on many fronts the people of our province deserve 
better. But they also deserve the facts. And it’s concerning, 
when we look at our finances, the record of this government, a 
government that didn’t save a dime during the best time in 
Saskatchewan, the best years, Mr. Speaker, record revenues, not 
a dime saved for the future. Through that period of time, a rainy 
day fund that was also drained in entirety, not when it was 
raining, Mr. Chair, but during the best years, during the sunniest 
times, leaving us particularly vulnerable at that period of time. 
 
And you know, these dollars aren’t a consequence of properly 
funding classrooms because that’s not happening. It’s not 
because of taking care of the vulnerable, Mr. Speaker, with 
practical measures because that’s not happening. What we’ve 
seen under this government is mismanaged project, wasteful 
mismanaged project after project that’s piled on debt for the 

people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now the consequences are coming due. We have raised these 
concerns in the past. We were raising them through the best 
times, saying to government, the way you’re going at this and 
managing these projects just isn’t sustainable. But that was 
brushed off and dismissed of course by the government, 
sometimes pretending that debt isn’t debt isn’t debt and calling 
it well this is this and this is that. 
 
The fact of the matter is $7 billion of new debt over seven 
years, Mr. Speaker, $3 billion of debt in just the last two years. 
And of course, leaving Saskatchewan people both vulnerable 
and bearing the brunt of now a downgrade that we see that 
should have been expected by the government, Mr. Speaker. 
And the costs come due to Saskatchewan people. Out of all of 
this, at the very least, I hope a lesson has been learned: a 
government that burned through cash fast on wasteful projects 
during the best days and a government that didn’t save a dime. 
 
A few years ago, the government commissioned a project to 
work with Peter MacKinnon to look at long-term savings or a 
sovereign wealth fund or a heritage futures fund. Of course that 
sat on the shelf. I guess my question to the Premier. We’re in a 
tighter . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well the Premier can go 
on and on and on and on not answering questions, but the side 
opposite seems to all of a sudden have a problem when the 
opposition puts on the record the real facts when it comes to 
their mismanagement and the finances, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I guess my question to the Premier, it’s important that we 
leave a lasting legacy for future generations. It’s important that 
we take care of today also. This is something that this 
government has really mismanaged. They didn’t get the job 
during the best time. What’s his plan to save for future 
generations, and will he ever start paying down debt? 
 
[17:45] 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — $2.7 billion in debt repayment over the last 
eight years — well that’s exactly the answer. He said, when will 
you ever start paying down debt, and I just told him precisely 
the answer. Now, Mr. Chair, he doesn’t like that answer. He 
doesn’t like the answer because that’s operating debt of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And we’ll walk through this again. Operating debt in 
Saskatchewan is something we inherited from members 
opposite who inherited it from another government that his 
House Leader was happy to talk about today. The difference 
between capital debt — which has a plan to fully retire, much 
like a mortgage — and operating debt is a credit card that’s got 
out of control with no plan ever, no date in the future by which 
you would retire. 
 
We inherited about $6 billion on that credit card. Is that what it 
was? $6.8 billion in operating debt from members opposite who 
inherited it from other members before them. So we thought we 
better pay that down. You know, my dad always advised me to 
make sure take care of your credit cards. The interest rates are 
higher. There’s no structured way to retire that debt if you just 
pay that minimum payment, and that’s what we were doing in 
the province for a long time. So when we had the opportunity 



June 29, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 713 

because of some economic good fortune — I think aided and 
maybe assisted by government policy — we paid off $2.7 
billion on the credit card, Mr. Chair. I think that makes eminent 
good sense. 
 
And I think by the way, this whole matter was debated in the 
election campaign. That’s why I find the member’s question 
pretty interesting because he basically relitigated the ballot 
question in the election. Before the election they were on this, 
where did the money go, and we answered the question. We 
answered it on the door steps in this province. We answered it 
on the airwaves. It was answered in the televised debate. And 
the answer goes something like $2.7 billion off the big orange 
credit card; $6 billion in tax cuts; $8 billion in infrastructure 
investment that will last for a very, very long time. 
 
But let’s return to item number two. That’s why the NDP have a 
hard time with the answer to the question, where did all the 
money go, because social democrats are not hardwired to think 
of government revenue as not belonging to the government but 
as belonging to the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
They have a hard time with that. They have a hard time with 
that. And that was their history because, you know, when they 
were elected, they would view those tax dollars . . . Once some 
family wrote their income tax cheque or a business remitted 
their PST [provincial sales tax], well that was now the property 
of the NDP government. 
 
Mr. Chair, we take a markedly different view of that on this 
side of the House. We think, when the province is in a position 
to return the money to the taxpayers to whom it has always 
belonged, we should take that opportunity. They’ll know better 
how to spend their money than any government of any stripe. 
When we return it to them in the magnitude of $6 billion, good 
things will happen in the Saskatchewan economy. And that’s 
exactly what has happened then, and what is still happening 
today in the province, Mr. Chair. 
 
This issue, it’s strange he would close the night with, well this 
is a question of management. Mr. Chairman, this is what we 
talked about in the provincial election campaign. The ballot 
question — it’s only April; it’s not that long ago — the ballot 
question was, who is best positioned to manage the province 
going forward, to provide the economic plan that can sustain us 
through some challenging times, can also manage the 
province’s finances? That was, I think, the critical question. 
That was what our polling said during and since the election 
campaign. And if the member’s interested, we could share some 
of the polling information. It’s not . . . there’s some sobering 
news in there perhaps, but we’ll share that post the election. 
 
The bottom line is that people made their choice. And they 
didn’t choose perfection; certainly we’ve never claimed it. We 
know as a government that we need to do better in a lot of 
areas. And it has been our intent, it’s been more than an 
aspiration, it has been our objective and our goal to do precisely 
that — to seek to do better in any number of files across the 
government, to be listening to Saskatchewan people, to hear 
about their concerns. 
 
The member tonight quite rightly pointed to a couple of 
occasions where government kind of backed off in a direction 
that we were going because we heard directly from 

Saskatchewan people. We make no claim to perfection, but we 
will always work hard to first of all, keep the promises that we 
made; and secondly, to stay in touch with Saskatchewan people; 
and thirdly, to approach policy in this province, to approach 
especially economic policy in this province in a way that states 
clearly to people in Saskatchewan and people from outside our 
borders that we view this province as a leader in Canada, a 
province and a place that should aspire with all of our resources 
and all of our people to leading in the country. Leading 
economically, but leading also in policy innovation, Mr. 
Chairman — that’s the third part of our objective and we’re 
going to continue to do that. 
 
Part of that is defending Saskatchewan’s interests outside the 
borders; that happens a lot lately on the energy sector. And we 
hope the NDP will come around to some sort of comfort level, 
to maybe even some pride in the energy sector that we have, so 
that we are not out there as a voice alone from this legislature 
but are joined by the NDP in support of the thousands of 
families that are working in the resource sector in the province. 
 
Mr. Chair, I’m not sure if we’re done. I’ll let the member ask 
another question. But if not, I’ll thank officials and thank him. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Keep going. I’ll ask another question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — He’s got one more question. Well I’ll defer 
him one more question since there’s one minute left. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we see more 
grandstanding from the Premier here today. And the question 
that was asked was, what is the plan for long-term savings in 
the province? You know, there was the MacKinnon report; 
there’s the idea of a sovereign wealth fund, a bright futures 
fund. But this is something the Premier doesn’t want to talk 
about because during the best days he couldn’t figure out how 
to shovel a dollar away for the future. And if he wants to talk 
about credit card debt and high interest, Mr. Speaker, he should 
look not past all these P3 projects, one managed by the one with 
this corporation from France, Mr. Speaker, and the wasteful 
projects. 
 
And we have a Premier who, instead of answering questions, is 
getting back into the election. Well you know it was pretty 
interesting when you go into an election. I think there’s one 
thing . . . You know Saskatchewan people, sure they deserve 
good management. Yes, they deserve a government that’s going 
to put us in a better fiscal position now and for the future. Is that 
happening? Certainly not.  
 
They deserve a government that’s going to come clean with 
them, that’s going to come clean with them about the true 
financial position of our province, something that never 
happened of course before the election, and a government that’s 
going to come clean with them about the impacts. And we see 
cut after cut within this budget that are small items, small items 
but have a big impact on vulnerable people across our province, 
on working people across our province. A government that 
never said during the election that, oh no, you can’t trust our 
signature on a teachers’ contract, and by not honouring that 
agreement we’re going to further strain classrooms all across 
our province. 
 



714 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2016 

And you know, our Premier, I tell you, the guy can speak. You 
know, I marvel at it. I like listening to him. I wish he’d make 
more sense at times, Mr. Speaker, but the fact is he can huff and 
puff and he can politic all he wants, but we need a Premier to be 
straight with Saskatchewan people, to focus on what matters. 
And on too many fronts in this budget we just don’t see it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need to take care of today. We need to plan for 
tomorrow. We need to deliver for the hard-working, optimistic 
people of this province, and certainly we don’t have this in the 
budget. So I’ll put my question back to the Premier: do you 
have a plan to repay debt, or is it just $7 billion over seven 
years like we’ve seen? And do you have a plan to save for the 
future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, I want to thank the member for 
getting in one last question because we want to share with him 
page 29 of the plan. It was in our platform, Mr. Chair. We 
campaigned on a fiscal plan for the province, notwithstanding 
challenging times, and the member opposite would have maybe 
done well to read the platform before he asked the question 
because it’s right there.  
 
Or even better, if he’s going to be all . . . If he’s going to pose a 
question with a premise about coming clean and good 
management, he may have wanted to read his own platform. 
Now I think he was the deputy leader at the time, so I’m hoping 
that the former leader of the party actually consulted with him 
on the development of the plan. I’m pretty sure he did because 
he would have noted that in the NDP platform there are 18 
promises that they failed to account for. 
 
So you want to talk about coming clean with Saskatchewan 
people, the opposite of coming clean with Saskatchewan people 
is, you go to Prince Albert and you promise a bridge but you 
don’t cost it, Mr. Chair. You don’t cost it. It’s nowhere in the 
platform. The opposite of coming clean with people is to tell 
those, especially who want a Wollaston road to the north, you 
tell them you’re going to build it, but you don’t cost it. It’s not 
in the platform. 
 
You tell people you’re going to fix up schools and build new 
ones — that’s a pretty specific promise — but even at that, you 
don’t cost it in the document. That doesn’t sound like coming 
clean with Saskatchewan people. You promise a utility bundle 
that’s worth, a utility bundle promise that’s worth $595 million, 
but you don’t come clean enough to actually cost it out and put 
it in your platform. And there’s a list of, I don’t know, there’s 
18 total. 
 
The Finance minister says, read them all. They told the people 
of the province, we’re going to reinstate cancelled STC 
[Saskatchewan Transportation Company] routes. But if they 
were serious about it, if they were coming clean with 
Saskatchewan voters, they might have actually costed it in their 
document. Fix up long-term care facilities, not costed. They’re 
going to do a basic income pilot project — remember that? — 
except that they didn’t cost it. They would expand SaskWater’s 
grid. They didn’t cost it. 
 
I don’t think anybody in this . . . To borrow a bit from the 
Education minister, I don’t think anybody ought to take any 
lessons from anyone on that side of the House about coming 

clean with people, especially after the last election campaign. 
 
Also in the premise to his question was good management. Well 
how in the world is it good management to have about $700 
million in uncosted promises, spending that you haven’t costed 
for, and then actually run a health care and an education 
platform where you’re going to fund it less than what’s in this 
current, very challenging budget, Mr. Chair? How is that about 
good management? 
 
So you know what? It’s funny. Over there we’ve heard, since 
the election, I think they truly believe that the people just got it 
wrong. The people got it wrong. They have said that. I think 
you have said that. Prior to the budget being tabled, prior to the 
budget being tabled, the members opposite were saying, what? 
They were saying, well if they would have . . . When the budget 
was tabled, I should say, they said that if people would have 
only known this budget — and I think we heard the Finance 
critic say it — if the people would have only known what was 
in this budget, the results in the election might have been 
different. But then there was a poll that came out after the 
budget, about 1,600 people they asked. And the members 
opposite were right. The numbers would have changed. There 
would have been more support on this side of the House than 
there is for members opposite. 
 
Mr. Chair, I want to thank the Leader of the Opposition for his 
questions. I want to thank the critic . . . The Chair is indicating 
that the Opposition Leader should go first. 
 
The Chair: — I understand the leader has another question. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — I’m listening to my House Leader here, 
and I’m not going to push. I think there’s an agreement on time. 
I have more questions for sure and I have more of a response 
that I’d love to get into, to some of what was just put forward 
here . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And of course the Minister 
of Highways is being her pleasant self, heckling at the end 
of . . . 
 
What I would like to say, I’d like to thank the Premier for the 
time here today — not all the answers, not all the actions, but 
the time here today. I’d definitely like to thank Deputy Minister 
Doug Moen for his service to the people of Saskatchewan, all of 
our civil service. And yes, I know, it’s always . . . When you’re 
on your feet as a politician, boy, there’s so much more I’d love 
to say right now, but I am cognizant of the time. 
 
Just as far as the comments about an election, Saskatchewan 
New Democrats understand the outcome that occurred, and we 
accept what happened. And we don’t think . . . We’re not going 
to tell voters that they’re wrong. We’re going to go out there 
and we’re going to work in earnest with Saskatchewan people, 
listening to their concerns and building and strengthening 
communities all across this province. We’ll take that work on 
seriously. That’s how we’ve tried to approach our work in this 
Assembly on issue after issue, and that’s the way we’ll go 
forward day after day. And that’s who we’re here to serve. And 
really we have a beautiful, remarkable province with incredible 
people, a lot of hope and opportunity, but it does take a 
government delivering where they can. With that being said, 
unless we’re going to move for an extra hour or so, I’ll close 
my comments. 



June 29, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 715 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, I want to thank you and the 
Deputy Chair of Committees for presiding this afternoon, and 
the table officers. I want to thank the Leader of the Opposition 
for the questions that he’s asked, and as well to the Health 
critic. She was able to make a case for issues that are important 
as well in health care, and I want to acknowledge and thank her 
for that. I too want to thank all the officials that have joined 
with me here today. 
 
But just before I do that, I’m really lucky to work with an 
amazing group of women and men, the MLAs on this side of 
the House, who are constant reminders to me personally, and to 
I think most that they encounter, to each other, that we are here 
serving the people of the province of Saskatchewan, that we 
were sent here to do a job and to be in contact and listening to 
their concerns and their desires and aspirations for their 
communities and cities across the province. So I do want to 
thank all my colleagues for their ongoing support and for their 
hard work on behalf of Saskatchewan people. 
 
[18:00] 
 
We have a great team in Executive Council in both what I 
might call the east wing and the west wing and I want to thank 
each of them for their service, not just for an evening like this, 
but for preparing for it and for what they do year round in trying 
to make sure that the government’s work can continue in a way 
that is responsible and a way that’s responsive as well. 
 
And I would be remiss if I didn’t take a chance to say 
something a little bit about this gentleman from Cabri, 
Saskatchewan who has served this province mightily for 97 
years. He is a remarkable man. I’ll repeat myself a little bit from 
a gathering we had not that long ago in room 218. There aren’t 
a lot of people who can offer up this rare combination. It’s all 
too rare — never mind politics; it’s just rare, period — of 
humility, of good humour, of intellect, of equanimity, and a 
work ethic that really does I think personify Saskatchewan 
people when we’re at our best. 
 
And he has, with all of those abilities, he has turned down many 
other opportunities, some of them very recently, I know, that I 
won’t put on the floor of the Assembly unless there’s a bet. But 
some of them have been very, very good offers. He’s turned, 
private and public, he’s turned them down because public 
service means a great deal to him, has always meant a great deal 
to him. And I want to point out that he’s leaving his current 
capacity as the head of the public service, but he’s by no means 
. . . Maybe going camping for a while but by no means is he 
finished with that public service. He’s going to be involved in 
public issues and maybe even he’ll help the government out so 
we can live up to the ideals that we all have for government in 
Saskatchewan a little bit better. 
 
There’s Proverbs, I think it’s 3:13 — I shared it at the event — 
that says something like “happy is the man that findeth wisdom 
and getteth understanding.” I have found those things in my 
friend, Doug Moen. So has the province of Saskatchewan. We 
thank him very much. 
 
The Chair: — Before we vote the estimates, I’ll give the 
officials a few moments to leave the Assembly before we start 
voting. 

Members, we’re ready to vote the estimates of Executive 
Council. Subvote (EX01), central management and services in 
the amount of 5,702,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (EX07), Premier’s office in the 
amount of $607,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (EX04), cabinet planning in 
the amount of 1,109,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (EX05), cabinet secretariat in 
the amount of 481,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (EX03), communications 
office in the amount of 1,396,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (EX08), House business and 
research in the amount of 413,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (EX06), members of Executive 
Council in the amount of 133,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (EX10), Intergovernmental 
Affairs in the amount of 4,444,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (EX11), francophone affairs in 
the amount of 770,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (EX12), Lieutenant 
Governor’s office in the amount of 691,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Resolved that there be granted to Her 
Majesty for the 12 months ending March 31, 2017 the following 
sums for Executive Council, 15,613,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. There being no further business 
before the committee, I would invite a member to move that the 
committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. 



716 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2016 

Mr. Chair, I move that the committee rise, report progress, and 
ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Chair: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that the committee rise, report progress, and ask for 
leave to sit again. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 
[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the committee to 
rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the 
next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. It now being past the time of 
adjournment, this Assembly stands adjourned until tomorrow at 
10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 18:08.] 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 681 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 681 
  Beaudry-Mellor ......................................................................................................................................................................... 681 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 681 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 681 
  Marit .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 682 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 682 
  Steinley ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 682 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 682 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................... 682 
  Ottenbreit .................................................................................................................................................................................. 683 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 683 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 683 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 683 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Donation Supports Project Triple Play 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 684 
 2016 Global Citizen Laureate 
  Stewart ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 684 
 Journey to Fitness and Health 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 684 
 Habitat for Humanity’s Women Build Projects 
  Eyre ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 684 
 Recognition Dinner Showcases Tourism Professionals 
  Olauson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 685 
 Need for Organ and Tissue Donors 
  Marit .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 685 
 Shooting Stars Foundation Fundraisers 
  Steinley ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 685 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Development of Mining Projects 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 686 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 686 
 Funding for Education 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 686 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 687 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 687 
 Coroner’s Inquest 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 688 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 688 
 Capacity of Health Care Facilities 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 688 
  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 688 
 Funding for Wakamow Valley Authority 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 690 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 690 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 690 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................... 690 
 Standing Committee on the Economy 
  Makowsky.................................................................................................................................................................................. 691 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 23 — The Liquor Retail Modernization Act/Loi de modernisation du commerce des boissons alcoolisées 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 690 
 Bill No. 24 — The Liquor Retail Modernization Consequential Amendments Act, 2016 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 691 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 



 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
General Revenue Fund — Executive Council — Vote 10 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 692 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 693 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 709 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


