






















































Hansard: June 13, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 15A  MONDAY, JUNE 13, 2016, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Hon. Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Hon. Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Merriman, Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 51; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Maurice Riou http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 469 
 June 13, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
introduce to you and through you and to all members of this 
Legislative Assembly, the staff from Foxvalley Counselling. 
Seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker . . . Oh, first of all, can I 
beg forgiveness, please? I’d like to ask for an extended 
introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Okay. In your gallery, we have Mark Fox — 
Mark, can you just wave? — Pam Fox, Brady O’Watch, Darrell 
Klyne, Remi Mike, Eddy Missens, Calvin Pelletier, Susanna 
Tuck, Laura Gunn, Chelsey Missens, Tammy Huget, Janis 
McNaughton, Kaylita Favel, Alida Moffatt. 
 
And I see Mr. Ross Pratt sitting up there too. I don’t know if 
you’re part of this, but hello and welcome, Ross. I knew he was, 
at one point in time for sure. 
 
They are joining us here today, Mr. Speaker, because earlier 
today I had the honour to take part in a pipe ceremony with the 
staff from Foxvalley, officials of the healthy families unit, and 
Elder Calvin Pelletier followed by a signing ceremony on the 
significant initiative for the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
There will be more to come later, Mr. Speaker. But until then, I 
ask all members to join me in welcoming this fine group to their 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you and to all members of this Legislative Assembly, I’d like to 
join with the minister in welcoming all the folks from Foxvalley 
Counselling. 
 
I understand we’re going to hear a little bit more about their 
program and what they do for the community shortly in a 
minister’s statement after other proceedings. But I’d just like to 
take this opportunity to join with the minister and ask that all 
other members join me in welcoming them to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, it’s my pleasure 

to introduce a great group of 36 grade 10 students from the 
Yorkton Regional High School. 
 
Their teachers, Mr. Perry Ostapowich and Mr. Chad McDowell, 
are with them, and again Mr. Pat Rawlick, the bus driver, is out 
in the bus. But as is tradition, some of the students will contact 
me with some questions and we correspond over the Internet or 
whatever the case might be, and I usually give them an 
honourable mention. So a few that have contacted me this time 
are Cameron Zamonsky, Madeline Benneke, Matthew 
Mandziuk, Amy Schmalz, Anastasia Prisyedko, Sydney 
Popowich, and Briana Balaybuck. I’d ask all members to 
welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d just 
like to join with the Minister for Corrections and Policing and 
the official opposition Justice critic in welcoming the group 
from Foxvalley here to their Legislative Assembly, to say 
congratulations on all the good work that is done, and certainly 
to say a special thank you to Mark and Pamela Fox and to Elder 
Calvin Pelletier for lifting the pipe this morning, getting things 
off in a good way. 
 
And just to say, in the person of Mark Fox, you’ve got someone 
who’s not just a good old ballplayer, but certainly someone 
who’s done a lot with his life to make a difference in other 
lives, and I know that in a lot of different ways, Mr. Speaker. 
But it’s really good to see them here today at their Legislative 
Assembly, so I’d again ask all members to welcome these 
important individuals to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to introduce three important guests who are seated in your 
gallery. Unfortunately I can’t see them though from where I am, 
but I know they’re up there. Autumn Bourque and Stephanie 
Cox, they’re the Co-Chairs on the board of TransSask Support 
Services. Also Autumn is the treasurer of Queen City Pride here 
in Regina. And they’re here as well as Laura Budd of Kelliher 
who’s a gender diversity consultant. But more importantly these 
folks are here to witness the passage of Bill 27, The Vital 
Statistics Act that we’ll be dealing with later on today. 
 
So I would ask all members to warmly welcome these three 
folks to their gallery here today. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to join with my friend across the way to welcome the 
guests from the trans community who are here with us today. 
Certainly their advocacy is one of the reasons that we are here 
today, that we’ll be bringing forward some very important 
legislation on the floor of the House today with the co-operation 
of our friends across the way. So, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
welcome them to our legislature and ask everyone else to join 
them as well. 
 



470 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2016 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Request leave for extended introduction, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Certainly I 
want to join with members opposite and the minister opposite 
and welcome Foxvalley here today. Thank you for the ways that 
you enrich our community and the lives of many. 
 
I’d also like to join with hon. . . . the minister and with the 
member from Saskatoon Centre to welcome Laura Budd, 
Stephanie Cox, and Autumn Faith Bourque to their Assembly 
here today, both for the legislation that’s passed, but also with 
respect to just the very tragic and horrendous attack of terror 
and hate that we, that the people across . . . well that people 
were subjected to in Orlando. And that certainly has a ripple 
effect across the world. And so I welcome these leaders within 
our LGBT [lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender] community 
to their Assembly here today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d also like to welcome Aidan Wotherspoon. We can’t figure it 
out if he’s a fourth or a fifth cousin of mine but he must be a 
fair bit removed because he’s a pretty good-looking guy. He’s 
of the Melville Wotherspoon clan for certain. And he’s an avid 
runner, I know, preparing for the Queen City Marathon. He 
works in water management. He’s an all around good guy and I 
got to spend an awful lot of time with him in this last election. 
He spent a lot of time on the doorstep with me, and he’s a 
committed guy who’s passionate, caring, and it was my 
pleasure to work closely with him through that period of time. 
 
I ask all members to join with me in welcoming Aidan and 
these other fine members to their Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition to improve PTSD 
[post-traumatic stress disorder] coverage for Saskatchewan 
workers. And, Mr. Speaker, these petitioners point out that 
post-traumatic stress disorder has a very real impact on the lives 
of Saskatchewan workers and they’re proposing that PTSD 
become a presumptive illness under workers’ compensation, 
Mr. Speaker. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Saskatchewan government to 
make the necessary changes to ensure that if Saskatchewan 
workers are exposed to traumatic events on the job and are 
then diagnosed with PTSD, it is presumed to be caused by 
the worker’s employment and the worker will subsequently 
be covered under workers’ compensation and receive the 

same benefits as others with work-related injuries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed today by citizens of 
Saskatoon and Moose Jaw. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition to the Government of Saskatchewan. They wanted to 
bring to our attention the following: that The Surface Rights 
Acquisition and Compensation Act is an old and outdated piece 
of legislation that remains largely unchanged despite 
amendments over the years, that is in desperate need of 
modernization to reflect the current challenges that farmers and 
ranchers are facing today. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the Government of Saskatchewan to introduce legislation 
that would modernize The Surface Rights Acquisition and 
Compensation Act, classify land valued as industrial rather 
than agricultural when oil and gas development takes 
place, removing pipelines and flow lines from the surface 
rights Act, and establish a new maximum in compensation 
to be paid for damages. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals who have signed this petition are 
from the city of Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Today I 
rise to present a petition in support of funding for heritage 
languages here in Saskatchewan. And we know that after 25 
years the Government of Saskatchewan is discontinuing all 
support for heritage language learning here in Saskatchewan. 
And since 1991, heritage language schools have depended on 
this modest funding from the Minister of Education to help 
sustain their programs. 
 
The heritage language schools contribute to the retention of 
immigrants in Saskatchewan by helping people to maintain 
their culture, identity, and traditions while at the same time 
learning about a Canadian way of life. Furthermore, studying 
additional languages offers many benefits for all Canadians, 
especially in today’s growing international markets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to reconsider this decision and restore funding for heritage 
language education in Saskatchewan heritage language 
schools. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition today are 
from Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 



June 13, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 471 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Standing Against Hatred and Violence 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, over the last few weeks I, 
along with many members in this House, have taken time to 
attend Pride events across Saskatchewan, in Moose Jaw, 
Saskatoon, Regina, Beardy’s, Okemasis, Swift Current, and 
Prince Albert. Members of the LGBT community and their 
allies have been coming together to celebrate diversity, but also 
to show solidarity and fight for human rights. 
 
In the last few years, some have asked whether or not Pride 
events are still relevant after so many victories and so many 
years of progress. Tragically this weekend’s horrifying attacks 
of terror and hate in Orlando highlight the terrible reality that 
homophobia and transphobia are still very real, and the 
consequences can be deadly. 
 
We all need to come together and fight alongside the LGBT 
community so that we can stamp out this hatred and violence. 
We need to call out homophobia and transphobia. We need to 
challenge those who say that the status quo is good enough. 
And we need to make sure that every student has the legislated 
right to build and find community through forming a GSA 
[gay-straight alliance] in their school if they want one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am asking all members to join me in expressing 
solidarity with members of the LGBT community. It’s 
understandable that they may be feeling a little less safe and a 
little less free today. Mr. Speaker, love is love is love is love, so 
let’s stand together and express care and love for one another. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister in charge of Parks, 
Culture and Sports. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with 
great sadness that I stand in this Assembly to acknowledge the 
horrific events that took place in the Pulse nightclub in Orlando 
early on Sunday morning. Although the details are still coming 
in, this was a heinous and cowardly attack against the LGBT 
community, and all of us. 
 
This was not just an attack on a nightclub. It was an attack 
against the rights and freedoms that have been so hard fought 
for, an attack on inclusion, an attack on human rights. Mr. 
Speaker, as Pride events and festivals take place throughout 
June, it is especially tragic as the lives of many were taken for 
no reason other than hate. 
 
Last evening I was able to attend a vigil at the Q Nightclub 
along with colleagues from both sides of this House. It was a 
moving experience where candles were lit for victims, thoughts 
were shared about inclusion and diversity, and there was a 
spontaneous singing of “Amazing Grace” that moved us all. 
Allies and the LGBT community took part and the building was 
standing room only. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no question that all members of this 
Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan stand firmly with the 

victims and their families and friends. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, we 
stand against hate and stand with the whole LGBT community. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

New Wheat Breeding Facility Opens at Pike Lake 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, on Friday I had the pleasure to 
attend the opening of Bayer’s new wheat breeding facility near 
Pike Lake. This state of the art facility will create up to 20 new 
jobs, many of them good-paying, high-tech jobs that our 
province needs to diversify its economy and become more 
resilient to the changes in the price of natural resources. This 
new 21,500-square-foot facility sits on 480 acres of farm land 
that will be used to grow and test the new wheat hybrids being 
developed. This facility represents a $24 million investment by 
Bayer. 
 
[13:45] 
 
We know that modern technology is so important for the 
sustainability of agriculture. Mary Buhr, dean of the U of S 
[University of Saskatchewan] College of Agriculture told The 
StarPhoenix: 
 

What we are literally doing is being able to grow more 
food with fewer inputs— like fertilizers and pesticides and 
gas to run tractors — and we get better-quality food and 
we get a greater variety of food. 

 
Mr. Speaker, continued investment in crop science and 
biotechnology helps create good-paying jobs and helps our 
producers grow better food. The development of a high-yielding 
wheat hybrid that is resistant to disease will put wheat back on 
the map, and producers will benefit from the work that Bayer is 
committed to. We need to do so much more as a province to 
invest in these types of projects through the University of 
Saskatchewan and by attracting investment from seed 
companies like Bayer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
Bayer on the opening of this new facility and in thanking them 
for everything they do to help Saskatchewan producers to grow 
healthy food we all need. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

Remembering Gordie Howe 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. The hockey community lost a legend, humanity lost a 
hero, and the province of Saskatchewan said goodbye to a son. 
Gordon Howe, born March 31st, 1928 in Floral, Saskatchewan 
passed away this Friday at the age of 88. 
 
Known as Mr. Hockey, this legend played a remarkable 33 
seasons over five decades of pro hockey. He was known as a 
humble man but when the puck dropped, he was a fierce 
competitor that wasn’t afraid to throw his weight around. 
Hockey fans everywhere know what a Gordie Howe hat trick is. 
Whether after a game or on the street, Gordie Howe always 



472 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2016 

made a point to talk to everybody, sign every autograph, and 
personally respond to every piece of mail. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of my most treasured memories was at a 
Kinsmen dinner in Saskatoon only a few years ago. Gordie 
Howe, Wayne Gretzkey, former prime minister Harper, and our 
Premier shared the stage. They shared a few laughs, a few tears, 
and everyone in the audience knew it was a moment that they 
would never forget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as long as there’s heroes in hockey, he will never 
be gone. As long as parents have a lesson to teach their 
children, he will never be gone. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members 
of this House to join me in saying, rest in peace, Mr. Hockey. 
Rest in peace, Mr. Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 

Autism Speaks Canada Walk 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, yesterday I had 
the opportunity to participate in the Autism Speaks Canada 
Walk with my daughter Courtney. Our team was called 
Courtney’s Crusaders in her honour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Autism Speaks Canada was founded in 2005 and 
has grown into the world’s leading autism science and advocacy 
organization. This important walk takes place in over 100 cities 
across North America to raise funds for research, services, 
advocacy, and awareness. Funds raised during the walk have 
gone towards training early childhood educators, helping newly 
diagnosed families navigate the health care system, and young 
adults learning skills to help them find jobs, just to name a few. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to share with this Assembly some of the 
things that I have learned about autism over the last 10 years. 
Autism can be diagnosed by the age of two. One-third of 
children with autism are non-verbal. High-quality, early 
intervention does more than develop skills. This is why our 
government will be introducing individualized funding for 
children under the age of six who have been diagnosed with 
autism spectrum disorder. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we were very lucky to have the member from 
Saskatoon Willowgrove and the member from Saskatoon 
University and their families join Courtney’s Crusaders. I ask 
that all members join me in thanking Autism Speaks Canada for 
putting on such an important event. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
North. 
 

Moose Javian Wins Miss Universe Canada 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 
today to recognize Siera Bearchell. Siera is a former constituent 
whose family continues to reside in Moose Jaw North. This 
weekend Siera won Miss Universe Canada 2016 and will 
represent Canada at the 2016 Miss Universe pageant later this 
year. 
 
Siera is an inspiration off the stage as well. She is currently a 
law student at the University of Saskatchewan and continues to 

help the most vulnerable communities around the globe. She is 
co-owner and co-founder of Watered Down Apparel, which 
provides 30 days of clean water for every item sold. Watered 
Down Apparel has helped provide clean water projects in 
Kenya, Ghana, Ethiopia, and Haiti and is partnered with the 
organization WaterIsLife. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Siera is an amazing young leader. She was the 
recipient of the Queen’s Diamond Jubilee Medal, the Peter 
Mansbridge Youth Leadership Award, the Deloitte Inspiration 
Award, and the Red Cross Young Humanitarian Award, just to 
name a few. It goes without saying that these awards are very 
well deserved. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating Siera Bearchell 
on her place as Miss Universe pageant. No doubt she will 
represent Saskatchewan and Canada incredibly well. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 

Freedom of the City Parade in Moose Jaw 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Saturday I had 
the pleasure of attending the Freedom of the City parade held 
by the Royal Canadian Air Force 15 Wing in Moose Jaw. The 
parade was held in honour of the 75th anniversary of the British 
Commonwealth air training program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the BCATP [British Commonwealth air training 
plan] was one of Canada’s most important contributions to the 
Allied war effort during the Second World War. Saskatchewan 
and Moose Jaw played an important role in this program as our 
large skies and wide open spaces provided great flying 
conditions for training. As a result of the BCATP, an air force 
station was set up south of Moose Jaw. The original station 
eventually became 15 Wing Moose Jaw. 
 
Over the past 75 years, Mr. Speaker, the air base and its 
members have made many valuable contributions to the Moose 
Jaw community. According to 15 Wing commander, Colonel 
Alex Day, the granting of the Freedom of the City is one of the 
most esteemed honours that can be bestowed on a military unit. 
 
I ask all members to join me in remembering those who served 
as part of the British Commonwealth air training program, and 
then thanking the members of 15 Wing for their contributions to 
Moose Jaw community and their service to our country. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Number of Saskatchewan Companies Working  
on Regina Bypass Project 

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, last week I raised concern 
that the Sask Party’s $2 billion so-called bypass and its $1 
billion overrun is bypassing Saskatchewan businesses, job 
creators, and Saskatchewan workers. The Premier dismissed 
this and brought out a list of companies and selectively read 



June 13, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 473 

from it. He neglected to mention that he was counting Crown 
corporations, municipalities, even the city of Regina. And he 
forgot to tell us that close to 20 of the companies he claims to 
be from Saskatchewan actually have head offices outside of the 
province. 
 
Of course we support Saskatchewan companies who are part of 
this project, but there are far too few of them, and they’re 
getting far too little of the work. Meanwhile companies like 
Rob’s Concrete Pumping here in Regina have been told that 
they won’t be included in the project. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, let me ask again, and this wasn’t answered last 
week, how much of the $2 billion in this project being run by 
the large corporation from France, in actual dollars, is going to 
Saskatchewan businesses? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice, Attorney 
General, and SaskBuilds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. You 
know, Mr. Speaker, I think this question was answered very, 
very well last week: 71 per cent of the businesses that are 
working on the bypass are Saskatchewan businesses. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, he can dismiss the fact that some of these 
companies don’t have head offices in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, but the people that are working for these companies 
are Saskatchewan residents. They’re paying Saskatchewan tax. 
Mr. Speaker, I can also say that the definition that we’ve used 
to define Saskatchewan companies has been adopted by a 
number of professional organizations, including consulting 
engineers, Canadian Manufacturers & Exporters, and the NSBA 
[North Saskatoon Business Association], to name a number, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, to suggest that Saskatchewan employees who 
work for companies and who have offices aren’t entitled to 
work on this bypass is ridiculous, Mr. Speaker. These are 
Saskatchewan employees. They’re paying tax in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. We stand by the numbers which we presented last 
week. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — The question was asked now for the 
third time, and not an answer again to the question. We’ve 
heard concern from many Saskatchewan businesses about being 
shut out on this project. And this growing Saskatchewan 
business says that they were told by the Sask Party and the 
contractor from France that “. . . they’re not even interested in 
our bid . . .” And they were told, “‘No, forget it, you’re not 
going to get to bid on it. You’re not going to get to be part of 
it.’ Flat-out no.” Mr. Speaker, instead an Alberta-based 
company got that contract.  
 
Mr. Speaker, there are 15,000 more Saskatchewan people out of 
work today than there was just a year ago. 9,500 Saskatchewan 
jobs have been lost. The unemployment rate for off-reserve 
First Nations is a shameful 25 per cent. So why is the Sask 
Party bypassing so many workers and so many Saskatchewan 
businesses? Now I’ll ask the question again, now for the fourth 
time in this Assembly, and maybe we can get a straight answer 

from the government. Of this $2 billion, the massive overrun 
that’s in place, how much of that money is going to 
Saskatchewan businesses? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll be direct with respect to 
the first part of his question. We’ve been advised by Regina 
Bypass Partners that they have no record of any contact with the 
company that he mentioned, and I would suggest that he do 
some research before he finds out the answers, Mr. Speaker. 
But they’ve had no, they’ve had no contact with the . . . And 
that’s the advice that we received, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll repeat my answer from before: 71 per cent of 
the companies that are working on this bypass are 
Saskatchewan companies, Mr. Speaker, hiring Saskatchewan 
workers to do this work. They’re paying tax in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. And I said, Mr. Speaker, you know, we should be 
thankful that offices are being set up in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, that they’re hiring people to pay taxes in this province. 
That’s what we should be concentrating on, worried about — 
the people that need employment in this province. The bypass is 
creating over 13,000 of those jobs for people right here in this 
province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Provincial Economy and Support for the Oil Industry 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, asked four times and not 
an answer, of the massive overrun, into $2 billion, about how 
much is being spent here in Saskatchewan. You know, the 
Premier just doesn’t get it. His way isn’t working on many 
fronts. He came into government when oil prices were high, 
times were good. Instead of saving a dime, he drained the rainy 
day fund, boasted and coasted and failed to diversify our 
economy. Now that oil prices came down and Saskatchewan 
people are losing their jobs, the Premier went to Calgary last 
week and actually said: 
 

We are in the middle of a battle and, frankly, we haven’t 
been winning very many battles. When I say “we,” I mean 
this sector and the resource importance of western Canada. 
 

Mr. Speaker, when he says “we,” he should just accept it; he 
hasn’t got the job done. Mr. Speaker, even with a Conservative 
government in Alberta and in Ottawa, the Premier was unable 
to build a single pipeline. In just the last year, 1,100 more 
workers in this sectors lost their jobs. Mr. Speaker, when will 
this government finally take diversifying our economy 
seriously, prioritize Saskatchewan jobs and workers, and stop 
putting headlines ahead of pipelines and start getting the job 
done for Saskatchewan people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I find that a curious 
attack by the opposition members, attacking the Premier and 
defending Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, one thing 
that this province can be proud of, it’s a Premier that is by far 
the most popular Premier in Canada, Mr. Speaker, most popular 
Premier in Saskatchewan that continues to defend this province 



474 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2016 

across the nation. 
 
You bet he was in Calgary last week. And he’s in eastern 
Ontario this week, Mr. Speaker, defending Saskatchewan, 
defending the oil industry for all of Western Canada, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s a far cry from the opposition that only wants to 
defend the Leap Manifesto that would kill the oil industry in 
this province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Carbon Capture and Storage Facility 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier attacks others for 
being against the oil and gas industry, but he is the one who is 
failing. In Alberta, the NDP [New Democratic Party] 
government is building success by working with people in the 
industry and out of it. And this Premier is failing on both 
counts. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we can see even more Sask Party troubles 
with the $1.5 billion carbon capture project. They have 
inexplicably stood by the bizarre claim that their project is 
working at nameplate capacity. I say bizarre, Mr. Speaker, 
because they know it’s only operating at 80 per cent. The 
Premier knows it, and the minister knows it. 
 
We recently found out that the BD3 [Boundary dam 3] carbon 
capture unit has also been repaired at least 6,862 times since 
May of 2013. That is, on average, six work orders a day, Mr. 
Speaker — six a day. These facts certainly weren’t highlighted 
in the government’s press releases. To the minister: when will 
we really know all of the facts about this project? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I believe the member 
opposite has toured the facility down at BD3, if I’m not 
mistaken. And what she would have saw, Mr. Speaker, is a very 
complex industrial facility down there, one that is certainly 
making headlines around the world for the nature of the carbon 
capture work that they’re doing down there, Mr. Speaker.  
 
[14:00] 
 
It also is one that is very, very complex, as I’ve said, and they 
have a huge amount of work that they do on a daily basis to 
ensure that maintenance, routine maintenance, is done on a 
regular basis. For example, Mr. Speaker, there’s one piece of 
equipment down there that there’s a work order issued weekly 
to change oil, Mr. Speaker. There’s a number of other ones that 
SaskPower documents all of the work that’s done with respect 
to that. For example, if there’s a leaking flange, they tighten up 
the bolts on the flange so it isn’t dripping any water or anything 
of that nature, Mr. Speaker, or any CO2 that’s being captured, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The fact of the matter is, it’s a very complex facility, Mr. 
Speaker, a lot of work orders. To put in context, last year 
SaskPower, on a province-wide basis, issued 195,000 work 
orders. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, this project is almost as complex 
as it is costly. And of course, this minister would downplay this. 
Yes of course, projects will need maintenance, but this minister 
has not been upfront about the extent of those repairs or the 
costs. 
 
There was $17 million in maintenance costs incurred just to get 
this project working, keeping in mind this is a brand new 
facility. On top of that, the operation and maintenance costs 
each year will be at least $13 million, and this is just the carbon 
capture plant, Mr. Speaker. In 2014 and ’15, millions were paid 
out in penalties to their corporate partners in this, Cenovus. In 
2015 the operation and maintenance costs were $13 million. No 
wonder this government is delaying their decisions for BD4 
[Boundary dam 4] and BD5 [Boundary dam 5]. 
 
How can they still defend the economic viability of this project? 
When will this minister finally be open and transparent when it 
comes to the cost and economic viability about carbon capture? 
How can the province trust this government’s decisions when 
they are so secretive? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan I think should be comforted in the fact that just 
recently we had the federal Minister of the Environment tour 
the facility down there at Boundary dam, Mr. Speaker. And she 
said, after touring the facility . . . So when you have a carbon 
capture and storage that’s certainly an innovative solution, a 
made-in-Canada solution, so looking at how we can improve 
here, and it’s a real opportunity for Canada to export solutions. 
 
And when she was talking about those solutions, Madam 
Member, she was talking about this. She said the opportunity 
here for Saskatchewan is 50 trillion — that’s with a “t” — $50 
trillion in China alone, Mr. Speaker. That’s the kind of 
economic impact that a facility of this type has on a worldwide 
basis, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Number of Young Offenders in Custody 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan continues to have 
the highest rates of youth crime and the second highest rates of 
youth incarceration. The Children’s Advocate has criticized the 
Minister of Corrections and Policing from moving away from a 
youth model and the principles of reintegration. Last year this 
government chose to close Yarrow Youth Farm and Orcadia 
Youth Residence. They made this decision on short notice and 
without consultation. 
 
Even after significant concerns were expressed from the 
Children’s Advocate, they chose to close these facilities. On 
many fronts, they are failing to deal with these issues 
appropriately. To the minister: why are youth offenders not a 
priority for this government? 
 



June 13, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 475 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. The closure of 
Yarrow Work Farm was done because it was operating at 50 per 
cent capacity, Mr. Speaker. We’re using unused space in our 
other facilities to consolidate young offenders within the 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me just go to a few statistics here, a few comments. The 
NDP government closed three youth centres, totalling 42 youth 
custody beds during their time in office. The 42 beds they 
closed were consolidated with other facilities, using empty, 
closed space at Paul Dojack Centre. When they faced crowding 
issues, they put youth in an adult correctional facility, Mr. 
Speaker. We are consolidating our operations within the 
province of Saskatchewan, and it really is about programming 
for the youth within our facilities, Mr. Speaker, not where 
they’re located. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, a report out today shows justice 
and correction systems are not getting the job done when it 
comes to dealing with offenders and, as the minister says, 
turning them into taxpayers. In fact, many will reoffend and 
have continued contact with the police. Mr. Speaker, 9 out of 10 
Aboriginal youth who are pushed through the correction 
system, had re-contact with the police following. Saskatchewan 
already has the highest youth crime rate, so bringing down 
recidivism rates is crucial for all of us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this budget we saw the Sask Party shut down 
the Buffalo Narrows Correctional Centre. They cut the 
Aboriginal court worker program. They cut the alternative 
measures programming. They cut the Aboriginal police 
consultation groups. Mr. Speaker, this government cuts 
program after program after program. Is anyone surprised that 
we’re seeing high rates of crime and recidivism? And with all 
of these cuts, how does the minister think things will get better? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, the Statistics Canada report 
that the member opposite references is one that I just saw for 
the first time this morning. I will take the time to go over it 
obviously and, with my officials, determine what it means for 
corrections and policing here in Saskatchewan. I am confident 
that it will help us to better understand the re-engagement 
within the criminal justice system in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And there’s one thing I know, Mr. Speaker: that is the fact that, 
if we continue doing the same thing time and time again, we’ll 
end up with the same results. Our young offender facilities will 
be over capacity. Our adult facilities will be unsustainable. Mr. 
Speaker, we are focusing on demand reduction. Healthy 
families is but one example of that, Mr. Speaker. We’ll continue 
focusing on what will reduce the people within our correctional 
facilities. Thank you. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Ever since the budget, 
we’ve heard story after story about cuts being made to school 
divisions. This minister likes to brag about how much funding 
for schools has increased, but for many school divisions that’s 
simply not the reality. In fact, Mr. Speaker, this year funding 
has decreased in nearly half of all school divisions compared to 
last year. They’ve had to scramble to make up for the shortfall, 
cutting educational staff and reducing staff hours. But the 
minister wants them to make more cuts, expecting school 
divisions to “. . . roll up their sleeves and try and find 
efficiencies and economies . . .” And if those cuts aren’t deep 
enough, Mr. Speaker, the minister says the government might 
intervene. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our schools are already understaffed and under 
resourced. Why won’t the minister admit his government made 
a mistake, reverse these cuts, and provide the funding needed to 
give our kids the education that they deserve? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this year our overall 
education budget increased by 7.8 per cent to $2.2 billion, an 
all-time high. Mr. Speaker, the member opposite accused us last 
week of playing games with the numbers, moving things in and 
out of what was capital, what wasn’t capital. I’d like to remind 
the members opposite that in 2007-2008 provincial funding to 
school divisions for operating funding — exclusive of capital, 
exclusive of EPT [education property tax] — was $694 million. 
Mr. Speaker, 2016-17 that number had risen to $1.2 billion, a 
73 per cent increase. At the same time, Mr. Speaker, education 
property tax dropped from $742 million to $680 million, a 
reduction of 8.3 per cent.  
 
So, Mr. Speaker, make no mistake: education funding has gone 
up in this province. We will continue to make our investment in 
students and make our investment in the future of the province. 
Money cannot be spent any better way than what we’re doing in 
partnership with the education divisions across the province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, once again a denial of the reality in 
our classrooms today. This minister used to talk a lot about the 
need to respect the autonomy of school divisions. Now he’s 
changed his tune, saying that if school divisions don’t make 
sufficient cuts, the government could step in and impose them. 
When asked if he would do so in an interview last week, he 
said, “We certainly have the right to do it. We have the ability 
to do things like that.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, our school divisions are already stretched thin. 
They’ve cut whatever they can, and they’ve been forced to cut 
teaching positions and support staff. But apparently that’s not 
enough for this minister. Will the minister respect the autonomy 
of school divisions, or will he step in and make deeper 
additional cuts? 



476 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2016 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, where a school division 
has got lower enrolment, where numbers have dropped, we can 
expect to see a corresponding drop in funding for that school 
division. Sometimes capital projects are finished and there’s a 
drop in funding when those things have ended. Mr. Speaker, we 
will continue to look for and we will not apologize for looking 
to the divisions to find economies and to make sure that they 
commit to spending money where it belongs — which is in the 
classrooms, in the front line — so that it benefits the students 
the most. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget has increased funding overall by 7.8 
per cent to 2.2. Mr. Speaker, in addition to that, part of that 
funding is $288 million for supports for learning. In addition to 
that, $5.4 million for Syrian refugees; $391 million for capital, 
including $310.5 million for joint schools; $41.9 million for 
ongoing capital projects in St. Brieux, Langenburg, 
Gravelbourg, Martensville, as well as École Connaught, Sacred 
Heart, and in Mâmawêyatitân Centre replacing Scott Collegiate 
in Regina. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, my question is simple to this 
minister: if the principle is funding based on enrolment, why 
did we see a cut to the mid-year adjustment for growing school 
divisions? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we could talk about 16 
years of government by the NDP, and we could talk about their 
mid-year adjustment for enrolment increase. Well the fact is, 
they never made it — not once. Not even when enrolment went 
up did they do it. But the fact of the matter is, enrolment went 
down under the members opposite so they didn’t need to worry 
about enrolment increase because the kids were all moving to 
Calgary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, under this government our enrolment has been 
going up. We gave enrolment increases in the years where we 
could and, Mr. Speaker, this year we’ve reached forward and 
projected what the numbers will be in September so that we 
won’t have to make another enrolment adjustment this year. 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s the type of things that we’re doing. 
We are planning ahead, and we will work with the divisions. 
We have confidence that they will work with us and give us the 
best economy we can so that we can continue to support the 
students and continue to support the divisions in our province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, a history lesson about what 
happened 10 years ago does nothing to put teachers in front of 
kids today. Mr. Speaker, the truth is that the minister has 
already stepped in and forced cuts on school divisions. His 
government cut the mid-year funding adjustment for schools 
last year, two years ago, and they’re doing it again this year. 
 

Mr. Speaker, schools depend on mid-year funding to help deal 
with unexpected enrolment growth. Last year’s funding cuts left 
divisions scrambling to find the money to pay for additional 
students in their schools. In Regina Public School Division 
alone there were 665 new students left unfunded. Now they’re 
calculating yet another shortfall with this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, schools depend on this money to help with the 
growth of their student population. Will the minister admit that 
cutting the mid-year funding adjustment was a mistake? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, in the last question, I 
answered that by saying we were reaching forward and 
projecting to what the September enrolments would be this year 
so there would not be the need for additional funding mid-year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 16 years under the NDP, not a nickel for mid-year 
funding. And they have the nerve to stand in this House now 
and say we should be doing it — something they never did, an 
idea that had never crossed their minds. Mr. Speaker, we will 
work with the divisions and continue to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week, and I quote, a headline from The 
StarPhoenix states that “[Saskatoon] public school division has 
ruled out staff cuts despite challenges.” Mr. Speaker, Northeast 
School Division director Don Rempel: 
 

We’re not going to decline any of our teaching or 
school-day staff. We’re going to work with our distribution 
model as far as our school-based teachers and support staff 
as status quo, and we’re going to make adjustments in 
services outside of schools. We will do the best we can 
with the resources we have. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the sign of divisions that are working with 
us, unlike what the members opposite had when they were in 
government. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Second Bridge for Prince Albert 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Prince Albert are 
sick and tired of waiting for the Sask Party government to 
address their need for a second bridge. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 
Prince Albert and area community leaders have written a letter 
to the Highways minister to raise not only the importance of a 
second bridge but also that the government’s costly P3 
[public-private partnership] rent-a-bridge plan will not work for 
their community. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the minister for 
Martensville-Warman prefers the my-way-or-the-highway 
approach. Instead of dictating terms to the community, the 
minister should be looking to solve the problem. To the 
minister: It is clear your P3 approach doesn’t work for Prince 
Albert and area. Will you agree to scrap your costly P3 
approach? 
 
[14:15] 



June 13, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 477 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Highways. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier 
was very clear a couple of years ago, saying that when the city 
of Prince Albert and the federal government were willing to 
proceed with this bridge with three levels of government that 
we would do that, Mr. Speaker. We are open to the possibility 
of it being outside of P3, but the important part, Mr. Speaker, is 
that the city of Prince Albert is at the table. This will not be a 
fully provincially funded bridge; this requires three levels of 
government. And I understand they have written to me; I 
haven’t yet received that letter, but I would be happy to meet 
with the leadership from Prince Albert to discuss this when they 
do reach out. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — So I just want to stress this, Mr. Speaker. 
Just last week these community leaders sent a letter to the 
Minister of Highways, and she’ll be receiving it soon. The letter 
encouraged support for a second bridge saying, “Due to the 
traffic volumes and, most importantly, the economic risk of one 
bridge supporting a significant amount of economic action to 
the North . . .” 
 
This is a provincial issue, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the letter 
goes on to stress that the city of Prince Albert, the RM [rural 
municipality] of Prince Albert, and the RM of Buckland cannot 
afford what the Sask Party will charge them for the P3 funding 
arrangement. The combined annual budget for the three 
municipalities is approximately 106 million. Mr. Speaker, the 
P3s also require a feasibility study which will cost in the 
ballpark of about $1 million and, even if they find the money, 
there’s still no guarantee to a second bridge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the committee is requesting time with the 
Highways minister, and I hope she considers to meet with them. 
So why won’t . . . discuss their concerns and potential solutions 
to the creation of the second bridge for Prince Albert? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I believe I just 
said yes to all the things in her question, although I couldn’t 
hear all of it because it was a little bit loud in here. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I do want to point out she said this was a 
provincial responsibility. Well that’s new for the NDP, Mr. 
Speaker, because when the province needed repairs, what was 
the NDPs answer to that? It wasn’t an important part of 
Highway No. 2 and they weren’t going to put a dime into that 
bridge, Mr. Speaker. We have fully funded the repairs on that 
bridge. And, Mr. Speaker, going forward, we require three 
levels of government to participate in the funding of this bridge. 
 
As I’ve said, I’m happy to meet with representatives. Mr. 
Speaker, the funding model that we’re looking at is similar to 
what we’ve done for the city of Saskatoon. They’re regional 
bridges, Mr. Speaker. They accommodate not just city traffic, 
but regional traffic, provincial traffic, national traffic in some 
circumstances, Mr. Speaker. The city of Saskatoon stepped up 
as a three-way partnership, Mr. Speaker, and that’s what we’re 

asking for for the city of Prince Albert. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 

Healthy Families Initiative 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier today I had 
the honour of taking part in the official signing ceremony for 
our government’s healthy families initiative. The healthy 
families unit was established in 2015 as a key priority under the 
Saskatchewan child and family agenda, with the objective to 
research and develop an intervention that will increase the 
well-being of families with complex needs and decrease their 
dependency on government programs and services. 
 
The healthy families unit developed the healthy families 
initiative and evidence-informed intervention that targets 
Saskatchewan’s most vulnerable families living with complex 
needs. Services will be tailored to meet the families’ unique and 
dynamic needs. Each family will be connected with a dedicated 
worker that will work with the family to identify natural and 
professional supports and participate in the development of the 
family plan. The healthy families unit is comprised of the 
ministries of Justice, Corrections and Policing, Health, Social 
Services, and Education, and together we will be investing 
$750,000 into the initiative. 
 
Foxvalley Counselling Services will be delivering the 18-month 
pilot program, which will be focusing on 10 high-usage, 
vulnerable families right here in Regina. Foxvalley Counselling 
staff will work with the families to reduce criminal offences and 
family violence, support families to care for their children, 
increase employment, support families challenged by mental 
health and addictions, and ensure children are attending school. 
It is estimated that this will generate a two-to-one return on 
investment. 
 
With an initial investment of $750,000, this program can save 
the government up to 1.5 million. Saskatchewan is already 
receiving national and international recognition for our 
multi-ministerial approach to working differently with families. 
The healthy families initiative is another example of the 
innovative work that we are doing in corrections and policing. 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is but one response to the provincial 
poverty reduction strategy and the mental health and addictions 
action plan. 
 
I want to thank the healthy families unit and Foxvalley for all 
their hard work they have done and will continue to do to 
ensure that Saskatchewan remains the best province in Canada 
to live, work, and raise a family. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to thank, 
first I’d like to thank the minister for providing me with the 
advance copy of the statement and learning a bit more about the 
new healthy families initiative. I’d also like to applaud the work 
that Foxvalley Counselling Services does in the province. They 



478 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2016 

do amazing work, and we had the opportunity to thank them in 
person already earlier today. 
 
It will be interesting to see how this program shapes up, with 
the dedicated worker and the high-needs families that this pilot 
is going to serve. And I’m also happy to see the inter-ministry 
support for funding for this program. It would have been nice to 
see the government do a little bit more of this upfront, 
providing supports work. That wasn’t apparent in the budget, I 
believe, this time around, and it’s clear from the minister’s own 
statement that providing this upfront support does help us in 
terms of financial consequences in the long run. 
 
In any event, we’re looking forward to seeing how this project 
works, and we’ll be continuing to monitor it. Thank you. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 30 — The Freedom of Information and Protection 
of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move that Bill No. 30, The Freedom of Information and 
Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016 be now introduced 
and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Attorney General 
that Bill No. 30, The Freedom of Information and Protection of 
Privacy Amendment Act, 2016 be now introduced and read a 
first time. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 31 — The Local Authority Freedom of Information 
and Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move that Bill No. 31, The Local Authority Freedom of 
Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016 be 
now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Attorney General 
that Bill No. 31, The Local Authority Freedom of Information 
and Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016 be introduced 
and read a first time. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND  
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to present 
its first report. I want to thank all the members of the public 
who made both oral and written submissions for this report, Mr. 
Speaker. I move: 
 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on Crown 
and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies that the 
first report be now . . . [inaudible] . . . in. 
 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — On division. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried . . . On division, okay. All those in 
favour? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — All those opposed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Yeas have it. When shall the Bill No. 1, The 
Crown Corporations Public Ownership Amendment Act, 2016 
be read a second time? I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 



June 13, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 479 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answer to question 76. 
 
The Speaker: — Question no. 76 is tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 18 — The Credit Union Central of  
Saskatchewan Act, 2016 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to consider 
all remaining stages of Bill No. 18, The Credit Union Central of 
Saskatchewan Act, 2016 and Bill 27, The Vital Statistics 
Amendment Act, 2016 immediately. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to move second reading of The Credit Union Central 
of Saskatchewan Act, 2016. Mr. Speaker, this government has 
always been a strong supporter of credit unions. We know they 
are important financial institutions for many farmers, small 
businesses, and rural communities. We are pleased to be able to 
report that the credit unions are still strong in Saskatchewan. 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to express my appreciation to the 
opposition members for their co-operation throughout this 
entire process. Working together was instrumental in ensuring 
that his important Act will come into effect in a timely manner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Credit Union Central of Saskatchewan, or 
SaskCentral, is the central credit union serving all of the 
Saskatchewan credit unions. Currently it is regulated pursuant 
to a federal statute, the Cooperative Credit Associations Act of 
Canada. That legislation allows the Office of the Superintendent 
of Financial Institutions, or OSFI, to supervise Canadian 
centrals to ensure that they are practising sound business 
practices to reduce risk to credit unions. Mr. Speaker, in 2014 
the federal government repealed that part of the Cooperative 
Credit Associations Act that allowed OSFI to regulate centrals. 
The repeal comes into effect on January 15, 2017. This means 
that we must pass legislation to provide for continued regulation 
of SaskCentral by the province by January of next year to avoid 
a gap. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the current bill is based in large part on the 
provisions of the federal Act that governs SaskCentral. It 
includes provisions for the business powers of SaskCentral, 
including the supply of financial services to its members. The 
most critical provision is one that allows the regulator to take 

control of SaskCentral in the unlikely event of a crisis. 
SaskCentral’s currently enabling legislation, The Credit Union 
Central of Saskatchewan Act, 1999 will be repealed and 
SaskCentral’s status continued under this bill. This legislation 
will provide for SaskCentral’s business powers, corporate 
governance, ownership, and allowable investments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the bill names Credit Union Deposit Guarantee 
Corporation, or CUDGC, as the primary regulator of 
SaskCentral. CUDGC is the entity that provides guarantees for 
credit union deposits. In order to provide the guarantee, it must 
supervise credit unions in the way that OSFI supervises 
SaskCentral. CUDGC will be SaskCentral’s regulator as well 
since it has the experience, expertise, and personnel to be an 
effective regulator. 
 
The bill provides for the registrar of credit unions to supervise 
CUDGC. The registrar is a statutory position located at the 
Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority. The registrar has 
overall responsibility to the minister for administration of the 
Act. The registrar also receives notices from CUDGC and 
SaskCentral and must approve certain actions. For example, 
CUDGC may make prudential standards for SaskCentral to 
follow but those standards must be approved by the registrar to 
be effective. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the registrar also has the power to act in the place 
of CUDGC in its supervision of SaskCentral if circumstances 
warrant. Mr. Speaker, the board of directors of CUDGC will be 
restructured. SaskCentral will have equal representation with 
the government on the selection committee to select mutually 
agreeable board members who are not either connected to 
SaskCentral or the government. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are extremely pleased that both SaskCentral 
and CUDGC have had significant involvement in the 
development of this legislation. We believe that their assistance 
contributed to the development of a robust regulatory scheme 
and for that, Mr. Speaker, we thank them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this bill lays the foundation for ongoing financial 
soundness of credit unions in this province for years to come. 
So that, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of 
The Credit Union Central of Saskatchewan Act, 2016. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, I just have a few brief remarks 
as critic before we move forward with this bill. I’d like to thank 
the minister for . . . I know this has been a bill that’s been a long 
time coming for a while and I’m sort of catching it on the tail 
end. But I’d like to thank the minister for allowing me to be a 
part of a very extensive technical briefing where I had the 
opportunity to get to know the legislation a little bit better and 
better understand it. 
 
I know we’ve had the opportunity to review the legislation. 
Members opposite including myself have had the opportunity to 
speak with the stakeholders, and SaskCentral in particular who 
do very good work in the province, Mr. Speaker, in supporting 



480 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2016 

credit unions — medium, small, large credit unions in the 
province — who are, you know, providing small business loans 
or personal loans or large loans to businesses and individuals 
throughout the province. 
 
In short, Mr. Speaker, SaskCentral and its members are doing 
very good work. It’s really important that they have this 
regulatory scheme in effect by January 1, 2017. We understand 
that to allow them as seamless as possible of a transition from 
federal oversight to provincial oversight, Mr. Speaker. So with 
that we are in support of moving this speedily along and we’re 
prepared to see this proceed. And with that I conclude my 
remarks. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
that Bill No. 18, The Credit Union Central of Saskatchewan 
Act, 2016 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee will this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Minister of Justice and Attorney 
General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
designate that Bill No. 18, The Credit Union Central of 
Saskatchewan Act, 2016 be committed to the Committee of the 
Whole on Bills and that the said bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills immediately. 
 
The Speaker: — The bill stands committed to the Committee 
of the Whole on Bills. 
 
Bill No. 27 — The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2016/Loi 

modificative de 2016 sur les services de l’état civil 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General to move second reading of Bill No. 27, The 
Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2016. I recognize the Attorney 
General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
first like to take a moment, as has been previously mentioned in 
the House, take a moment to recognize those that were injured 
or killed in the senseless attack at the Pulse nightclub in 
Orlando over the weekend, as well as the families of the victims 
and the first responders who heroically acted in a terrible 
situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is events like this that demonstrate the LGBTQ2 
[lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, transsexual, queer, 
questioning, or two-spirited] community across the world 
continues, and all too often, to face hatred, bigotry, and 
violence. It’s important for all of us to stand with members in 
the LGBTQ2 community in denouncing the forces of bigotry 
and hatred both in our society and across the world and to 

promote a future of tolerance and love. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Pride events exist for a reason and sometimes we 
are reminded of why through shocking events like the one that 
took place in Orlando. I was proud to participate with the 
members from Saskatoon Southeast along with members from 
Saskatoon Nutana and Saskatoon Riversdale. That’s why I’m 
proud to rise today, Mr. Speaker, to move second reading of 
The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this bill will make important changes to enhance 
the rights of transgendered individuals in our province. Under 
these changes, adults will be able to change their designation on 
birth certificates without having to undergo reassignment 
surgery. Currently under section 31 of the Act, an individual is 
required to undergo gender reassignment surgery prior to 
applying to have the designation changed on their birth record. 
The applicant must provide a certificate from a physician who 
performed the surgery as well as an additional certificate from a 
physician who examined the applicant. Mr. Speaker, the 
Government of Saskatchewan recently agreed to adopt interim 
criteria that allow an adult to change their designation without 
undergoing that surgery. The interim criteria were adopted 
pursuant to a consent order issued by the Court of Queen’s 
Bench and became effective on March 1st when they were 
published on the eHealth Saskatchewan website. 
 
Under the revised criteria, an individual who was born in 
Saskatchewan and who is 18 years of age or older can apply to 
change their designation by providing a statutory declaration 
that they have assumed, identified with, and intend to maintain 
the gender identity matching the requested change, and a letter 
of support from a physician or a psychologist. If the criteria are 
met, the applicant’s birth registration will be amended and a 
new birth certificate, with the amended sex, will be issued. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this bill will replace current section 31 of the Act 
with a revised criteria removing the surgical requirement. In 
addition, Mr. Speaker, this bill will allow regulations to be 
passed in the future that authorizes further professional groups 
to provide letters of support for applicants. Examples of 
professional groups that have been given this authority in other 
provinces include social workers and nurse practitioners. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government recognizes that rules and policies 
regarding changes to individuals’ designation continues to 
develop across this country. As a result, this bill contains a 
provision that allows alternative criteria to be prescribed in 
regulation. This provision recognizes the evolving nature of the 
area of the law, and will allow the government to respond to 
future developments through regulatory revisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this bill provides an important change and further 
demonstrates the Government of Saskatchewan’s commitment 
to protecting the rights and interests of all residents of this 
province. We now have the ability to move this legislation 
through this House and give the trans community something 
that they have lobbied for — the means to have their gender 
marker changed. 
 
I’m glad that members opposite will stand with us and support 
the trans community. A unanimous vote today sends a strong 
message that we all support the inherent dignity of all persons 



June 13, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 481 

in this province. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading 
of The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 
would like to join with the minister in recognizing the Pulse 
nightclub tragedy in Orlando. And this bill is an important step 
forward in removing systematic bigotry in our society, so we 
are glad to be speaking today. 
 
I want to thank all the guests who’ve come here from across the 
province, and also to the Minister of Justice and this 
government, for bringing this forward. I really want to give a 
special recognition to the minister who’s been working hard to 
keep all those involved in the loop to make sure this moves 
forward, so thank you very much for that. It is indeed a very 
important bill. 
 
But it did all start with a human rights complaint that was 
brought forward by a transgender woman, Laura Budd, who is 
with us here today — a very tenacious human rights fighter who 
won’t back down. And it’s people like that in our society that 
help us move forward and I think this is very important that we 
recognize Laura. We are indeed passing progressive legislation 
that says all transgender adults in Saskatchewan who want 
gender designations on their birth certificate changed will no 
longer have to have the surgery in order to receive new gender 
identification. Under the old vital stats Act, transgender people 
were required to have gender reassignment surgery before a 
change in birth certificates could be made. 
 
One area — and the minister did allude to the evolving nature 
of the law — one area that needs more work is the area around 
age. This particular bill specifies 18 as the age limit, but unlike 
other provinces . . . We know in Alberta and Manitoba there is 
no age designation. So we’ll be watching that one very closely 
and urging the government to be as current as possible. 
 
We understand that, through the Court of Queen’s Bench, a 
consent order was issued in February. The registrar of vital 
statistics gained the authority to change the sex designation for 
transgender adults in February. And this was issued in response 
to Mrs. Laura Budd’s human rights complaint filed by the 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission. The commission 
applied to the court for a hearing on her behalf and argued that 
the existing legislation is contrary to section 12 of The 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Code. Section 12 of the code 
states that no person or group can be denied accommodation, 
services, or facilities based on a prohibited ground. In this case 
the ground was sex. 
 
As part of the resolution, a one-time donation of $20,000 was 
paid to Moose Jaw Pride for the purpose of providing public 
education about the rights of transgender people. 
 
I want to quote David Arnot, Chief Commissioner of the 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission, who said, and I 
quote: 
 

Mrs. Budd’s commitment to this process will greatly 
benefit all transgender people in our province. We know 
that transgender people face discrimination in housing, 
employment, and they also face travel restrictions — in 
part because of the mismatch between their gender identity 
and their government-issued identification. 

 
Well today we are amending The Vital Statistics Act to comply 
with that Act. Mr. Speaker, we believe that all people of 
Saskatchewan should have the resources and support to lead 
their lives however they wish to and have their needs 
accommodated without being hindered by discriminatory 
practices. But we also believe there needs to be resources for 
public education. 
 
We’ll be asking and urging the government to make sure that 
the public is educated about their human rights when it comes 
to this area but as well, as we’ve been fighting in the area of 
education, that schools where students wish to have GSAs, that 
they have GSAs because we know . . . and it’s particularly, a 
day like this, following the Orlando tragedy, that kids need to 
feel safe and secure in their schools. So we will continue to 
fight to have GSAs in schools if students request them. 
 
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights affirms that all 
human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights, and 
that everyone is entitled to all the rights and freedoms set forth 
in that instrument without distinction of any kind. And today 
especially, the day after the Pulse nightclub tragedy, really is 
special that we do this today. Moments like this define who we 
are and I think in Saskatchewan this is a good, good step 
forward. It encompasses the idea that every day is Human 
Rights Day. It celebrates the fundamental proposition, the 
universal declaration: each one of us, everywhere, at all times, 
is entitled to the full range of human rights; that human rights 
belong equally to each of us and binds us together as a global 
community with the same ideals and values; and we should 
celebrate those rights every day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I’ve quoted often in this House, Martin Luther 
King said, “The arc of the moral universe is long, but it bends 
toward justice.” And again today that arc is bending even more 
here in Saskatchewan. We know there’s more to be done, but 
this is a good step forward. Thank you very much. 
 
The opposition is now prepared to have Bill 27 moved to 
committee. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
that Bill No. 27, The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2016 be 
now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Attorney General. 



482 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2016 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate that 
Bill No. 27, The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2016 be 
committed to the Committee of the Whole on Bills and that the 
said bill be considered in the Committee of the Whole on Bills 
immediately. 
 
The Speaker: — The bill stands committed to the Committee 
of the Whole on Bills. 
 
Clerk: — Committee of the Whole. 
 
The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair for the House to go 
into the Committee of the Whole on Bills. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ON BILLS 
 

Bill No. 18 — The Credit Union Central of  
Saskatchewan Act, 2016 

 
The Chair: — I’ll call the Committee of the Whole to order. 
The first item before the committee is Bill No. 18, The Credit 
Union Central of Saskatchewan Act, 2016. Clause 1, short title, 
is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
[Clauses 1-1 to 1-4 inclusive agreed to.] 
 
[14:45] 
 
The Chair: — Members, this bill is a rather lengthy bill. It has 
59 pages and 22 parts. I would ask for leave to do the rest of the 
bill by parts. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 
[Clauses 2-1 to 22-8 inclusive agreed to.] 
 
[Schedule agreed to.] 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Her Majesty, by and with the advice 
and consent of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 
enacts as follows: Bill No. 18, The Credit Union Central of 
Saskatchewan Act, 2016. 
 
I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I move that the 
committee report the bill without amendment. 
 
The Chair: — It has been moved that the committee report Bill 
No. 18 without amendment. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 
Bill No. 27 — The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2016/Loi 

modificative de 2016 sur les services de l’état civil 
 
The Chair: — The last of item of business before the 

committee is Bill No. 27, The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 
2016. Clause 1, short title, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 
[Clauses 1 to 5 inclusive agreed to.] 
 
The Chair: — Her Majesty, by and with the advice and consent 
of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, enacts as 
follows: Bill No. 27, The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I move that the 
committee report the bill without amendment. 
 
The Chair: — The Minister of Justice has moved that the 
committee report Bill No. 27, The Vital Statistics Amendment 
Act, 2016 without amendment. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I 
move that the committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave 
to sit again. 
 
The Chair: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that the committee rise, report progress, and ask for 
leave to sit again. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — This committee is adjourned. 
 
[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The Assembly shall now resume. I 
recognize the Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Committee of 
the Whole on Bills to report Bill No. 18, The Credit Union 
Central of Saskatchewan Act, 2016 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read the third time? I 
recognize the Attorney General. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 18 — The Credit Union Central of  
Saskatchewan Act, 2016 

 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 18, The Credit Union Central of Saskatchewan Act, 2016 
be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 



June 13, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 483 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hart: — I’m instructed by the Committee of the Whole on 
Bills to report Bill No. 27, The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 
2016 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read the third time? I 
recognize the Attorney General. 
 
Bill No. 27 — The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2016/Loi 

modificative de 2016 sur les services de l’état civil 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that the 
bill now be read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 27, The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2016 be read the 
third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for 
the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the 
next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 21 — The Growth and Financial Security 
Repeal Act 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of Bill No. 21, An Act to repeal The 
Growth and Financial Security Act. 
 
In 2014-15 government changed the focus for budgeting, 
forecasting, and reporting to a summary basis. The Growth and 

Financial Security Act is focused on the General Revenue Fund, 
or GRF, and identifies several reporting, balancing, and 
transferring requirements on a GRF basis. These provisions are 
no longer relevant, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We previously indicated that the transition to a summary focus 
would require changes to The Growth and Financial Security 
Act. The repeal of this Act, Mr. Speaker, will be a further step 
in the legislative changes required for the ongoing transition to 
summary budgeting, forecasting, and reporting. The 
government is developing a revised fiscal management and 
accountability framework that will form the basis for a new 
summary-based fiscal management and accountability Act. The 
Ministry of Finance and officials will be consulting with key 
stakeholders and the Provincial Auditor in preparation for new 
legislation. The repeal will come into force on Royal Assent but 
is retroactive. It is deemed to have been in force on and from 
April 1, 2016. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is continuously modernizing how 
we present the financial statements of the Government of 
Saskatchewan. The Provincial Auditor has recognized 
government’s work, and last week when the auditor released 
her audit follow-ups, she stated, and I quote: 
 

We are pleased to report that, since 2013, the Government 
focuses on summary budget and reporting. It publishes a 
Summary Budget, quarterly interim summary reports, and 
audited Summary Financial Statements. By focusing its 
financial information on summary budgeting and reporting, 
the Government reports its plans and results in a way that 
captures the full nature and extent of its financial activities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the auditor continued, and I quote: 
 

The Government recognizes changes to the law are 
necessary to complete its transition to summary budgeting 
and financial reporting. 

 
Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, we are continuously reviewing 
how we can improve the financial statements of the province to 
ensure reporting practices are sustainable and meet the needs of 
legislators and the public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to repeal The 
Growth and Financial Security Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved that Bill 
No. 21, The Growth and Financial Security Repeal Act 2016 
. . . Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 
member from Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 
indeed my honour to rise in this Assembly with the opportunity 
to speak to legislation that’s being introduced here today. This 
is obviously the second reading of the bill, and thanks to the 
minister for his brief comments. The bill itself, Mr. Speaker, is 
incredibly short, and I think that is because it’s a repeal Act. So 
in that sense, there’s not much to say. But there’s only the one 
section, and basically what they’re doing is repealing, or 
proposing to repeal The Growth and Financial Security Act, 
which was introduced back in 2008 I believe, Mr. Speaker. Yes. 
 



484 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2016 

So I think one of the things I would like to do, just to kick it off 
here today, is to talk a little bit about this government’s views 
on this bill, how they felt very proud of this bill and how they 
felt it was a very important bill. Because I think to provide that 
kind of context for the story that we’re at today is something 
that should be on the record and should be discussed, I think, 
hopefully by all of my colleagues if we have an opportunity to 
speak to this bill. 
 
At any rate, where does the story of this bill start? Well I would 
think it starts in the Speech from the Throne in December of 
2007, and this is what the Lieutenant Governor had to say in 
that Throne Speech. It’s on page 4 of Hansard on December 10, 
2007, and what was said there under the heading of 
accountability is this: 
 

My government and its growth agenda will be built on a 
foundation of sound financial management. That is why 
my government will introduce The Saskatchewan Growth 
and Financial Security Act. This Act will require that the 
budget of this province be balanced each and every year, 
instead of every four years as current legislation dictates. 
This new Act will also set out a formula for allocating 
budgetary surpluses — half to securing the future by 
paying down debt, and half to investing in the future 
through economic growth initiatives. The Saskatchewan 
Growth and Financial Security Act will also ensure the 
size of the public service will not grow at a rate faster than 
the population it serves. 

 
[15:00] 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that’s from the Throne Speech in December of 
2007. And I think there were some very high aspirations for this 
bill at that time; you know, confidence in the government that 
they would be able to pay down debt by securing the future by 
paying down debt and also investing through economic growth 
initiatives. So there were supposed to be two halves to this bill, 
one to pay down debt and one to deal with economic growth. 
 
What’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, is they’re talking about the 
budget of this year, but it wasn’t specific in the Throne Speech 
that this was just the General Revenue Fund and not the 
summary financial budget. So that’s part of the problem that 
this bill has been dealing with over the years. It was never really 
clear to the people of Saskatchewan exactly what debt we were 
talking about, and certainly what budget we were talking about. 
 
So the bill was introduced in this House on March 10, 2008. 
And I just want to share a little bit about again the hopes and 
aspirations of this government when this bill was introduced so 
we can see how we got to where we are today. 
 
So in Hansard on page 231, March 10, 2008, we had the 
Minister of Finance saying this, Mr. Speaker: 
 

This Bill reflects that this government and its economic 
growth agenda will be built on a foundation of sound 
financial management. It recognizes that sound financial 
management requires more than just fiscal stabilization. 
Sound financial management will be achieved through 
balanced budgets, the establishment of the Growth and 
Financial Security Fund, the establishment of a Debt 

Retirement Fund, stipulations on the use of annual 
surpluses, and ensuring efficient government services. 

 
He goes on to say: 
 

Mr. Speaker, in this Bill the government is required to plan 
for and achieve a balanced budget each and every year 
with exceptions only in the event of natural disaster or war. 
To ensure long-term planning, each year a financial plan 
and a public debt management plan for the next four years 
are required to be tabled. 

 
So there were some very lofty goals and aspirations again 
enunciated by the Minister of Finance when he introduced this 
bill in March of 2008. And part of that, I think it’s kind of 
disappointing, is that he was anticipating that this budget would 
be based on sound financial management. And sadly, Mr. 
Speaker, I think eight years later when we’re here in 2016, that 
simply hasn’t been the case. 
 
In the future also, this is only the event of natural disaster or 
war. Well, Mr. Speaker, there has been no natural disaster as far 
as I know, and there’s certainly been no war as far as I know. 
So I’m not really sure why the government has decided that this 
is the time to actually turf this bill, other than their lofty 
aspirations of sound financial management haven’t actually 
been achieved. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, at this point I would like to take a moment 
to interrupt myself and ask for leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has requested leave to introduce 
guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 
my great, great honour and pleasure to introduce two very 
special people here in the Assembly today. This is my dad, 
Merle Sproule from Lafleche, Saskatchewan, and my sister, 
Maureen Froelich from Chaplin, Saskatchewan. And this is 
their first time that they’ve actually been able to come into the 
House, and their timing is great if they wanted to watch me in 
action. I’m not sure whether they did or didn’t, but anyway they 
get to watch me in action here in the Assembly. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, my dad is a very proud farmer in 
Saskatchewan. He farmed the farm that my grandfather 
homesteaded back in 1909. Dad took over the farm in the 
mid-’50s or early ’50s at the same time. The farm is in 
Lafleche, Saskatchewan, just south of Lafleche, about 10 miles 
in the Palliser triangle where they said farming would never 
succeed. And that certainly hasn’t been the case for our farm.  
 
In the meantime, dad also took time to raise a family of six 
children and was very, very active in the farm activist 
community. He had his own farm co-operative, the Chinook 
Machinery Co-operative back in the ’60s. And his dad was also 



June 13, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 485 

very involved in the establishment of the Co-operators Life 
Insurance Company. So I believe dad’s life insurance policy is 
policy no. 9, and his brother, Keith, has policy no. 8 in The 
Co-operators insurance program. So dad certainly enjoyed 
going around with his father, Fen Sproule, to the Pool picnics 
over the years. 
 
And the establishment of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool was 
something our family was very proud of. And certainly dad has 
followed in those footsteps and been involved as a director with 
the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, et al. He wasn’t very happy 
when the Canadian Wheat Board disappeared, and I think he 
said his dad would be turning in his grave, but those are things 
that happen. And he’s definitely watching actively all the 
activities, watching the Minister of Agriculture for sure and 
keeping an eye on him. 
 
So I would like to ask all members of the Assembly to take a 
moment and welcome my dad, Merle Sproule, to his Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — While I’m on my feet, I just wanted to say a 
couple of words about my sister, my older sister who always 
kept me in line and, you know, made sure I wasn’t acting up too 
much. She’s a great teacher. She just retired from teaching a 
couple of years ago, raised two daughters in Chaplin, 
Saskatchewan. Her husband, Gordon, is a retired SaskPower 
employee, a lineman for SaskPower. Good, solid Saskatchewan 
citizens; they’ve always got my back, Mr. Speaker. So I’d also 
like everyone to welcome my sister as well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — And now that I’m done interrupting myself, 
I’ll continue on with my speech. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 21 — The Growth and Financial Security 
Repeal Act 
(continued) 

 
Ms. Sproule: — So we left on March of 2008, and what the 
Minister of Finance had to say about this amazing, wonderful 
bill called the growth and fiscal stability Act. So let’s listen to a 
few other quotes maybe, Mr. Speaker, of what members 
opposite had to say about this bill. In April of 2008 — I believe 
this is in the Crown and Central Agencies Committee — this is 
April 29, 2008, and the Minister of Finance was being 
questioned in committee about this particular bill. 
 
And here’s what he had to say about it then. This is in April of 
2008: 
 

And, you know, one of the other things that the members 
haven’t talked about is the discipline that’s instilled in this 
legislation that says if we have surpluses, half of the 
surplus will be applied to long-term debt, and the other half 
will be available to the Growth And Financial Security 

Fund. 
 
So that there is, I think, advancements in terms of the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund regime before. And maybe it’s 
evolutionary. Maybe it’s progress, as times change in the 
province and the ability to be able to impose on ourselves 
as a province an increased level of discipline in terms of 
how we’re going to deal with the financial future of the 
province. 

 
He goes on to say, and this is still quoting: 
 

I think that, you know, when I look back in terms of when 
the Fiscal Stabilization Fund was first established and it 
was a theoretical fund, a credit card fund if you like, and 
that was where we were at at that stage. January 1, I 
believe, of ’07 is when there was actually a funded fund, if 
you like. And so that again was an evolutionary progress, I 
think. And I see this as further progress moving forward. 
And who knows? As the fiscal position of the province 
improves, perhaps further changes will be made down the 
road. 

 
And that’s the end of the quote, and that’s in April of 2008, Mr. 
Speaker. So there we have the minister of the day talking about 
this bill being evolutionary, about it being progress, and that 
this is the signal of much great things to come. And I don’t 
think it was too long after that, Mr. Speaker, that the members 
opposite were actually drawing down from the money that was 
placed in this fund prior to their election in 2007. So great 
hopes, I think, were in place but not too sure that the realization 
was ever going to happen, particularly when we see the way 
this government took record revenues and blew through them 
faster than a sailor in port on a Friday night, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the next thing I want to talk about is what was said, I guess 
this is in the House, in March of 2009, Mr. Speaker. This was as 
well the budget speech, I believe, at the time. And there was a 
question asked to the Premier in question period, and what the 
Premier said about the fund in the bill in 2009 was this: 
 

Well, I think there’s a combination of things you can do. 
You can maintain a healthy balance in that fund. Today it’s 
$1.2 billion; I think that’s pretty healthy. You can also use 
it for stimulus to provide a booster shot against some of the 
very things the member said in his earlier question that is 
happening to the province’s economy as a result of the 
global recession. 

 
So that’s the Premier talking about a healthy balance in the 
fund. Well we certainly don’t hear the Premier talking about a 
healthy balance in the fund today, Mr. Speaker, because you 
know how much is in that fund, Mr. Speaker? Zero, absolutely 
nothing. The money is gone. There’s no money left in the fund. 
So I don’t think the Premier would agree today that he was right 
in 2009 saying it’s pretty healthy if he would have known that 
in 2016 it would have been drained down to zero, our debt 
levels would be back up again, and we are facing very uncertain 
times financially and we have absolutely no savings for when 
the times have turned out to be rougher. 
 
Okay. Well then let’s go ahead a little bit later. Well this is the 
Speech from the Throne from October of 2008, and again the 



486 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2016 

Speech from the Throne talked about debt reduction and fiscal 
prudence. And the quote there I would like to share with the 
Assembly is this: 
 

Many Saskatchewan people asked us to go further — to 
ensure a stronger Saskatchewan by reducing debt, and 
saving millions of dollars in interest payments now and in 
the future. 
 
It was good advice. 

 
Now as far as I can tell, Mr. Speaker, on page 50 of this year’s 
budget, we don’t see debt being reduced. In fact it’s going 
higher and higher and higher. And as far as I know, the pension 
liabilities aren’t even reflected in these numbers. So our public 
debt is way higher than it was in 2008 at 10 billion. We’re now 
looking at 14, almost $15 billion in debt. So that’s a fairly hefty 
increase in debt, and I don’t think that was what the Throne 
Speech meant in 2008 when they said reducing debt. So I think 
there’s some very serious concerns about whether this bill was 
ever going to work and what the government’s true intentions 
were in relation to it. 
 
I want to fast-forward now to the Saskatchewan Party platform 
document from 2016. So this is what the Saskatchewan Party 
were telling people on doorsteps just in March. Now knowing 
that there was no money left in this fund and that they’re 
probably going to scrap it, here’s what their own platform said. 
New initiatives to keep Saskatchewan strong, build a $500 
million balance in the Growth and Financial Security Fund, and 
pay down debt. And this is what it says: 
 

A Saskatchewan Party government will use oil revenues 
gained by the province to build a $500 million balance in 
the province’s rainy day fund — the Growth and Financial 
Security Fund — when the price of oil exceeds a threshold 
of $75 per U.S. barrel (WTI). Once the fund has achieved a 
$500 million balance, oil revenues received by the 
province above the $75 U.S. per barrel (WTI) [price] 
threshold will be dedicated to debt repayment. 

 
So here they are talking about this fund, Mr. Speaker, as if it’s 
alive and well and that once oil hits $75, which is nowhere near 
in the general forecast for the next few years as far as I can tell 
by the forecasting that the government is using, they are going 
to use that money in that fund. And here we are after the 
election and what is this government doing? They’re 
eliminating the fund altogether. They’re just going to wipe it 
out and repeal it. 
 
So what were they telling the voters in their platform this year, 
in March of this year? And here we are in June of this year, and 
they’re actually wiping the entire thing out. Mr. Speaker, you 
really have to wonder what the messages are and why the 
messages are so mixed and why it is that this government hasn’t 
been able to continue putting savings into this fund when we’ve 
had the absolute best years ever when it comes to natural 
resource revenues. 
 
Just for the record, Mr. Speaker, I want to read out the balance 
in this fund over the last 10 years just so we know how much 
money was in there. And this is from 2006 to 2015, and I didn’t 
put the . . . Well 2016 is zero. 

But 2006 there was 887 million. The same in 2007. In 2008 
there was money transferred in, up to $1.5 billion. Then in 2009 
they started taking money out, 1.2 billion. In 2010 they took out 
more money. Now we’re down to 958 million. 2011 there was a 
bit of money put in, 47 million, so it’s back up just over $1 
billion, one billion five hundred thousand dollars . . . No, one 
billion, five million, nine hundred sixty-eight thousand dollars, 
sorry. 2012, guess what? They took out money again, down to 
708,000. 2013, what did they do? They took out money again, 
$42 million they took out, down to $666 million. What do you 
think happened in 2014, Mr. Speaker? You got it. They took out 
more money, $220 million removed. We’re now down to $446 
million. 2015, guess what? Again a large withdrawal from the 
fund. And this was when we still had really good revenues 
coming in in oil and gas, so I don’t know what this government 
was thinking and how they couldn’t work the balances, but 
when you’re using a GRF accounting system, I think that’s part 
of the problem. Anyways 2015, the balance at the end of the 
fiscal year was $131 million, and we found out just from the 
technical briefing for the budget for this year in 2016, that the 
amount is actually at zero. And this government intends to wind 
up the fund. 
 
So for all intents and purposes and all the glory talk, Mr. 
Speaker, what we have is good intentions but failure to deliver 
for the people of Saskatchewan. And that’s a big problem for 
the people of Saskatchewan now when we need to have those 
kinds of savings to get us through the tough times that we are 
in. 
 
[15:15] 
 
I want to talk a little bit, Mr. Speaker, actually at length, about 
the Provincial Auditor’s report from April of 2013 because 
there was a number of problems in that that the auditor 
identified, and there was several recommendations that were 
made. And by the government doing what it’s doing today, 
they’re actually not at all acting on the recommendations of the 
auditor, but they’re just simply getting rid of the bill. What her 
suggestions are, is that the bill be amended to reflect better 
practices that are being used across the country when it comes 
to summary financial reporting. 
 
I’m just going to quote from this quite a bit, Mr. Speaker, but in 
her reflections section — so that’s at the very beginning on 
page 1 of the report — she talks about what is needed here in 
Saskatchewan, and she talks about financial reporting. She says: 
 

Regarding financial reporting, Saskatchewan was one of 
the first provinces in Canada in 1992 to prepare Summary 
Financial Statements that include all Government 
operations. However, as of 2013, it will now be the last 
province in Canada to move to using those financial 
statements as the primary public reporting tool in 
communicating its fiscal results to its citizens. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the government did make that change 
shortly after this report came out because there was a number of 
problems with it. When you’re just using the GRF budget, we 
know that there’s an incomplete and misleading picture. 
 
One other thing I think that we’re still not seeing accurately 
reflected in an easy way for the citizens of this province to 



June 13, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 487 

understand are the pension costs. And this is what the auditor 
had to say about that: 
 

Moreover, the amounts in the GRF Budget and GRF actual 
financial results are incomplete. Since 1995 when balanced 
budget legislation was originally passed, an estimated $2.9 
billion in pension costs have been excluded from the 
calculation of the GRF’s “balanced budget.” 

 
I’ll go on to quote from her: 
 

I do not believe that omitting such significant costs is what 
the average citizen has in mind when presented with the 
term “balanced budget.” Almost all other provinces include 
all costs, such as pension costs, when determining whether 
their budget is balanced or not. However, this exclusion is 
permitted in Saskatchewan by The Growth and Financial 
Security Act in preparing the GRF Budget. 

 
Now by repealing it, I don’t think we’re still getting an accurate 
picture of what the actual pension costs and pension liabilities 
are for the taxpayers when we look at our total public debt. 
 
The auditor went on to talk a lot about the difference between 
summary budgets and GRF budgets and I’ve talked about that 
as well. But what we’re talking about in terms of gross debt, if 
we want to include the provincial liabilities, in 2008 the gross 
debt, if you include the pension liabilities, 17.6 billion and as of 
March 31st, 2014, our total gross debt is $19.1 billion, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s a pretty hefty price and it’s certainly going up. 
It’s not going down despite all the efforts of this government to 
convince people that actually debt has been reduced. It’s 
actually going up overall. 
 
And the other thing that the auditor pointed out over and over in 
her budget or in her report in 2013 is about the communications 
that the government had been sharing with the public. Here’s 
what she had to say, “Although the Government’s public 
communication has been of balanced budgets every year using 
the GRF financial statements, Saskatchewan had annual deficits 
in each of the last three years.” 
 
And I’ve never heard a single member opposite talk about the 
actual deficit that they’d been running in those years, which 
would be 2010, 2011, and 2012. They just didn’t talk about. 
They kept saying that there was a surplus when clearly that was 
not correct. It was misleading. And the auditor went on on a 
number of pages showing how that misleading communications 
actually was used by various media outlets and a number of 
other reporting sources. And that’s on section 4.1.2 of her report 
which is called, two budgets cause confusion. And she went on 
to say in there: 
 

Saskatchewan is the only province with a Provincial 
Budget containing two budgets. Having two budgets makes 
understanding the Government’s financial plans difficult 
. . . Producing two budgets in Saskatchewan has proven to 
be confusing to the public. The confusion is that the public 
assumes that the GRF Budget includes all of the 
Government’s financial plans for the province. In some 
cases, publications use the GRF financial information 
instead of Summary financial information without clear 
disclosure of such. 

And she gives a number of examples where that wrong 
information was used. A C.D. Howe Institute report, they used 
the wrong information. The Globe and Mail in February of 
2013 used the wrong information. TD Economics in March of 
2012 used the wrong information. Even the government itself, 
she said, contributed to the confusion through its own 
communications. And here’s an example here: 
 

The March 23, 2011 Finance News Release entitled The 
Saskatchewan Advantage: Lower Taxes, Improved 
Services, Less Debt states that “Finance Minister Ken 
Krawetz today tabled a balanced budget that improves 
government services, reduces the provincial debt and 
lowers taxes for individuals, families, homeowners, 
farmers and businesses.” In this case, it is unclear as to 
which 2011-12 budget is balanced — the GRF Budget or 
the Summary Budget. As Figure 2 shows, while the 
Government planned for a . . . surplus in its 2011-12 GRF 
Budget of $382.5 million, it [actually] planned for an 
annual surplus of only $54.3 million in its Summary 
Budget. 

 
There’s a number of other items that she references there as 
well in that section, Mr. Speaker. In section 4.1.3, the auditor 
talks a lot about how a summary budget is not required by 
legislation. What does she say here? 
 

Unlike most other provinces, Saskatchewan is not required 
in legislation to prepare a Summary Budget. Legislation in 
some other provinces also sets [out] the expected form and 
content of the Summary Budget. 

 
So not only do we not have a summary budget required by 
legislation, we don’t have the safeguards built in that other 
provinces have. So let’s take a little look at what other 
provinces could . . . are doing and that we could be doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, seven provinces are required by legislation to 
provide a summary budget and Saskatchewan is not required to 
do so. Now the government has indicated they will be 
introducing legislation in the fall. We have yet to see what the 
content of that would be. Why they felt it necessary to repeal 
this bill now and not introduce new legislation at this time is 
rather interesting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And why didn’t they wait until the fall to repeal this bill and 
introduce a new one or do it all at once? Hard to say. We 
certainly don’t know what their intentions are going to be in the 
fall and what that legislation’s going to look at, but we’re 
hoping that they will take the auditor’s advice and 
recommendations seriously and incorporate some of these 
requirements into legislation. As I said, seven provinces are 
already doing it and Saskatchewan is not, so I think there are 
good examples being provided by other provinces on this front. 
 
Four other provinces are required to provide multi-year 
summary budgets. Saskatchewan is not required to do so. And 
we only, at this point, prepare a single-year summary budget. 
So again, I think this is something that we’re looking forward to 
in the legislation is that there will be actually that adequate 
planning, adequate foresight, adequate forecasting to make sure 
that the realities that the government’s going to be dealing with 
are properly introduced and shared, so that we have 



488 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2016 

transparency and accountability for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The other thing I think, Mr. Speaker, that the auditor was 
interested in having the government do — and we don’t know if 
they’re going to do this or not; again we’re hoping they will — 
is to use the format that six other provinces use. There are six 
provinces that use a similar format for their summary financial 
statements, and that would be very helpful I think for 
economists, for people across Canada to be able to do an 
apples-to-apples comparison. 
 
I think we saw Doug Elliott from Trends Monitor talk about a 
reporting system now that’s being used across the country, and 
the numbers that he reflects show even more deficits than what 
the auditor is pointing out. So if we were using apples to apples, 
I think it would be more reflective of the real story of what’s 
going on. It’s certainly something that economists and business 
planners and tax planners and various other people who look at 
these numbers would be able to use, a proper comparison. 
 
The format that’s being used, she looks at one like for example 
British Columbia’s format. What they do there is they give the 
same level of detail as reflected in its summary financial 
statements for the upcoming year and for two years thereafter. 
So we get a whole lot of forecasting at a very drilled-down level 
in the British Columbia financial statements. We do not get that 
from this government, Mr. Speaker, and I think again that 
speaks to transparency. We need to see these multi-year 
summary budgets in writing from this government so that we 
have a very good idea of what the story’s going to be in the 
future. 
 
Six provinces have balanced budget legislation requiring a 
balanced summary budget. Now again, we have to wonder why 
this government is not going forward with that at this time. We 
know they’re repealing the GRF budget legislation that is 
before us today, but we have no idea what’s going to replace it. 
And that’s one of the concerns to think that we now have a 
void. We don’t even have this legislation anymore with the 
intention that the government set out. We have a void and we 
don’t know what’s going to happen until possibly the fall, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The last point she gives in this area is that five provinces are 
required by legislation to provide budget information that’s 
notably more comprehensive than others. And she says 
Saskatchewan does not. Again when I’m talking to economists 
and people that are watching these numbers closely, they keep 
calling for more information, more transparency, more 
accountability, more detail, better forecasting, better planning 
because we don’t know what kind of planning this government 
is doing Mr. Speaker. And that’s part of the problem when you 
don’t have this kind of detail and transparency in the financial 
statements that are being presented to the taxpayers. She goes 
on to say here, and I’m going to quote: 
 

As Figure 5 shows, the level of detail and number of years 
that provinces provide in their Summary Budgets varies. 
However, unlike many other provinces, Saskatchewan’s 
Summary Budget does not provide a multi-year budget or 
[does not] include any detail on estimated revenues and 
expenses. That means, the 2012-13 estimated expense for 
the entire Government is not published or available. 

Without complete information on planned revenues and 
expenses, legislators and the public do not receive 
sufficient information to enable them to understand the 
nature and extent of the Government’s plans for the 
upcoming year. Also, they are at a disadvantage to 
effectively scrutinize the Government’s revenue raising 
and spending plans and make meaningful comparisons of 
actual to planned results. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, we see a number of recommendations just in 
that one section alone from the Provincial Auditor saying we 
need more detail. We need more transparency. We need better 
reporting. We need better planning, and we need better 
accountability. I think that we’ll look forward to the legislation 
coming in the fall. 
 
But again what the concern is is that we haven’t seen anything 
at this point, Mr. Speaker, of what the government intends to 
do. We know what they intend to get rid of. And certainly it 
was their flawed legislation and the auditor pointed out a 
number of flaws. But I don’t know that they’re actually going to 
go forward and take up her recommendations. 
 
So, for example, the first recommendation from the auditor: 
 

We recommend that the Government of Saskatchewan 
provide information on planned revenues and expenses in 
its Summary Budget using the same accounting policies 
and format as used for the Summary Financial Statements. 

 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that that is not being done as fully as it 
should be. There’s been some improvements but there’s still a 
need to improve the level of the plans, the details that are in the 
plan, and certainly the sort of forecasting that the government is 
using, way more detail, way more level . . . What did she call it? 
The nature and extent has to be more available — spending 
plans, revenue raising — because we can’t make meaningful 
comparisons right now. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Second recommendation, Mr. Speaker, is this: 
 

We recommend that the Government of Saskatchewan 
seek changes to legislation that would require it to provide 
the Legislative Assembly with a Summary Budget . . . and 
consider providing a multi-year Summary Budget. 

 
So that’s not what’s happening here, Mr. Speaker. Again what 
we’re having is a wholesale repeal of their flawed legislation 
and no attempts whatsoever at this point to make those changes 
that have been recommended by the auditor. So I expect she’ll 
have something to say about this in her report, review on this 
three-year-old report. But we haven’t had the opportunity to see 
those comments yet, but we’ll look forward to those and see 
whether her view is that this repeal is sufficient. And I suspect, 
based on the recommendations that she made in 2013, she will 
not find that simply repealing the bill will deal with all the 
issues. However let’s be hopeful. Perhaps those changes will 
come in the legislation that the government will introduce in the 
fall. 
 
The third one is . . . The third recommendation is this: 



June 13, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 489 

We recommend that the Government of Saskatchewan 
seek changes to legislation that would discontinue the 
preparation and publication of a budget for the General 
Revenue Fund. 
 

The minister is saying it’s done. Well there haven’t been 
changes to legislation at all to do that. Secondly, the budget for 
the General Revenue Fund is still located . . . It’s in part 2 now 
rather than part 1 but it still is there. And I think the focus now 
on part 1 is correctly the summary budget but we still . . . If you 
don’t know how to work your way through the documents, the 
General Revenue Fund publication is still there and I don’t 
think that this recommendation has been implemented at all. 
 
The next one is on section 4.2.2 and that’s “Consequences of 
Focusing on Balancing the GRF Budget — Managing the 
Bottom Line.” And the recommendation there is this: 
 

We recommend that if balanced budget legislation is 
desired, the Government of Saskatchewan seek changes to 
current legislation to use the Summary Budget as the basis 
for balanced budgeting. 

 
So again there has been no changes to the legislation. They’re 
just dumping it entirely, and we’re not sure whether this 
government is interested in balanced budget legislation or not. 
They have indicated they would be introducing legislation in 
the fall, but there’s certainly no sort of plan or forward-going 
information for the people of Saskatchewan and for the 
taxpayers and the economists and the analysts to find out 
exactly what their intentions are. So we look forward to hearing 
what the government will present in the fall, but certainly as of 
today, that recommendation has not been up taken . . . Is that a 
word? Taken up is probably a better word to use, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The fifth recommendation in this report is this: 
 

We recommend that the Government of Saskatchewan 
seek changes to The Growth and Financial Security Act to 
eliminate the use of “rainy day” funds for balancing 
budgets in conjunction with its elimination of the budget 
for the General Revenue Fund. 

 
Again no changes to the Act, Mr. Speaker, and indeed it’s a 
complete repeal of the Act. 
 
So again we don’t know how new balanced budget legislation 
will look. Certainly the auditor had much to say about using the 
rainy day fund and it really . . . I think the most damning 
incitement here on this section 4.3 is that she . . . or sorry, it’s 
section 4.8.1 which is entitled, “The GRF Financial Statements 
Contain Significant Errors.” And that is certainly a problem, 
Mr. Speaker, when you’re communicating as a government to 
the people. 
 
So that’s about the comparison of the pre-transfer surplus and 
the annual surplus or the deficit as reported. The close matching 
of GRF budgets to actual results is possible through the control 
of transfers. So her view, Mr. Speaker, was the transfers of 
surplus and deficit was only used to control the GRF budget 
itself. But it really was meaningless when you look at the actual 
summary financial statements. So she’s saying, get rid of it; it’s 
not helpful at all. 

The big discussion next about the GRF debt and management 
plan, her recommendation in terms of the debt management 
plan — and I think this is something, I think, we’re still looking 
for from the government — is the pension debt. I mentioned 
that earlier. But the auditor points out that pension debt is 36 
per cent of the gross debt of this government. 
 
I know all governments are currently struggling with pension 
liabilities. I think with the baby boomers coming through to 
retirement, this is a significant issue, and I think the auditor and 
probably many taxpayers would be more comfortable seeing 
these liabilities in writing on the statements that are provided by 
the government. 
 
So 36 per cent of our gross debt is our pension liabilities and 
currently the debt management plan does not address that at all. 
She says here . . . I’ll quote. This is section 4.4.2: 
 

Having a debt management plan for the entire government 
is important. The financial results in the Summary 
Financial Statements are already those used by credit raters 
when they set the provincial credit rating. 
 
The legislative requirement for a debt management plan is 
focused on the GRF instead of on all of the Government’s 
debt. As such, the Government does not publish a plan that 
shows how it plans to manage all of its debt. 

 
So I think the auditor has it right but maybe not. I think the 
government disagrees but we’ll see what they come up with in 
the fall whether or not they take these concerns to heart, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So the sixth recommendation we find in the auditor’s report of 
2013 is this: 
 

We recommend that the Government of Saskatchewan 
seek changes to The Growth and Financial Security Act to 
publish a debt management plan that includes all of the 
debt of the Government. 

 
Now that hasn’t happened yet. There certainly have not been 
changes to the Act, as I mentioned several times already. 
They’re dumping the Act. But we haven’t even seen the 
government take this up as a practice. There’s no debt 
management plan that includes all the debt of the government, 
and that’s something, I think, Mr. Speaker, that the taxpayers 
are rightly entitled to. 
 
4.5 talks very briefly about the Debt Retirement Fund, which 
was actually created in The Growth and Financial Security Act. 
And this is an interesting piece, Mr. Speaker, what they created 
because . . . I’ll read what the auditor had to say about it: 
 

The Debt Retirement Fund, created under The Growth and 
Financial Security Act, does not hold any cash or 
investments; rather it is simply the total of a portion of the 
annual surpluses of the GRF since 2007-08. By simply 
being an accounting of surpluses, the Debt Retirement 
Fund serves no purpose. As such, it cannot achieve its 
purpose of helping eliminate the accumulated deficit of the 
General Revenue Fund. 

 



490 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2016 

So as far as the shell game goes, Mr. Speaker, I think you have 
it right there. The Debt Retirement Fund serves absolutely no 
purpose, and that is one thing that I think is good to be gone 
when we consider the repeal of this Act. 
 
But again, this is actually one recommendation that is being 
dealt with by the repeal of this Act, is recommendation 7, which 
is, should “eliminate the existence of the Debt Retirement 
Fund.” Well they’re doing that because they’re eliminating the 
bill. So at least there, we know that one recommendation of the 
auditor is being listened to. 
 
The interim budget update, there’s some recommendations 
there by the auditor as well on the interim budget updates. The 
recommendation there is again to seek changes to The Growth 
and Financial Security Act; instead, today we’re talking about 
repealing it. But the recommendations that are made there are to 
“eliminate interim reporting on the General Revenue Fund . . . 
and to require quarterly public reporting on the Summary 
Budget.” 
 
Now those changes are beginning to be made, and I think 
certainly this is something that’s very much appreciated by, 
again the analysts and the economists and the advisers that use 
this information to deal with their work and their clients, Mr. 
Speaker, and the taxpayers, of course. So part of this has been 
done, but it certainly has not been enshrined in legislation, so 
we’ll look forward again to possible legislation in the fall. But 
again the question is, why isn’t this being done at this time? 
 
The next section is 4.7, requirement for two sets of financial 
statements. And now again the government has made changes 
since in terms of their practice, and we know that part one of 
the public accounts is dealing only with the summary financial 
statements, which is as recommended by the auditor, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s somewhat what recommendation no. 9 is, 
where the auditor recommends that the Government of 
Saskatchewan seek changes to the current legislation to require 
the auditing and publication of only the summary financial 
statements for the government of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And certainly the first part, part one of public accounts, if you 
now look at it, Mr. Speaker, does only contain the summary 
financial statements. However this is again not enshrined in 
legislation, and certainly the repeal of this legislation that we’re 
talking about today will not do anything to advance the 
recommendation that there be changes in legislation to deal 
with it. Again not sure why it would take even three years for 
the government to bring in the legislation. We’re going to be 
looking at four years if indeed they do bring in legislation in the 
fall. We’ll be looking at 2017 before any of these changes are 
made. 
 
So I know the shift to summary financial reporting is one that is 
very important, and I think our public servants in the Ministry 
of Finance have worked very, very hard to present those 
numbers to us. However there’s been no changes to legislation, 
and that might be the easier part of actually making these 
changes. I know changing to summary statements is the more 
difficult part. 
 
There’s a few more recommendations in this report, Mr. 
Speaker. I guess another concern that was really the main 

concern with the GRF budget was the fact that the government 
wasn’t even using generally accepted accounting principles. 
And there’s a very harsh indictment of the government in 
section 4.8.2, where in fact they were reporting surpluses in the 
GRF that did not exist either, Mr. Speaker.  
 
And that is something I think that is . . . I’m really happy that 
we’re now using summary just for that reason alone, because 
the way the GRF is represented, there are ways to present 
information in different ways. But there’s a chart, figure 18, on 
section 4.8.2, that shows the reporting of the GRF as a surplus 
and then the actual GRF deficit if you use generally accepted 
accounting principles. And I think that’s something we would 
like our government to do, is to use those generally accepted 
accounting principles. I certainly think the auditor’s indictment 
of that is one that this government did take into account when 
they switched over to the summary financial statements. 
 
So one of the concerns she raised was the silence in the 
legislation regarding GAAP or generally accepted accounting 
principles, and so the recommendation there was to change The 
Financial Administration Act, 1993. And this is the 
recommendation: 
 

We recommend that the Government of Saskatchewan 
seek changes to The Financial Administration Act, 1993 to 
require the use of Canadian public sector standards 
established by the Canadian Public Sector Accounting 
Board in the preparation of the Summary Financial 
Statements. 

 
Now as far as I know, I don’t think those changes have been 
made yet. I’m not sure whether the government intends to do 
so, and perhaps it will show up in their response to the auditor’s 
follow-up report on this. But when I looked at recent changes to 
The Financial Administration Act, I didn’t see that the 
government would now be required to use Canadian public 
sector standards for the preparation of summary financial 
statements. 
 
So it’s a technical piece, Mr. Speaker, but I think using 
generally accepted accounting principles is something that is 
accepted across Canada in any kind of audit process, and 
perhaps it would be useful for our government to use those as 
well. And certainly I think the auditor is recommending that 
that be the case; so not only use them, but actually reflect them 
in our financial administration Act. So it’s the changes to the 
legislation that is being required, and as far as I know the 
legislation hasn’t been amended yet. 
 
The 11th recommendation comes in section 5 of her . . . and this 
is the last recommendation of the auditor. And this is basically 
the financial discussion and analysis section, and here what 
she’s recommending is this: 
 

We recommend that the Government of Saskatchewan 
expand the financial statement discussion and analysis 
about the Summary Financial Statements included in the 
Public Accounts — Volume 1 to include more detailed 
analysis of differences between budget and actual as well 
as reasons for trends in key financial statement items and 
indicators. 

 



June 13, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 491 

Mr. Speaker, there certainly is a fair amount of information in 
Public Accounts volume 1 in the last couple of years, and these 
are complex and detailed reports. There are some there; I’m not 
sure whether these will meet the recommendations that the 
auditor has made or not. 
 
So those are just some of my comments in relation to what the 
auditor had to say about the growth and fiscal stability fund. 
Now I’m going to go on to talk a little bit more about what 
other people are saying about this bill. So on June 6th we had 
the minister in, and he was talking to us a little bit about The 
Growth And Financial Security Act repeal. And basically what 
he indicated to the public is this: that because it’s referring to 
the General Revenue Fund and we’re under summary financial 
statements now, so it’s completely irrelevant. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that was the intention of the 
auditor at the time, is to actually throw out the requirement for 
reporting as laid out in the growth and financial stability Act, 
but really what we need to do is apply those principles to the 
summary financial statements and not the General Revenue 
Fund statements. So that’s unfortunate that the minister is 
stopping here and just saying it’s completely irrelevant when 
really he should be saying it needs changes, and not to 
completely repeal it. 
 
Now he did indicate that he is going to consult with the 
Provincial Auditor and academics to determine the best method 
for presenting the budget. I’m just kind of wondering why 
we’re still determining this three years after the auditor 
presented her report. And certainly this wasn’t the first time that 
the auditor raised concerns about this style of reporting that the 
government brought in in 2008. So we’re now at eight years 
after that has been brought in, eight years after criticism, and 
it’s interesting that he’s now going to take time to consult with 
the auditor to determine the best method for presenting the 
budget to the public. 
 
[15:45] 
 
So he’s indicated there will be new legislation in the fall, and 
again it’s not clear why the government chose this point in time 
to repeal this particular Act. And I think we have to kind of 
think that through, Mr. Speaker, as we go forward in our 
examination of the intentions behind the repeal of this bill, and 
certainly what the intentions of the government will be in the 
future as they introduce this new legislation. 
 
One of the questions the minister was asked was whether or not 
this new legislation will require balanced budgets. And again he 
said, we don’t know yet. The auditor says having a law like this 
is difficult because of the variations that can occur on a daily 
basis. But it seems to be, Mr. Speaker, that the auditor is 
recommending if the government does choose balanced budget 
legislation that they follow the models that other provinces are 
using. So I’m not sure that the auditor is telling this government 
not to have a balanced budget legislation but rather, if they do 
choose to have one, that it be set up appropriately with the right 
kind of accounting principles in it. 
 
Now the minister has promised that he hopes to have the most 
complete, transparent financial statements by the fall. Again 
we’re not sure what exactly that’s going to look like, but I guess 

we’ll just have to wait and see, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now before I finish I do want to talk a little bit about a report 
that was commissioned in 2013 by the Premier on what he 
called the Saskatchewan heritage initiative, and this was on the 
topic of a futures fund for Saskatchewan. This was submitted to 
the Premier by Peter MacKinnon in 2013. And he did an 
examination in that report of four different types of four 
different sovereign funds, although there are probably more 
than 60 throughout the world. And I just want to share a little 
bit of what Peter MacKinnon said in his executive summary for 
this report. And this is a quote: “The advantages that come with 
non-renewable resource wealth are accompanied by risks of 
excessive reliance, unsustainable spending commitments, and 
waste.” 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that something we’ve seen in full 
glory here from this government is excessive reliance, 
unsustainable spending commitments, and waste in relation to 
our non-renewable resource wealth. He goes on to say: 
 

Governments in jurisdictions that are beneficiaries of this 
wealth are wise to consider and plan how it will be used to 
secure the advantages while diminishing the risks. This has 
led many of them to create special funds to receive some or 
all of the revenues from non-renewable resources and to 
subject them to special saving and spending rules. There 
are more than sixty of these funds — commonly referred to 
as sovereign wealth funds — worldwide and the number 
has been increasing in recent years. 

 
So that’s in his executive summary. And then I’d like to go on 
and talk about or quote some of the things he said in his 
introduction to his paper. And he says: 
 

The discussion that follows will address critical issues, but 
it is appropriate to begin with consideration of the concept 
that underlies the main recommendation of this report. The 
concept is a futures fund — not a rainy day fund, a reserve 
to be tapped opportunistically, or a source of money to 
finance projects in Saskatchewan in the absence of capital 
and operating commitments to pay for them. It is a 
permanent fund for saving a portion of the revenues from 
non-renewable resources to be invested for the benefit of 
future as well as present residents of our province for 
generations to come, hopefully forever. 

 
And then he goes on to say . . . and I’m going to skip down a 
little bit but I’ll continue quoting: 
 

Our non-renewable resource wealth is inherently time 
limited, and with each barrel of oil or tonne of potash 
removed from the ground our store of natural wealth is 
depleted. Today we use these revenues to grow our 
economy, pay down public debt, build vital infrastructure 
and fund public services like education and health care. 
Through a futures fund we have the opportunity to sustain 
and stabilize our use of this revenue by ensuring a portion 
of it is permanently saved and invested to grow and 
generate income over time. 

 
For this purpose to be realized we must guard against 
temptation. History teaches us that readily available 



492 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2016 

sources of large amounts of money are temptations for 
governments, advocates of special interests or projects, and 
others. Governments seek relief from budgetary pressures 
of the day, and there is no shortage of competing claims 
and ambitions. We owe it to our children and 
grandchildren, and to their children and grandchildren to 
resist this temptation. We need to remind ourselves that our 
natural resources will not last forever and that provincial 
budgets should not be unduly dependent on them to fund 
the annual, ongoing expenditures of the province. 
Experience tells us that, as markets change, an overreliance 
on non-renewable resource revenues can lead to painful 
cuts and punishing debt accumulation. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have to say that’s exactly what we’re 
seeing in this year’s budget is that painful cuts and punishing 
debt accumulation. When we see $1 billion just in capital 
funding or spending alone that’s being financed by deficit 
financing, I think that’s a major concern and certainly doesn’t 
reflect the opportunities that we have seen in the last few years 
in terms of high natural resource revenues. And now that we’re 
seeing declining prices, it’s certainly a concern. 
 
So at this point, Mr. Speaker, I believe that I have exhausted the 
comments that I intended to make on this particular bill, and 
I’m going to adjourn the debate. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Nutana has moved 
to adjourn debate on Bill No. 21, The Growth and Financial 
Security Repeal Act 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 22 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2016 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
am pleased to rise and move second reading of Bill No. 22 to 
amend The Income Tax Act, 2000 to implement income tax 
initiatives announced in our government’s 2016-17 budget on 
June 1. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one initiative that our government is proud to 
stand by is the graduate retention program. It provides personal 
income tax credits to rebate up to $20,000 in tuition fees to 
post-secondary graduates. The tuition rebate is based on actual 
tuition fees paid subject to a maximum based on program of 
study: $3,000 for certificates, 6,400 for diplomas, 15,000 for 
three-year degrees, and $20,000 for four-year degrees. 
 
The tuition rebate is paid out over a seven-year instalment 
period with 10 per cent paid in each of the first four instalment 
years and 20 per cent paid in each of the remaining three 
instalment years. 
 
Graduates currently receive the tuition rebate as a reduction in 
their income taxes otherwise payable. Tuition rebates must be 
applied against Saskatchewan income taxes otherwise payable. 
Any rebate amount that cannot be applied against taxes payable 

may be carried forward and added to the next year’s instalment 
amount. Graduates are allowed 10 years to fully claim their 
tuition rebate. 
 
Since the program’s creation in 2008, approximately 58,000 
post-secondary graduates have taken advantage of this program, 
receiving nearly $200 million in tuition rebates by filing a 
Saskatchewan income tax return along with a tuition rebate 
eligibility certificate issued by the Ministry of Advanced 
Education. This program has been very effective in keeping 
young people in Saskatchewan as they live, work, and raise a 
family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as announced in our election platform, we are 
creating a first home loan option under the graduate retention 
program. This new program will allow eligible graduates to 
borrow up to $10,000 of their future GRP [graduate retention 
program] tax credits as an interest-free loan to use towards the 
down payment on their first home in our province. The loan 
will be repaid in amounts equal to the amount of the GRP 
credits claimed by the graduate in subsequent years. This 
program will be administered by the Sask Housing Corporation. 
As described in the platform commitment, borrowers under the 
first home loan program will not be eligible to claim the 
Saskatchewan first-time homebuyers tax credit. The Income Tax 
Act is being amended to implement this condition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget has announced the elimination of the 
active families benefit, AFB. This credit was introduced in 2009 
to lower the costs of registering children in sports, cultural, and 
recreational activities. Mr. Speaker, further review of the 
program has concluded that the active families benefit program 
has not met program objectives. We believe community-based 
charities and organizations such as KidSport and Creative Kids 
will continue to be more effective at helping children from 
families with lower incomes participate in these activities. As a 
result, our government has decided to eliminate the AFB 
program for the 2016 and subsequent taxation years. This is 
being accomplished by repealing The Active Families Benefit 
Act and consequently amending The Income Tax Act, 2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this bill contains a number of amendments that are 
being made because of changes made by the federal 
government. For example, the federal government has reduced 
the federal small-business tax rate and has made a related 
change to the taxation of dividend income. The change to the 
taxation of dividend income automatically impacts the 
provincial taxation of that income. Were we to do nothing, the 
provincial tax on that income would increase. We have 
therefore decided to adjust our dividend tax credit rate to 
counteract the federal change and ensure that the amount of 
provincial tax on this dividend income remains the same as 
before the federal change. The Act is being amended to reflect 
this change as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The federal government has also altered the taxation of trusts. 
Most trusts have always paid tax at the top federal and 
provincial income tax rates, but some trusts had paid tax at the 
graduated tax rates. The federal government is now requiring all 
trusts to pay tax at the top tax rates. The Act is being amended 
to effect this change for provincial tax purposes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the tax credit for charitable donations is calculated 



June 13, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 493 

using the lowest income tax rate for the first $200 of donations 
and the highest income tax rate for any donations over that 
threshold. The introduction of a new federal tax rate has 
resulted in changes to the calculation of the federal tax credit 
for charitable donations. The provincial Act previously adopted 
the federal tax credit calculation and substituted provincial tax 
rates. This is no longer possible with the changes to the federal 
calculation. The provincial provision therefore needs to be 
amended to create a new provincial calculation. This new 
provision will exactly replicate the former calculation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in last year’s budget our government announced 
the creation of new tax incentives to increase manufacturing 
exports and attract head office jobs. Our government 
understands that bringing high-quality, stable jobs to 
Saskatchewan is a key part of our plan for growth and an 
instrumental element of keeping our job market strong. The M 
& P [manufacturing and processing] exporter tax incentive 
provides non-refundable tax credits for each of the 2015 
through 2019 taxation years to eligible corporations that expand 
the number of their full-time employees above the number that 
were employed in 2014. 
 
Eligible businesses are those that export to the rest of Canada or 
internationally at least 25 per cent of their manufacturing goods 
each year and that manufacture or process goods for sale as 
defined in the federal Income Tax Act or are principally 
involved in the commercial development of new economy 
products for export, including interactive digital media products 
and creative industry products. 
 
The M & P exporter tax incentive consists of two components: 
a general hiring tax credit and a head office tax credit. The 
hiring tax credit offers non-refundable tax credits equal to 
$3,000 each year in respect of each incremental full-time 
employee hired by an eligible business. The head office tax 
credit offers non-refundable tax credits equal to $10,000 each 
year in respect to each incremental full-time head office 
employee hired by an eligible business subject to minimum 
qualifying and incremental employment thresholds. 
 
These incentives included provisions to safeguard against 
certain transfers of existing employees between parent and 
subsidiary corporations. These provisions are being 
supplemented to clarify that the transfer of employees between 
related companies or the conversion of contractors into 
employees, which do not result in the creation of new 
Saskatchewan jobs, will not qualify for the tax credits. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year we also introduced a new tax incentive to 
encourage new capital investment in primary steel production 
here in Saskatchewan. The tax incentive is available to eligible 
primary steel producers that make a minimum capital 
investment of $100 million in new or expanded productive 
capacity and provides a rebate of the new or incremental 
Saskatchewan corporation income tax payable by the 
corporation as a result of the new investment. 
 
The tax incentive is available for a five-year period and rebates 
the full amount of incremental tax for each of the first two years 
of the rebate period followed by 75 per cent of incremental tax 
in the third year, 50 per cent in the fourth year, and 25 per cent 
in the fifth year. This incremental tax resulting from a 

qualifying capital investment is determined as the pro rata share 
of the company’s total tax based on the incremental tonnes of 
steel produced as a result of the new investment. 
 
For a new entrant, all of the company’s tax will be incremental 
and eligible for rebate. For an existing producer, the new 
investment may result in new product lines as opposed to an 
increase in the output of existing products. To better capture 
this reality for existing producers, technical amendments are 
being made to clarify that the rebate calculation will focus on 
the new product lines that result from an eligible capital 
investment rather than on the total production of the company. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the changes being read a second time today are 
part of the government’s plan to keep Saskatchewan strong. 
They keep our economy strong by keeping taxes low and 
maintaining the competitiveness of our tax regime. Mr. 
Speaker, I move the second reading of Bill 22, the Act to amend 
The Income Tax Act, 2000. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved 
that Bill No. 22, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2016 be now 
read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 
recognize the member from Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 
is a pleasure to enter into this debate on Bill No. 22, an Act to 
amend The Income Tax Act. And of course it’s important to 
have this before us so we can study and understand the 
implications. Whenever you get a bill like this, they can be very 
technical and it takes a bit of a time to understand the full 
implications. And of course you even see that now we’re seeing 
amendments to what was proposed last year. 
 
[16:00] 
 
But I do want to get some initial comments on the record 
because there are questions that we have about this bill and 
what it really means for the people of Saskatchewan, 
particularly after we’ve seen the budget that we have before us. 
And there are implications that cross over into other initiatives 
or cuts that this government has put forward, and I want to put 
those on the record and make sure we fully understand the 
implications of the legislation. You know, when we put bills 
like this before, there could be unintended consequences. We 
think we understand the full reach of all the legislation, but we 
need to make sure that we have some thought that goes into it. 
So we appreciate the opportunity this afternoon and into the 
week to make comments on this bill. 
 
You know, there is five main parts to it and a couple that I may 
not get into. But I do want to talk a little bit about the first one, 
the first-time homebuyers tax credit and the connection with the 
graduate retention plan tax credit. And this one is one that this 
government had put forward in an election, and they did win the 
election on that campaign, so that’s fair enough, and that’s 
something. And we’ve seen that this has been taken up, and 
we’ll have some questions about this. Of course whenever we 
talk about homebuyers in housing, we have to as well think 
about the whole scheme of what’s happening out there in the 
housing world. And as the Housing critic, I look at these 
initiatives and I say, is this the most important initiative that we 
could have put forward in terms of the need out there? 



494 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2016 

This is one they campaigned on and we recognize that. They 
felt this was one that spoke to people in a particular sector, and 
it did. But when we look at other home or housing issues, 
particularly Housing First, that this government doesn’t buy in 
to, and I mean that in terms of the financial support . . . You 
know, we see Saskatoon, Regina getting into that in a really 
huge way, huge way, and that’s something right across the 
province because we know that we have still in our 
communities those who are what they call hard to house. And 
they may not be voters. They may not be people who get out to 
vote and so they don’t actually make it on to the campaign 
promise trail very often. But this is something we urge the 
government to really look at because we see both Regina and 
Saskatoon getting into that and supporting it. And we would 
really encourage this government to do that. 
 
But this is about the graduate retention plan tax credit and the 
$10,000 down payment on a home. And we see that there are 
people already taking it up. And so we think that’s fair enough, 
but we’ll be watching that to make sure that it’s used wisely and 
that again there are no unintended consequences. And people 
might get caught up in something that they didn’t intend to. But 
clearly the government campaigned on it, and we are looking 
for them to complete their promise. 
 
I mean it is interesting because the next item is also a campaign 
promise that they made several years ago, and here now they 
are wrapping it up and talking about eliminating the active 
families benefit. That’s $150 per child and it’s a savings of 5.5 
million. So if I do my math, that’s got to affect at least 
3,000-plus children. And it’s interesting how the government is 
now putting this on to KidSport or Creative Kids. And we’re 
familiar with both of those. And we do have some concerns that 
actually, are they really, you know . . . Is Creative Kids the 
same sector as this? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Bonk: — Request leave for an introduction. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Moosomin has 
requested leave for an introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Bonk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, to you and through you I’d 
like to make an introduction to some special guests that are 
seated in the west gallery — my wife, Candace, and my 
daughter Emma, my good strong support system there. I’m very 
happy to have them here today and they’re just . . . I can’t say 
enough of how they’ve supported me through this journey into 
politics. And I’d just like to say: 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Hungarian.] 
 
So I’d like everyone in this legislature to join me in welcoming 
my wife and daughter to their legislature. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 22 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2016 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Forbes: —Thank you very much, and that’s a very good 
introduction. I hadn’t heard . . . [inaudible] . . . like that before, 
but very good. Welcome as well. 
 
So as I was saying, eliminating the active families benefit, we’ll 
have to know more about the research when they said it didn’t 
quite reach or meet the targets that it had set out to do, and how 
they are looking at Creative Kids or KidSport to actually meet 
that objective. 
 
I’m not sure if that’s the case because Creative Kids and 
KidSport I know are a direct grant to children who are looking 
to play a certain sport or get involved in a certain art, and it’s a 
very straightforward thing. It’s a grant. And so when you have a 
tax credit, that’s very different. And so we know that people 
who are applying for tax credits quite often wouldn’t qualify for 
that grant, because the grants are for lower income, and this tax 
credit was for probably a little higher tax bracket than what 
Creative Kids in art and KidSport were doing. 
 
And I have to say a shout-out to Creative Kids and for 
KidSport. I’m familiar with both of them. They do a fantastic 
job, and I would really hope that they continue to do the work, 
and because they are fully funded as a non-government 
organization, that they don’t feel pressure from the government 
to start to change their requirements because of this change. So 
we haven’t contacted them, and we probably should talk to 
them and say, so the government is saying that you’re going to 
meet their target — is that what you really think is going to 
happen? I don’t know if that’s going to happen. That would be 
very, very interesting to hear. 
 
So there’s some 3,000 kids. The other thing I’m thinking about 
when there are 3,000 kids, that we’ve been, every day I’ve been 
presenting a petition about heritage languages, and we know 
that impacts about 4,000 children. And we had just an example 
of a heritage language just minutes ago in this House and it was 
a very . . . as at the family root, and that’s a wonderful thing. 
 
And so here we have 4,000 children who are going to be 
impacted by the changes around the heritage language program. 
And that’s a small, small, small amount of money compared to 
this $5.5 million that this government is going to save by 
eliminating the active families benefit. 
 
The active families benefit program right now is running about 
. . . It costs about 5.5 million to the government. They plan on 
cutting that and saving that and not sharing it. I mean it would 
be interesting if they said, okay, we are going to try to even 
spend a small amount of that 5.5 million — say 225,000. That 
would be a good round number that they could take from that 
and say, you know what? We’re going to support something 
like the heritage language program because we know the 
heritage language program is impacting 4,000 kids. So now we 
have 7,000 kids in this province who are impacted by the 
changes. And if you . . . [inaudible] . . . your family, say that’s 3 
or 4,000 families. 
 



June 13, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 495 

Now interestingly the minister in the House defended the cuts 
to the heritage language program by saying it’s only $55 per 
student and a family can pick that up. Here we have that $55, 
and if you add now the $150, parents are being caught with an 
increase of $200 more for active children who would be 
involved in sports or culture or the arts. And that’s not a small 
thing if you have two or three or four kids. All of a sudden 
you’re looking at 4 or 6 or $800. That’s a change in what this 
bill means to you. And of course then we can also get into the 
new increases in the drug plan as well. So all of a sudden it is 
costing some families more, and I don’t know if the government 
has taken that into account. 
 
The other one that I just want to make a quick note on, because 
I know there are many bills that we want to get to today, is 
around making housekeeping changes to reflect the 
middle-class tax cut and that’s in brackets — the middle-class 
tax cut — introduced by the federal government. And we want 
to make sure we’re very careful about this to make sure that tax 
cuts really actually do what they’re intended to do, because as 
we understand the federal tax cuts that . . . The Liberals are 
saying this is for the middle class and it really isn’t. 
 
In Canada we know the median income is about 44,000, but the 
federal Liberal tax cuts doesn’t impact anybody who makes 
44,000. You won’t be seeing a tax cut. Who will be seeing a tax 
cut are those who are making over $200,000. Lucky them. And 
I don’t know when the change of definition of middle class 
came, but usually I thought it was around 40 or 50,000. It was 
the working class, or maybe a little bit above that, but not the 
upper class. Clearly, $200,000 you don’t need a tax cut really, 
and that was not what the federal Liberals campaigned on. I 
don’t think here in Saskatchewan we should be unintentionally 
supporting that. 
 
Now we would want to know from the government — and we’ll 
be asking these questions — have they done their homework on 
the impact of these housekeeping changes to reflect the 
middle-class tax cuts. You know, is it really . . . Is it helping the 
people who are making the high incomes, the over 200,000, or 
is it really doing the job of cutting taxes for the middle class? 
So we’re aware of that and we’re going to be watching that. 
 
And we’re going to be talking to the folks — especially in 
committee, the finance folks — to make sure that that’s not the 
case; that in fact people who are middle class here in 
Saskatchewan, and I would say that’s got to be . . . And it 
would be interesting to hear what the minister says about his 
definition of who the middle class is. Maybe his definition of 
the middle class is around 200,000, but I don’t think that’s one 
that we would accept on this side of the House. It would be . . . 
Middle class really usually means the middle or median 
income, so that would be around 44,000. So we think this is an 
important area to be watching for because we don’t want to get 
caught up in unintended consequences. And we know the new 
government in Ottawa could be making some mistakes with 
their new changes. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these are the three areas that I do want 
to focus on. And I think that it’s really important that we do 
take a look and we do have some time to study these and find 
out what really the impacts will be, you know, the changes to 
the definitions of primary steel production. What is the impact 

on that? What does that really mean?  
 
We know that now in Saskatchewan’s economy that it’s not as 
robust as it was a couple of years ago. We hope that we can do 
things that will make sure it’s stronger and actually creating 
new jobs. We’re not seeing that. We’ve seen a loss of some 
9,000 jobs year over year, and we want to see that be changed. 
So hopefully that does meet the goal of increasing jobs in that 
sector and also in the manufacturing processing sector, that 
people are being hired. And we want to know, does that really 
meet its job? And are people really being hired and is it doing, 
meeting the target that’s set out? So I know our Finance critic 
will be hard at work in committee on these questions that I’ve 
laid out.  
 
So with that, I just want to review before I wrap up in about five 
minutes here that we will be looking and talking about the 
graduate retention plan tax credit, that it’s actually working and 
it’s accessible to those who can really be excited about getting a 
new home, their first home. And that’s what it’s really meant to 
be. 
 
[16:15] 
 
We are going to be talking about the active families benefit. 
And I might actually come in and ask about that because I think 
that’s a big issue, you know, when you have 3,000-kids-plus 
being targeted and having, losing $150 towards a sport, whether 
that be hockey. 
 
We had a great statement about Gordie Howe today. I think that 
the whole House got behind that 100 per cent. And the story of 
how he got started and how his mom bought a bag of clothes 
that had, there was a pair of skates in it. That was his first 
skates. Huge, huge impact. We’ve come a long way from there. 
And in some ways it’s kind of sad because kids like Gordie 
Howe who was so poor and got a start like that, I mean his 
story, his early years really can choke you up about what 
happened in terms of . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, not 
quite in my constituency. I am so sad to say it’s not mine, but in 
the great constituency of Riversdale, King George school. And I 
know there’s probably a strong rivalry between King George 
and Princess Alex and Westmount and Caswell. I think he 
ended up in Mayfair; I’m not sure. But I digress. 
 
 But I know there’s some interesting . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
reflecting on that member’s statement, you know, and the active 
families benefit, it seems odd that on that same day we have 
that bill introduced that would hurt kids, and here we are talking 
about that. So hopefully KidSport can pull up and fill that void, 
but I’m not sure when we’re saying we’ve got 3,000 more kids 
for you to deal with. That’s a big, big, a big, big ask. 
 
So we’ll be asking about that and we’ll be asking definitely, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, about the middle class tax cut. We’re going to 
get more information on that and making sure that it actually 
does impact and really work for the middle class here in 
Saskatchewan. We have some big, big questions about that. 
 
So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know we have lots of work 
to do today, so I want to wrap up my comments about An Act to 
amend The Income Tax Act. And I don’t want to say anything 
about changing the name to the Gordie Howe Act or anything 



496 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2016 

like that. But I’ll leave it at that, and I just want to adjourn the 
discussion right now. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 22, The Income Tax 
Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 23 — The Liquor Retail Modernization Act/Loi de 
modernisation du commerce des boissons alcoolisées 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of Bill No. 
23, The Liquor Retail Modernization Act 2016. 
 
Under Saskatchewan’s current liquor retailing system, an 
uneven playing field exists. Currently only certain types of 
retailers are allowed to make decisions about their hours of 
operation, prices, and even the availability of chilled products. 
All of this is in the detriment of consumers. This bill will 
correct those issues. 
 
It will create a single permit for all retailers of alcoholic 
beverages in Saskatchewan, that is alcoholic beverages to the 
general public. This new retail permit will apply to existing 
SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority] stores, 
rural franchises, private liquor stores, and off-sale outlets as 
well as new operators entering the market. 
 
These changes will be a key component to the new liquor 
retailing system our government ran on in this past election, Mr. 
Speaker. Most importantly, these changes will provide 
consumers with more choice, more convenience, and 
competitive pricing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of The Liquor 
Retail Modernization Act 2016. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Deputy Premier has moved that 
Bill No. 23, The Liquor Retail Modernization Act be now read a 
second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? I recognize the member from Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
to enter the debate about Bill No. 23, Mr. Speaker, An Act to 
amend The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act, 1997 
respecting Retail Sales and making certain other amendments, 
or as the minister also said, The Liquor Retail Modernization 
Act, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for me to be the first member 
of the opposition to put some comments on record. 
 
I found it interesting, the minister’s second reading speech that 
he just delivered right now, he talked about levelling the 
playing field, allowing alcohol . . . the opportunity for all 
retailers to be on the same foot, Mr. Speaker. But the one thing 
he didn’t acknowledge is that as this government has been in 
power, they haven’t allowed SLGA to in fact modernize. It’s 

interesting the name of this Act. That’s what the NDP 
opposition has been calling for for a couple years now, Mr. 
Speaker, the opportunity to modernize, for SLGA to modernize 
and provide better services to Saskatchewan people, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We’ve talked about things like growler stations, cold beer 
fridges, Mr. Speaker, kiosks, improving the existing stores, Mr. 
Speaker, to provide both better services, Mr. Speaker, to 
Saskatchewan residences. But that also translates into more 
revenue for the GRF as SLGA has returned hundreds of 
millions of dollars to the GRF, which provides education and 
health care and highways — all those things that we count on, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But with respect to this particular bill, Bill No. 23, The Liquor 
Retail Modernization Act, what this particular bill does, as the 
minister said, it harmonizes the regulatory framework for liquor 
retailers and creates a single-permit system for all retailers, 
including off-sales, private stores, and franchises. It allows 
private vendors to sell special occasion permits and allows 
permit holders to purchase alcohol from the SLGA, the Brewers 
Association, or another retail store instead of the SLGA. 
 
I haven’t had an opportunity to fully look at this bill, and I 
know that we’ll also be reaching out to stakeholders. But one 
thing . . . Actually speaking to a colleague of mine, she says she 
hopes that with this bill that some changes might be the 
opportunity to apply for a permit online and then go pick it up 
when you go to pick up your alcohol for a special occasion. 
She’s pointed out that it can be hard, Mr. Speaker, when your 
garage doesn’t hold 400 dozen beer, and so it sometimes 
necessitates a couple trips to the store, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So in fact we’re hoping that one of the opportunities here is the 
opportunity to apply online . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I’m 
not quite sure why they’re heckling. They find this quite 
amusing, Mr. Speaker, but in fact this is about creating an 
opportunity, making things a little easier, modernizing for 
people. We shop online. There are many things we do online, 
Mr. Speaker, and applying for a liquor permit and saving one 
trip to the store So you apply. You get your permit and have the 
opportunity just to make one trip to the store, Mr. Speaker. So I 
know I’m hopeful that that might be something in this Act. 
 
But again back to that notion of modernization. This is the 
name of this particular Act, The Liquor Retail Modernization 
Act, and this is something we’ve been calling on the 
government to do with respect to SLGA for quite some time, 
Mr. Speaker, allowing SLGA to be competitive, Mr. Speaker, 
and to serve Saskatchewan citizens well. 
 
This government will be selling 40 SLGA stores, many in rural 
communities where those stores provide good employment, 
mortgage-paying jobs for people in the community, Mr. 
Speaker. I know knocking on doors during the election, I ran 
into many SLGA employees who were very worried about their 
colleagues in rural Saskatchewan particularly, Mr. Speaker, and 
actually quite frankly worried about their own jobs as this 
government’s Bill No. 1 will take SLGA completely out of the 
Crown protection Act which means that down the road this 
government will do whatever it would like with respect to 
SLGA. So I know I had heard many concerns from people. 



June 13, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 497 

I’m thinking on a couple of doorsteps in Montgomery, Mr. 
Speaker, of people who’ve been able to earn a living, pay taxes, 
and contribute and take pride in the job that they do in ensuring 
that they are providing good public service in providing 
knowledgeable information about alcohol products but also 
making sure that they’re selling to people who are of age, Mr. 
Speaker. I know that that’s one concern that’s been flagged 
around the privatization of stores. 
 
And I can tell you anecdotally, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . I’m not sure what the member from 
Martensville-Warman is heckling about, Mr. Speaker, but she’s 
awfully loud today. I noticed that during question period as 
well, Mr. Speaker. I know anecdotally from my own experience 
working actually in a . . . I’ve worked in many bars in my 
university days, Mr. Speaker. One of them happened to be 
Louis’, the campus pub, which was a unionized facility, Mr. 
Speaker. And one of the great things about Louis’, we made just 
a little bit more than you would like a dollar or two more than 
minimum wage. 
 
But the one thing that that organization provided us was really 
good training, Mr. Speaker, to make sure that we were serving 
responsibly and knowing when to not serve people more 
alcohol, Mr. Speaker. And I know that some concerns with 
some of the possibility of privatization where money and profit 
becomes extra imperative, Mr. Speaker, and you might be 
dealing with a really small store who has a very small staff so 
maybe training won’t be the top priority for some of these 
stores, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So when it comes to selling some of these liquor stores, it’s 
about good-paying jobs, but it’s also about making sure . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . I am not sure what the member from 
Martensville-Warman has eaten here today or drank, Mr. 
Speaker, but she’s got some serious issues here today, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m sure she could probably be heard on the video 
today, Mr. Speaker. Anyway there are many concerns with the 
privatization of liquor stores, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I did actually really enjoy the hearings last week. I sat in my 
office. I wasn’t in the committee room. But I like to think it’s 
important to hear all sides of the debate, Mr. Speaker, and I 
really thoroughly enjoyed listening to the presentations last 
week on Bill No. 1, Mr. Speaker. And I know an organization 
like Sobeys actually took great pride at one of the things I heard 
from them last week. They took great pride in both their 
training of their staff which again this is something that I’m 
talking about, the ability to train staff to provide the best quality 
public service but to know that you’re serving people who are 
of legal age, Mr. Speaker. Those are all very important things 
when it comes to the sale of alcohol. 
 
And unfortunately sometimes smaller organizations or smaller 
businesses, not that they’re not well-meaning and 
well-intentioned, but don’t have the capacity to do that, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I think that there are, there are . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure why the 
member from Martensville-Warman, the Minister for 
Highways, is so chirpy today, Mr. Speaker. Not a clue. Not a 
clue. Anyway the privatization of these 40 stores is of huge 
concern to many people throughout Saskatchewan and, as I 
said, during the campaign I heard that on the doorstep. 

But we will have an opportunity in this Chamber to debate Bill 
No. 1, but right now we’re on Bill No. 23, The Liquor Retail 
Modernization Act. Again there are reasonable things that the 
minister is proposing but like I said, we’re hopeful that there 
will be some other inclusions discussed — the opportunity, as I 
said, to buy a permit online perhaps. But with that, Mr. Speaker, 
I know I have colleagues who will enter the debate after me. I 
would like to move to adjourn debate. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Riversdale has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 23, The Liquor Retail 
Modernization Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 24 — The Liquor Retail Modernization 
Consequential Amendments Act, 2016 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
rise today to move second reading of Bill No. 24, The Liquor 
Retail Modernization Consequential Amendments Act, 2016. 
The amendments outlined in this bill explain some of the 
language and definitions in The Alcohol and Gaming 
Regulation Act, 1997 and will ensure that The Liquor Retail 
Modernization Act, 2016 will have the necessary clarity it 
requires. Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of 
The Liquor Retail Modernization Consequential Amendments 
Act, 2016. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Deputy Premier has moved that 
Bill No. 24, The Liquor Retail Modernization Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2016 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
[16:30] 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again it’s my 
pleasure to put the opposition’s first comments on the record 
about Bill No. 24, The Liquor Retail Modernization 
Consequential Amendments Act, 2016, Mr. Speaker. The 
minister just finished saying that this bill will give the Bill No. 
23, the previous bill, the necessary clarity it requires, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d like to put on the record here some of those 
comments about what that necessary clarity might look like, 
Mr. Speaker, but in terms of my comments around the concerns 
about modernization of SLGA and liquor retailing in 
Saskatchewan, my comments from the previous bill still stand. 
 
But with respect to Bill No. 24, what does this bill do, Mr. 
Speaker? So amendments . . . I’d like to take a look at the 
explanatory notes to let the general public know a little bit 
about what this bill will do: 
 

Amendments to section 2 will change “valuable 
consideration” to “consideration” as “valuable 
consideration” is a legal expression or concept. 
“Consideration” is a defined term in this Act, so “valuable” 



498 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2016 

is not necessary. Also, gender specific references have 
been changed to “him or her.” 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I actually in this Assembly have had the 
opportunity to put on the record that using specific language, 
Mr. Speaker, around gender is very important. And so I’m 
pleased to see that this is part of the bill. 
 
Amendments to section 2 will also add definitions for retail 
store and retail store permit. The definition of special liquor 
vendor is being repealed. Retail stores will include those 
stores operated by Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority and private stores. 
 
So amendments to section 2 will update the definition of value 
to address changes to The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act 
1997 that will allow retail stores to establish their own current 
list prices and that have allowed customers to bring their own 
wine into restaurants. These restaurants are allowed to levy a 
corkage fee or bring-your-own-wine charge on the customer, 
and as the wine is consumed in a licensed premises, the levy 
that is charged for this service is taxable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what else will this amendment do? Amendments 
to section 3 are housekeeping in nature and clarify the 
collection of the levy, that it’s on behalf of the Crown in right 
of Saskatchewan. This subsection also is being amended to 
delete the reference to special liquor vendor. This bill also, Mr. 
Speaker, amendments to section 4 are housekeeping in nature 
again and clarify that collection of the levy is on behalf of the 
Crown in right of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, another piece here. Application for a special 
licence is being amended. Amendments to this section remove 
references to special liquor vendor, which is being repealed as it 
refers to the holder of a franchise pursuant to The Alcohol and 
Gaming Regulation Act 1997. 
 
There is also a housekeeping amendment to change gender 
specific references, and again I’ve put on the record in this 
House the importance of gender language. The terms that we 
use I think send messages about ourselves, Mr. Speaker, and 
that’s an important change. This is another housekeeping 
amendment with respect to the restoration of special licence, 
section 17. It’s a housekeeping amendment to change gender 
specific references again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we have finally two more points, Mr. Speaker. An 
amendment removes references to special liquor vendors and 
outlets operated by the Liquor and Gaming Authority and 
replaces them with references to holders of retail permits. 
 
And one final point, Mr. Speaker, changes to specified sections 
and subsections will come into force on the proclamation of The 
Liquor Retail Modernization Act since their implementation is 
contingent on the implementation of that previous Act which I 
just spoke to, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I hope . . . Those are what the minister is proposing and the 
changes, the necessary clarity that Bill No. 23 requires, Mr. 
Speaker. But with that, I know I have colleagues who will want 
to speak to both Bill 23 and 24, and their concern really around 
the lack of modernization, this government’s unwillingness to 

allow SLGA to modernize and move into 2016, Mr. Speaker. 
So with that, I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 24, The Liquor Retail Modernization Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2016. Is the Assembly willing to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 25 — The Wakamow Valley Authority  
Amendment Act, 2016 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Mr. Speaker, today I rise to speak 
about The Wakamow Valley Authority Amendment Act, 2016. 
As you know, budget 2016-17 controls spending. The province 
is eliminating funding to urban parks for the savings of 
$540,000 over last year. Funding for the Wakamow Valley 
Authority has been eliminated for a savings of $157,000 over 
last year. In order to eliminate funding, we’ve amended the Act 
to remove the section that deals with provincial statutory 
funding. 
 
In the past urban parks have been jointly funded by 
government, the cities, and in some cases, universities and rural 
municipalities. Since 2007-08, the Government of 
Saskatchewan has provided record grants, an increase of more 
than 100 per cent to municipalities through municipal revenue 
sharing. After multiple years of providing increased grants 
which are tied to the PST [provincial sales tax], the government 
is now asking those communities to take financial responsibility 
for their urban parks. 
 
The government’s municipal revenue-sharing program 
distributes funding to municipalities who in turn make decisions 
about local funding priorities. To conclude, I move second 
reading of The Wakamow Valley Authority Amendment Act, 
2016. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport has 
moved second reading of The Wakamow Valley Authority 
Amendment Act, 2016. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
I recognize Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And as 
always, it’s a distinct honour to be able to rise in the Assembly 
to provide commentary on government bills that they’re 
introducing. Today obviously we’re in the second reading stage 
now for this bill, Wakamow Valley Authority Act. 
 
Many of these . . . Obviously many of these parks that are being 
affected by cuts in the budget have their own legislation, and 
that’s what’s going on in this case, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know if 
the other four parks that are receiving cuts have their own 
legislation like this one and why we’re only considering this 
one at this time, but I would have to check all the legislation to 
see. 
 



June 13, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 499 

But at any rate, we’re talking today about The Wakamow Valley 
Authority Act and the beautiful Wakamow Valley in the 
beautiful city of Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker. Clearly these spaces 
are spaces that are valuable to the citizenry, not only of the city 
in which you locate them, but certainly the people that come to 
visit the city. And so it’s a bit disappointing to hear the minister 
use language like controlling spending or providing savings, 
when what we’re really talking about here, Mr. Speaker, is a 
cut. This is a cut to funding. It was a tri-lateral arrangement in 
the Act as it exists right now where we had three levels of 
funding, the urban municipality and secondly any rural 
municipalities, and the province has always been a partner in 
this kind of funding. 
 
Now the cut that we’re talking about here, where the province is 
cutting its funding, they’re using the municipal revenue sharing 
as the justification for the cuts. But I think if you talked to any 
municipal authority including the RMs or this urban 
municipalities, they’ve expressed grave concerns that although 
the municipal revenue and sharing is now tied to the PST, that 
still these cities are growing, and that the costs of running these 
programs is also increasing as well. 
 
And I think the example that we see with the Meewasin Valley 
Authority is a good example of how they’ve managed to deal 
with the funding levels have been decreasing per capita on a 
very drastic basis. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, many members 
opposite have seen these numbers, particularly the members 
from Saskatoon, I’m sure will have seen the numbers where the 
level of funding per capita in Saskatoon for the Meewasin 
Valley Authority has dramatically decreased. The city has done 
what it can and continues to do that and continues to increase 
funding as best they can. But I think what’s missing in this 
framework here — and we heard the Minister of Highways talk 
about early today in relation to Prince Albert — is that there are 
provincial responsibilities involved with these kinds of 
municipal projects. And for the government to off-load onto 
already strapped municipal authorities is unfair. I think it’s 
mean-spirited.  
 
And these are small, small cuts. When we look in this case, I 
think the provincial government was providing — I’m just 
going to check section 56 to be sure here because that’s the 
section — $127,000, Mr. Speaker, $127,000 when we’re 
looking at a deficit of over 1 billion. I think $1.7 billion. So this 
is less than one per cent. It’s probably, I don’t know how many 
zeros. I have to take out my calculator to figure it out, but 
$127,000.  
 
Are you kidding me, Mr. Speaker? I mean this is something that 
the city needs. They rely on it. They don’t have any ability to 
raise the funds any other way, and unless they start charging 
people admission to these parks, it’s going to be a loss that’s 
going to be felt by many, many people. And as you know, Mr. 
Speaker, I think if you take a stroll in any one of these urban 
parks in Saskatchewan, you’re going to see people enjoying 
them that are people that don’t have high levels of income as 
much as other people do. And you see families out enjoying 
being in the beautiful Saskatchewan weather. If anybody took a 
stroll this weekend on the Meewasin Valley . . . I know I often 
see families having barbecues and enjoying what mother nature 
has to provide in our beautiful urban parks. 
 

So these kinds of cuts are mean-spirited and they’re painful, 
Mr. Speaker. They’re painful to the communities. They’re 
painful to the people who use the parks for their enjoyment, and 
they’re painful to the people who come to visit. And whenever I 
have friends come to visit in Saskatoon, that’s the first 
suggestion is to go walk along the Meewasin Valley. It’s only, 
you know, four blocks from my house, and this is something 
I’m very proud of and very glad that our governments, our 
provincial government and our federal government and our 
municipal governments all support because it takes all levels of 
government to make these projects viable. 
 
And I think this off-loading $127,000, really, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s something that’s really hard to understand, why that kind 
of money couldn’t be located when we’re finding millions of 
dollars for other projects — $127,000. I really have difficulty 
understanding what the motivation is here for this government 
to make those kinds of petty cuts when they know the hardships 
it’s going to put on the rural municipalities and the urban 
municipalities where these parks are located. 
 
So I’m not sure what the minister is hearing from other folks 
who are concerned. I know there’s been a lot of concern about 
changes and cuts to the Meewasin Valley Authority because of 
the parsimonious nature of these types of cuts. And it’s really 
hard to believe that this government is doing that at this point 
when this payment has been in place for over 20 years I think, 
Mr. Speaker, certainly since 1997 and possibly longer. That’s 
the last time this section was amended, was in 1997, so we’re 
looking at at least 20 years. So record revenues, and here we 
are. Cuts like this, $127,000 to a small urban park in a beautiful 
city where people rely on this kind of support from their 
provincial government — where their tax dollars are going — 
and they see these kinds of cuts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m just going to talk a little bit about the actual 
mechanics of the bill. There’s a number of sections here. 
Section 5(9) is being amended, and the only . . . It’s a correction 
being made there where there’s been a name change to another 
bill, so it’s being reflected here in this bill as well. It’s no longer 
The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act, 2007. It’s 
just The Legislative Assembly Act, 2007. So that makes sense. 
 
Section 56 is being repealed and replaced, and this is the one 
where we see this mean-spirited and small, painful cut that is 
being made to the Wakamow Valley Authority. So originally 
the way this section was set up was that there were three parties 
that would pay amounts to the authority, the Wakamow Valley 
Authority. First of all, the city itself, which is continuing under 
the bill to pay $190,500 to the authority. And this section (b) is 
the one that really hurts This is where they’re just cutting it out: 
“in the case of the government, $127,000” — $127,000. 
 
And again the language that the minister is using is controlling 
spending and providing savings. This doesn’t provide savings to 
anyone, Mr. Speaker. It just causes pain and hardship for the 
people that enjoy these kinds of wonderful opportunities that 
are the responsibility of government. I don’t know why they 
think it’s not their responsibility anymore. Why do we pay 
taxes? It’s for those services that we could enjoy. So if they 
can’t balance that out, $127,000, it just seems so mean-spirited, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 



500 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2016 

The third party that pays in this is clause (c) of section 56, 
which is now becoming (b), is the rural municipalities. Each 
rural municipality that participates in the authority is required to 
pay $1,500. It’s not clear to me how many RMs are actually 
involved in the Wakamow Valley Authority, but they would 
pay a small stipend as well of $1,500. Not a lot of money, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’m not sure how many RMs would be 
contributing. I don’t think it would be a large number. So that 
certainly isn’t going to help with the loss of that $127,000. 
 
Probably . . . Well at least two-thirds of the funding that the city 
already pays, and I don’t know where the city’s going to find 
that extra $127,000 to just maintain the level of funding that the 
Wakamow Valley Authority has. And certainly I can imagine 
their expenses are going up as well. We know that the power 
bill is going up by 10 per cent for sure, Mr. Speaker, or more 
than 10 per cent. They’re going to have other increased costs for 
staffing, and to fix this statutory amount and remove it in this 
way is one that’s going to cause severe hardship, I would say, 
for that authority to carry on with its business. 
 
[16:45] 
 
I’m obviously more familiar with the Meewasin Valley 
Authority and have met with them on a number of occasions, 
raised it in committee with the minister and the former minister 
as well, about the need for attention to make sure these parks 
are maintained. 
 
And we see what happens now. We’re losing I think three jobs 
in Saskatoon in the Meewasin Valley Authority. They’re 
closing the centre, the beautiful centre that has been in place 
serving the public, serving tourists, serving the members of the 
community for years, and it’s closing. So that’s the interpretive 
centre is closing. That was announced last week because there’s 
no funding. And their funding has been so undercut. I don’t 
know that Wakamow Valley Authority, with the statutory levels 
being set as they are, would be in any better situation than the 
Meewasin Valley Authority. 
 
And certainly we want to take an opportunity as these bills go 
forward to talk to the people that live in Moose Jaw. We want 
to talk to the city council. We want to talk to the rural 
municipalities that have contributed over the years and whose 
citizens also enjoy the pleasures of that urban park. So it’s 
unfortunate that we see this clause 56 being changed in this 
way. 
 
The next section that’s being changed or repealed is section 57, 
which of course follows from section 56. The clause currently 
reads as follows: “Any sums payable by the government 
pursuant to section 56 are to be paid out of the general revenue 
fund.” So it’s a very clear intent of the legislature . . . This is 
back in 1980 so this looks like this has been in place for over 30 
years. We’ve been through a lot of rough times in those 30, 35 
years, 36 years, Mr. Speaker, and we’ve always managed to see 
our provincial government contribute in a meaningful way to 
the operation of this authority. So because there’s no more 
government payment under this statute we of course would 
have to see section 57 repealed. And that’s just part of this 
mean-spirited cut that we see from the budget coming forward, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

The next section of the bill that’s being changed is section 61. 
In that bill, again it’s just to adjust so that we no longer refer to 
the provincial government’s contribution under this statute. And 
it used to read: “One-fourth of each of the sums to be paid by a 
participating party during a fiscal year . . . becomes due . . .” 
And there was quarterly payments that were due under this 
section. And they’re referring to participating parties, but of 
course the government’s no longer part of the party, Mr. 
Speaker. They’ve left and so we have to amend this section as 
well. 
 
Section 61 just now refers to participating parties but not to the 
provincial government because they’re no longer involved in 
the funding of this particular authority, the Wakamow Valley 
Authority. The clause obviously still applies to the other 
funding partners which in this case, as mentioned earlier, are 
the city of Moose Jaw and the rural municipalities that also 
participate. 
 
The next one that’s being changed is section 62. And here we 
have the clause . . . There’s a number of housekeeping changes 
that are being made here, it appears, but really since the 
government is no longer a funding party, they’re repealing this 
section and replacing it with a clause that still applies to the 
other funding parties but not to the government. So I don’t 
really see any changes on this other than reference to an 
authority, an amount . . . Oh, sorry, I’m going to restate that. 
The change that’s here is that it refers to an authority that is 
required to pay an amount. So obviously in this case it’s no 
longer the provincial government but it is the city itself and the 
rural municipalities. So it makes it very, very clear that no 
longer is the Government of Saskatchewan a participating 
partner in this particular bill. 
 
The next one that is being changed is section 63, and again this 
is the reference to participating parties under section 56(1). 
Then we will be able to again remove the government as one of 
the participating parties. And I’m just going to look at the 
specific changes to section 63(3). It’s about temporary loans 
and repayment of temporary loans. So this is the section that 
allows the authority to actually borrow money and pay them in 
a reasonable and responsible fashion to make those repayments. 
But the aggregate of the sum . . . So section 3 talks about the 
total or aggregate of the sum that can be borrowed. And they’re 
saying it can’t, they can’t borrow more than one-half . . . Now 
what does it say now? It says one-half of the total of the 
amounts payable by the participating parties to section 56(1) in 
respect to that fiscal year. So it’s being changed now to read, by 
the city and to the rural municipalities. 
 
So again because we’re losing a significant amount of the 
funding that’s available to Wakamow, this is going to also 
affect their ability to do their business because their ability to 
borrow sums is now cut considerably, Mr. Speaker. Indeed half 
of $130,000 is $75,000 of borrowing room that . . . 127, so that 
is sixty-three five, $63,500 is no longer available to them under 
the borrowing limits. I’m not sure why the government decided 
to leave it at one-half because obviously that will have an 
impact on the authority’s ability to do business. 
 
One of the, I guess, the intent of the section there is to ensure 
that they don’t over exceed their borrowing amounts. But if 
they want to do any kind of capital improvements, this will 



June 13, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 501 

certainly limit their ability to be able to look after their changes 
or the improvements that they need to do. And again because 
these are statutory sums . . . and as I pointed out earlier, the 
amounts haven’t changed, I can tell, since 1997. So these 
statutory amounts have been fixed for almost 20 years. It’s 
$127,000 that the government is no longer making available 
under statute. And I think the only thing we can hope is that this 
government will find ways to make that money available 
through other means if it’s outside of the statutory exemption 
that the Act currently provides. 
 
We know that in this budget there’s other bodies that are being 
affected as well. There’s been a number of other cities that have 
received the same kind of news. Again I don’t know what kind 
of statutory requirements are in place for those, because this is 
the only bill that we’re dealing with at this point in time. But I 
think the cuts there are obviously being done through other 
means if not through specific bills. 
 
And as I mentioned earlier, the minister’s characterization of 
this is really unfortunate because he just simply can’t use the 
word cut. He seems to be averse to the word, and yet that’s the 
most descriptive thing we have when we talk about what’s 
going on here in this particular bill. 
 
And you know, I just think again about the Meewasin Valley 
Authority and the importance it has to the people of Saskatoon. 
If you recall, Mr. Speaker . . . I’m sure you’ve probably even 
taken family and visitors out to the Beaver Creek place where 
there’s lots of activities for kids so that children can understand 
how beavers can change a river system and how they affect the 
geography of the place. We have two amazingly talented 
biologists who are losing their jobs now because of the impact 
of the cuts, the impact of the failure of this government to even 
increase funding when, as you know, all their costs are going up 
much higher. 
 
And again, what we see is with the government’s new version 
of revenue sharing in terms of 1 per cent of the PST, they’re 
saying to municipalities effectively, deal with it. It’s your 
problem now; we’re not going to be helping you out any more 
and this is your responsibility. 
 
And as you know, Mr. Speaker, it’s very difficult for rural 
municipalities and urban municipalities to make those kinds of 
revenue adjustments when it means they’re the ones that are 
going to have to raise the taxes. It’s just pushing it down the 
line. And we see that in a number of instances in this budget 
where the government, instead of supporting relevant and 
positive programs such as the Wakamow Valley Authority . . . 
And I don’t know if this is part of transformational change. If it 
is, Mr. Speaker, I don’t like it. Because transformational change 
doesn’t mean . . . I hope to goodness it doesn’t mean a series of 
mean-spirited, small cuts that are going to nickel and dime the 
people of Saskatchewan when we know the structural problems 
that we see in this budget go way beyond $127,000. It goes way 
beyond $1.127 million. It goes way beyond $100.027 million. 
We’re talking about billions of dollars, Mr. Speaker, and this is 
not going to deal with that issue. 
 
When we see structural spending at limits that have never been 
imagined before, and borrowing to boot to support that 
spending, Mr. Speaker, why would we look at cuts like this 

$127,000 that’s been in place for almost 20 years in a bill that’s 
been around for over 35 years? Like, surely to goodness, 
transformational change doesn’t mean picking away at small 
programs like this. 
 
And we have to really wonder what sort of discussions this 
government is going to undertake when it looks at what 
transformational change is. We know the minister’s indicated 
that everything’s up for grabs. Everything’s up for grabs. So we 
have pundits asking now, well does that mean the number of 
MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] is up for grabs? 
Very interesting question, Mr. Speaker. And we’ll look forward 
to those discussions as the government begins its broad review 
of all the programs that are in place and deciding what the role 
of government is. 
 
As I pointed out in my budget speech, Mr. Speaker, why now? 
That’s the good question. Why is the government just now 
deciding it wants to decide what program roles are? It’s been 
around for over eight years, and now is when it’s starting to 
decide whether programs are available. That kind of planning 
makes me worry about our future. And I think it’s reflected 
very clearly in what we see here today, because if these 
picayune cuts, when we’re looking at over $1 billion in debt, 
are how this government is going to deal with the big problem, 
it’s like putting a Band-Aid on an amputation, Mr. Speaker. It 
just doesn’t make any sense. 
 
This government needs to take responsibility for its 
uncontrolled spending. It needs to take responsibility for the 
fact that it blew through the best revenues we’ve ever seen as a 
province in the last few years. And now that we see that 
revenue declining to make it a smaller percentage of the 
revenues that we take from the taxpayers, that we take from our 
Crowns, and that our natural resource revenues aren’t going to 
be the be-all and end-all for us this year in our budget, then we 
have to see a government take responsibility for that. And as far 
as I’m concerned, Mr. Speaker off-loading this onto smaller 
urban centres like Wakamow Valley Authority are just plain 
mean-spirited. 
 
I know that other of my colleagues are going to want to be able 
to get in on this discussion, Mr. Speaker, and given the late hour 
that we’re in right now, at this point I would move that we 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 25, An Act to amend The Wakamow 
Valley Authority Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has adjourned debate on Bill No. 
25, The Wakamow Valley Authority Amendment Act, 2016. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. To facilitate the work of committees later this day, I 
move that this Assembly do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that this Assembly do now 
adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 



502 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2016 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly now stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:59.] 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Tell ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 469 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 469 
  Ottenbreit .................................................................................................................................................................................. 469 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 469 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 469 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 469 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 470 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 484 
  Bonk ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 494 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 470 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 470 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 470 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Standing Against Hatred and Violence 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 471 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 471 
 New Wheat Breeding Facility Opens at Pike Lake 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 471 
 Remembering Gordie Howe 
  Cheveldayoff .............................................................................................................................................................................. 471 
 Autism Speaks Canada Walk 
  Merriman .................................................................................................................................................................................. 472 
 Moose Javian Wins Miss Universe Canada 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 472 
 Freedom of the City Parade in Moose Jaw 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................... 472 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Number of Saskatchewan Companies Working on Regina Bypass Project 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 472 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 473 
 Provincial Economy and Support for the Oil Industry 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 473 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 473 
 Carbon Capture and Storage Facility 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 474 
  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 474 
 Number of Young Offenders in Custody 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 474 
  Tell ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 475 
 Funding for Education 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 475 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 475 
 Second Bridge for Prince Albert 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 476 
  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 477 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Healthy Families Initiative 
  Tell ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 477 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 477 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 30 — The Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 478 
 Bill No. 31 — The Local Authority Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 478 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................... 478 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Merriman .................................................................................................................................................................................. 479 
 



 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 18 — The Credit Union Central of Saskatchewan Act, 2016 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 479 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 479 
 Bill No. 27 — The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur les services de l’état civil 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 480 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 481 
 Bill No. 21 — The Growth and Financial Security Repeal Act 
  Doherty ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 483 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 483 
 Bill No. 22 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2016 
  Doherty ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 492 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 493 
 Bill No. 23 — The Liquor Retail Modernization Act/Loi de modernisation du commerce des boissons alcoolisées 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 496 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 496 
 Bill No. 24 — The Liquor Retail Modernization Consequential Amendments Act, 2016 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 497 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 497 
 Bill No. 25 — The Wakamow Valley Authority Amendment Act, 2016 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 498 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 498 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ON BILLS 
 Bill No. 18 — The Credit Union Central of Saskatchewan Act, 2016 ......................................................................................... 482 
 Bill No. 27 — The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur les services de l’état civil ................... 482 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 18 — The Credit Union Central of Saskatchewan Act, 2016 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 482 
 Bill No. 27 — The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur les services de l’état civil 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 483 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


	SECOND READINGS
	(continued)

