






















































Hansard: November 03, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 36A  THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 3, 2016, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (Ind.) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10; Independent (Ind.) — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1117 
 November 3, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you I’d like to introduce friends of mine in the west 
gallery, Randy and Sandra Clark. Randy was my campaign 
manager and Sandra was my business manager, so it’s my 
pleasure to introduce them. And also, Mr. Chair, if I could, as 
you know, this is Movember month and I am participating, and 
I’m participating . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, you can 
tell. You can tell. And I am participating, Mr. Speaker. Randy is 
proof of that. He’s a survivor of cancer and has a clean bill of 
health. So I ask all members to welcome them to their 
Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to the rest of the House today, 
two special guests in the east gallery. They’re friends from 
Moose Jaw, members of Unifor: Bill Lawson and Lorne Hill. 
They are here to observe the procedures and proceedings and to 
meet with some folks afterwards. So I would ask all members to 
welcome them to their legislature. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow and the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you. I’d like to also say hi to Bill and 
Lorne. It’s been a while since we worked together but a couple 
of old co-workers from my days at SaskTel, and we’ll be 
having a meeting with them later, so looking forward to sitting 
down and having a chat with them. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This 
brings me great pleasure to introduce some special guests in the 
House today and also on the floor of the Assembly. I have some 
of my friends from the château Marian, which is in my 
constituency. They’re here for a tea and a tour — no ice cream, 
I don’t think. They’re here for a tea and a tour today. I would 
like to especially welcome one of them who is my 
mother-in-law, seated here on the floor of the gallery. Ginny, 
would you give a wave? So it brings me great pleasure to have 
them here today. Would you join me in welcoming them to 
their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve got some 
special guests in the west gallery as well from the 
Saskatchewan House of Prayer. And some of them are from 

Moose Jaw, and I thought it would be fitting to thank them for 
their participation and their prayers for all of us. They are 
sitting in the west gallery: David Murray, Dianne Green, 
Barbara Brown, and from my constituency, Agnes Slavin. 
 
Agnes was very instrumental just after the ’07 election that 
wrote us a very nice letter to me and my wife and 
congratulating and prayers, and I’ve still got a copy of that 
sitting on my bulletin board because it was so very touching. 
 
Joining them is Tamara Johnson of Regina. And I’d ask all 
members to welcome to their Legislative Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Gardiner 
Park. 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on our 
province. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Regina, 
Saskatchewan. I’d like to present it. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise a 
petition again in this House to reverse the cuts to the Lighthouse 
program, Mr. Speaker. The petitioners point out that in April of 
2014, the Minister of Social Services said the Lighthouse in 
Saskatoon would “. . . take pressure off existing detox facilities, 
hospitals and police cells, while keeping people safe, especially 
in our brutally cold winters.” That same day, Mr. Speaker, the 
Minister of Health said, “We want to ensure that individuals 
with mental health and addictions issues have a safe place to 
stay.” 
 
And this government . . . The petitioners point out that this 
government has repeatedly indicated that the Lighthouse 
stabilization unit keeps individuals out of hospital emergency 
rooms and jail cells. In light of the pressure on the Saskatoon 
Health Region and our hospitals, Mr. Speaker, obviously the 
Lighthouse isn’t the whole issue, Mr. Speaker, but the cut to the 
Lighthouse certainly does not help. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately reverse 
their recent cuts to funding that allows extremely 
vulnerable people to access the services of the Lighthouse 
stabilization unit in Saskatoon, and revisit their imposition 
of a strict and narrow definition of homelessness in 
November of 2015 which forced the Lighthouse to cut 



1118 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2016 

back its hours of essential services in February of 2016, 
and take immediate steps to ensure the homeless people in 
Saskatchewan have emergency shelter, clothing, and food 
available to them before more lives are lost. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens of 
Weyburn, Langham, and Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
also pleased to stand in my place today to present a petition 
around the northern teacher education program, the NORTEP 
program. And the prayer that reads as follows: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan call on the Saskatchewan Party government 
to immediately restore funding to the northern teacher 
education program. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re getting these petitions signed from all 
throughout the province. On these number of pages that I’m 
presenting today, some of the people that have signed the 
petition are from Regina. Some are from Moose Jaw. Some are 
from Lumsden. Some are from Saskatoon. Some are from 
Yorkton; Melville, Mr. Speaker; Spruce Home; and the list goes 
on and on. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition regarding the wetlands in Saskatchewan. Wetlands 
serve a very vital function in our ecosystem. They take the form 
of marshes, bogs, fens, swamps, and open water. Wetlands are 
home to wildlife, including waterfowl. They clean the water 
running off of agricultural fields. They protect us from flooding 
and drought, and they are a playground where families can 
explore and play and duck hunt. In the worst cases, such as 
some areas on the prairies, as much as 90 per cent of our 
wetlands have disappeared. As they continue to disappear so 
too do the many benefits they provide. I’d like to read the 
prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the Government of Saskatchewan to: 
 
Increase funding to do the proper inventory work, putting 
Saskatchewan in a better position to manage the water 
resource; 
 
Speed up the evaluation of high-risk watersheds where 
there is significant damage annually from flooding. This 
evaluation must include a recognition of drainage works 
that could be closed or restored that will alleviate some of 
the issues downstream with respect to flooding and nutrient 
loading; 
 
Create a sound and transparent mitigation process that 
adequately addresses sustainable development. The 
sequence should first focus on avoiding the environmental 
harm whenever possible, before a secondary focus on 
minimizing the harm with compensation being sought only 

when the development is deemed essential and the first two 
stages cannot be met. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it is signed today from individuals from 
Saskatoon, Spruce Home, Yorkton, Regina, Moose Jaw, and 
Lumsden. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition in support of Wakamow Valley Authority in Moose 
Jaw and that we know that as a result of the passage of The 
Wakamow Valley Authority Amendment Act, 2016 on June 30, 
the Wakamow Valley Authority lost its statutory funding of 
$127,000 from the Saskatchewan government in addition to its 
$30,000 in supplementary funding. This loss of annual funding 
negatively affected the ability of Wakamow to maintain its 
lands and repair its facilities and provide services to the 
community of Moose Jaw. 
 
This funding cut resulted in a layoff of one-third of the park 
staff, which included two summer students and two regular 
employees. But, Mr. Speaker, on June 21, 2016, the provincial 
government voted in favour of this bill, resulting in cuts to 
Wakamow and subsequent job losses. I’d like to read the 
prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to immediately repeal The Wakamow Valley Authority 
Amendment Act, 2016 and reinstate statutory funding to the 
Wakamow Valley Authority. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
the city of Moose Jaw. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
stand here today to present the petition condemning the Sask 
Party cuts to the SAID [Saskatchewan assured income for 
disability] program. After nearly a decade of wasting the 
economic boom and blowing through the savings, the 
government is now forcing the province’s most vulnerable 
people to pay for the Sask Party mismanagement. 
 
The Sask Party’s latest cold-hearted cut will take money away 
from people who are unable to work due to a disability; that 
many people who are being hurt by this Sask Party cut live with 
serious illnesses such as multiple sclerosis, cancer, autism, 
among other illnesses; and that contrary to the Minister of 
Social Services’s claims, the government underfunds clients in 
regards to shelter allowance and that shelter allowance should 
be reflective of the current rental costs. I’ll read the prayer: 
 



November 3, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1119 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to stop their plan to cut 
the SAID funding and immediately restore funding for 
those living with a disability; that shelter allowance is 
reflective of the current rental costs; and that the 
Saskatchewan Party government implement the 
recommendations of the advisory group on poverty 
reduction. 

 
Mr. Speaker, people who signed this petition come from all 
over Saskatchewan. They come from the communities of 
Moose Jaw, Regina, Spruce Home, White City, Yorkton, 
Saskatoon, and Melville. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition in 
support of a sexual abuse prevention curriculum in 
Saskatchewan. Those signing the petition wish to draw our 
attention to the following: Saskatchewan has the second highest 
rate of sexual child abuse in Canada. Statistics show that one in 
three girls and one in six boys will be sexually abused by the 
age of 18. 
 
Sexual child abuse has lasting impacts throughout the lifespan, 
Mr. Speaker, with those impacts including mental health 
impacts, PTSD [post-traumatic stress disorder], depression, 
anxiety, panic attacks, and low self-esteem. Other effects 
include reduced school attendance and achievement, decreased 
productivity throughout their lifespan. Victims of sexual child 
abuse are four times more likely to commit suicide, and 
currently there is no comprehensive elementary or secondary 
curriculum regarding prevention and reporting of child abuse in 
Saskatchewan. I will read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan Ministry of 
Education take immediate concrete steps to develop and 
implement Erin’s law. Such legislation would ensure that a 
comprehensive health education program be developed and 
implemented which would require age-appropriate sexual 
abuse and assault awareness and prevention education in 
grades pre-K through 12, along with the proper training of 
school staff on the prevention of child abuse. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those signing this petition today reside in Yorkton, 
Hagen, Saskatoon, Spruce Home, and Regina. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition calling for a stop to the Sask Party plan to sell 
off SaskTel. The petitioners point out that after nearly a decade 
of wasting the economic boom and blowing through the 
savings, the government is now forcing Saskatchewan people to 
pay for Sask Party mismanagement. They point out that in the 
recent election campaign the Sask Party promised that it would 
not privatize SaskTel. And, Mr. Speaker, the petitioners are 
calling on this government to keep all of that promise and not 
just 51 per cent of that promise. 
 

In the prayer that reads as follows, the petitioners 
respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan call on the Saskatchewan Party government 
to keep their promise, stop their plan to sell off SaskTel, 
and keep our valued Crown corporation in the hands of the 
people of Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular group of petitions is signed by 
individuals from Prince Albert, White City, Yorkton, Regina, 
and Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I once again rise in 
the House today to present a petition calling on the government 
to reverse the cuts to the Aboriginal court worker program. The 
Government of Saskatchewan cut the budget for the Aboriginal 
court worker program in the 2016-2017 provincial budget, and 
those on this side of the House know that Aboriginal court 
workers play an important role helping Aboriginal people in 
criminal and child apprehension cases. Aboriginal peoples are 
disproportionately represented in Saskatchewan’s correctional 
centres, and Aboriginal court workers successfully help to make 
our communities safer through reduced recidivism rates. 
 
[10:15] 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan reverse its 
short-sighted and counterproductive cuts to the Aboriginal 
court worker program. 
 

Those signing the petition today are from Swift Current, Ituna, 
and Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. I do submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 

Rally Supports Pipelines and the Oil and Gas Industry 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past Monday I 
had the privilege of attending a rally organized by the mayor of 
White City, Bruce Evans, who happens to be seated in the west 
gallery. It was in support of pipelines, pipeline expansion, and 
our oil and gas industry. 
 
I was joined by the Minister for the Economy; MP [Member of 
Parliament] for Regina-Qu’Appelle, Andrew Scheer; mayor of 
White City, Bruce Evans; and SARM [Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities] president, Ray Orb. Court 
Klein, on behalf of the steelworkers’ union at Evraz Place, was 
also present and spoke about the importance of the energy 
industry in our province. 
 
There are five oil pipelines owned by Enbridge and one major 
natural gas pipeline owned by TransGas that operate daily 
through White City. The pipelines safely deliver 2.2 million 
barrels of oil to markets in the northeastern United States and 
eastern Saskatchewan on a daily basis. 



1120 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2016 

This rally demonstrates how vital the oil and gas industry is to 
our province and validates the fact that it is such an important 
economic driver in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I ask all 
members to join me in recognizing Enbridge and TransGas for 
successfully operating pipelines and a major natural gas 
pipeline through White City for over 60 years. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Resident’s Efforts Bring World Broomball 
Championship to Regina 

 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, the 2016 World Broomball 
Championships are currently being held in Regina. Over 1,000 
coaches and athletes with teams from around the world are here 
for the five-day tournament. Broomball has its roots right here 
in Saskatchewan with the first game ever recorded being played 
in Perdue on March the 5th, 1909. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to acknowledge Don Black, the 
president of Saskatchewan Broomball Association. Don worked 
tirelessly in Japan during the last tournament, lobbying for 
Regina to host the tournament. Don has been a broomball 
player for the last 30 years and president of the association for 
the past eight. Don is an admirable individual, a long-time 
supporter and campaign manager. He’s known as a hard worker 
and a strong advocate for working people. The first time I met 
Don, he was volunteering his time for a municipal campaign 
school.  
 
In addition to his tireless community work, Don is a family 
man. He and his wife, Tracy, make their home in Regina 
Lakeview. Don has four daughters and five grandchildren, and 
the youngest is only weeks old. 
 
Don is also fighting the biggest battle of his life. This past June 
he was diagnosed with terminal cancer. But that didn’t stop his 
love of broomball and his determination to see the world 
championship brought to his hometown. His goal is now to 
attend the 2018 games. We sincerely hope that he achieves that 
goal, like so many others that he has set and achieved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would invite all members to join me in 
celebrating Don and the Broomball World Championships. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 
 

Increasing Access to Medical Imaging Services  
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Patients in Prairie 
North Health Region will soon have access to faster, safer 
medical imaging services once the aging computerized 
tomography, CT scanners, at Battlefords Union Hospital and 
Lloydminster Hospital are replaced. Our government is pleased 
to provide 1.2 million in infrastructure funding, half the cost for 
the purchase and installation of the new equipment. The 
Battlefords Union Hospital Foundation and Lloydminster 
Region Health Foundation have each committed to raising the 
remaining 600,000 K for their respective community scanners. 
 
Since 2007-08, CT scan capacity in Saskatchewan’s health 

system has increased by 40 per cent to about 105,000 patients in 
2015-16. During that same period, overall health system 
spending on medical imaging has increased by 70 per cent to 
143 million. With the addition of the new CT unit at St. 
Joseph’s Hospital in Estevan earlier in 2016, there are now 15 
CT scanners accessible in the health system across 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to increasing access 
to medical imaging technology for patients by continuing to 
invest in technologies in the public system while also 
introducing The Patient Choice Medical Imaging Act in June of 
this year. The expansion of CT capacity in both the public and 
private sector will increase our ability to increase demand for 
advanced diagnostic services while reducing wait times. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

Award-Winning Authors Tell the Saskatchewan Story 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would like to 
take the opportunity to recognize the accomplishments of two 
very distinguished authors and historians from Saskatchewan, 
Dr. James Daschuk and Dr. Bill Waiser. Daschuk’s book, 
Clearing the Plains, is a story of disease, the politics of 
starvation, and the loss of indigenous life and has been awarded 
the Governor General’s History Award for scholarly research 
and the Saskatchewan Book Award, as well as several other 
literary awards. 
 
And just this fall, Mr. Speaker, the Literary Review of Canada 
has named Clearing the Plains as one of the 25 most influential 
books published in Canada in the last 25 years. Since the book’s 
publication in 2013, over 10,000 copies have been sold, and it 
continues to be considered required reading for all Canadians 
that should be taught in every school across the country. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, most recently Dr. Bill Waiser has been 
awarded the 2016 Governor General’s Literary Award for 
non-fiction for his book, A World We Have Lost: Saskatchewan 
Before 1905. The Governor General’s awards jury praised the 
book for its ability to surprise the reader with a new approach to 
Canada’s history, stating, “In a sweeping blend of narrative 
historical detail and compelling images, Waiser refocuses the 
country’s story by putting indigenous peoples and 
environmental concerns in the foreground.” 
 
A World We Have Lost is one of over a dozen publications by 
Waiser that highlights Canada’s western history. Bill Waiser is 
also the recipient of the Saskatchewan Centennial Medal, the 
Saskatchewan Order of Merit, an elected Fellow of the Royal 
Society of Canada, and a distinguished university professor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in 
congratulating James Daschuk and Bill Waiser for their literary 
achievements and for their significant contributions in telling 
the Saskatchewan and the Canadian story. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
North. 
 



November 3, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1121 

Better Together Food Drive 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
with great pride that I stand in the Assembly today and inform 
all members that the 2016 Moose Jaw Better Together Food 
Drive was a resounding success. Mr. Speaker, this annual 
Halloween night initiative started and organized by the Hillcrest 
Apostolic Church is the single biggest food drive of the year for 
the city of Moose Jaw. While kids are out and about on 
Halloween evening trick-or-treating, teams of volunteers are 
also canvassing door to door for non-perishable foods. In most 
cases the packaged donation was set out ready to be picked up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year brought in a record amount of donations; 
yet this year they were able to beat it by collecting 53,000 
pounds of food. Once the food was picked up, it was brought 
back to the Moose Jaw Exhibition convention centre where 
there were more volunteers that created an assembly-type line 
operating to sort the food properly, package it, and crate it, and 
deliver it to the food bank. There is no question that the people 
of the province are some of the most generous in the world and 
this is another excellent example of that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members join in thanking the 
Hillcrest Church and the many volunteers, the donors, and the 
food bank for making this year’s Better Together Food Drive 
another resounding success. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Carrot River Wildcats Win Division 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — It has been quite some time since I talked 
about the Carrot River Wildcats in this Chamber, and I am 
happy to announce the Wildcats six-man football team has 
captured their division for 2016. This is quite an 
accomplishment for a team that is in a rebuilding year and is 
still recovering from the tragic accident that claimed three of 
their teammates last year. The depth of character in these 
players and their coaches has been demonstrated both on and 
off the field. Winning or losing, they are true sportsmen. But I 
do have to point out, they have only lost one game all season. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are proud to call them our team, and that is 
evident every Friday night on the football field. The support 
given them is incredible, but that is in part due to the 
tremendous effort given by them: early morning practice every 
day of the week with the exception of game day. Any spare 
moment, if you were to walk by the football field, you would 
see kids out there practising. Whether they’re just tossing the 
ball around, kicking field goals, or running plays, their love for 
the game is evident. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in 
congratulating the Carrot River Wildcats and head coach Cory 
Schmaltz for winning their division. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 
 
Saskatchewan to Surpass Alberta in New Oil Well Drilling 

 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It wasn’t that long ago 

that Saskatchewan had an NDP [New Democratic Party] 
government. And the idea of Saskatchewan surpassing Alberta 
in new oil well drilling was about as far-fetched as the Cubs 
winning the World Series. 
 
Well yesterday, the Petroleum Services Association of Canada, 
or PSAC, released its 2017 drilling activity forecast. They 
project a total of 1,940 new wells to be drilled in Saskatchewan 
next year compared to 1,900 in Alberta. The president of PSAC, 
Mark Salkeld, had this to say, Mr. Speaker: “Saskatchewan will 
outperform Alberta in wells drilled for the first time in the 36 
years I’ve been in the industry and probably the first time ever.” 
This message from the petroleum industry couldn’t be more 
clear: Saskatchewan is the place they want to be. 
 
When Scotia Waterous Inc. compared 55 oil plays in the US 
[United States] and Canada, 6 of the top 10 oil plays ranked 
profit and investment ratio are right here in Saskatchewan. The 
Fraser Institute rated Saskatchewan as the best province in 
Canada for oil investment in 2015. 
 
Now the NDP want to talk about donations rolling in from 
Alberta, but this is really what is coming to Saskatchewan from 
Alberta — it’s capital and jobs. We know all about that. For 
years we saw jobs and investment flee the province under the 
NDP government. Not anymore, Mr. Speaker, and hopefully 
never again. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Role of the Global Transportation Hub in Land 
Acquisitions 

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the mystery phone call to 
the scandal-plagued former minister at the centre of the 
multi-million dollar GTH [Global Transportation Hub] scandal 
could be cleared up by this government. The minister now 
responsible for the GTH told the media that he could get the 
phone records. Why has the Premier not done that? Why won’t 
he finally commit to do that today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the member’s question rests 
on the preamble where he inferred something of the Minister 
Responsible for GTH which is not correct. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Will he commit to get those phone 
records and bring them to this Assembly and the people of 
Saskatchewan, and clear this up? If he has nothing to hide, this 
shouldn’t be a problem. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well he’s backed 
off of another allegation that he’s made that’s not based on fact. 
Mr. Speaker, I would just say this. The phone records, all the 
documents were made available to the Provincial Auditor. The 
auditor has made her conclusions. The conclusions included in 



1122 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2016 

the press release that accompanied the report: that there was no 
conflict of interest; there was no fraud; there was no 
wrongdoing by members of the board of directors. That 
included the minister. 
 
Yesterday in this House, that member, the leader of the NDP, 
took a drive-by smear run at the member for Kindersley, Mr. 
Speaker. We challenged him to repeat those words outside the 
House but he lacked the courage of his conviction. 
 
This should surprise precisely no one. That’s the same member 
that ran the name of Deveraux, a company in this city, through 
the mud, Mr. Speaker, with allegations of them bribing the 
members of this House — bribing me actually. That was his 
allegation. He had to stand in his place and apologize to the 
Assembly and to the people of the province. That’s the kind of 
conduct we’ve come to expect, sadly, from the Leader of the 
Opposition and I would say, Mr. Speaker, that’s why there’s 
only 10 members on that side of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
[10:30] 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — It’s about time that the Premier deal in 
the truth on the floor of this Assembly. What we know, what we 
know is that both Highways and the GTH were both planning 
for Highways to acquire the land. In fact the minister was 
briefed as late as October in 2012 that this was the plan, for 
Highways to acquire the land. 
 
Then in a strange and costly flip-flop, this scandalous deal was 
brought to cabinet without any due diligence by the minister of 
the GTH or CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan]. How did the Premier let this happen? Why 
didn’t he stop this scandal then and there? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, we know that the 
members opposite are getting desperate. They’re 
misrepresenting, misrepresenting — and I’ll use the 
parliamentary term for what the Leader of the Opposition said 
in his first question — misrepresenting, very explicitly 
misrepresenting what I said in the rotunda. 
 
And this member, the Leader of the Opposition, is developing a 
pattern of this behaviour, Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen that, 
whether it be on what he did in the House yesterday with 
respect to the member from Kindersley, didn’t have the courage 
of his convictions to go and say the same thing as I challenged 
him to do outside of this House. We’ve seen him as well having 
to apologize to the House after being found on the verge of 
contempt of the Assembly for making an accusation about the 
Premier taking a bribe, which was entirely false. The Leader of 
the Opposition had to come to this Assembly on the verge of 
being found in contempt of the Assembly and apologize. That’s 
his record, Mr. Speaker. Desperately, desperately reaching to 
try and create a scandal where none exists, where our Provincial 
Auditor, who has had access to thousands of documents, has 
gone through all of those documents and who made a 
conclusion, Mr. Speaker, that there was no wrongdoing, there 

was no fraud, and there was no conflict of interest. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — The minister can mischaracterize 
whatever he cares to. We’ll go out into that rotunda any day of 
the week and we’ll deal with this scandal that wasted millions 
of dollars. And it’s about time, it’s about time that that Premier 
would actually provide an answer to the people of the province. 
You’d think there’d be an ounce of contrition from a Premier 
who’s wasted millions of dollars and won’t have the backbone 
to provide answers to Saskatchewan people on this front. 
 
You know, since the Premier’s not answering, maybe the 
Minister of Justice will be forthright and answer a few 
questions. He is the one who flagged the first attempt to buy the 
land as a bad deal. He said they couldn’t approve the GTH deal 
because they didn’t know who owned the land. So did he not 
find it strange just a year later when the same deal was back at 
the cabinet table, this time with a higher price and a new name 
on the title? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Once again, the preamble to the Leader 
of the Opposition’s question is wrong. We have responded to 
and addressed every question put to us on this matter. And more 
importantly, Mr. Speaker, and perhaps more authoritatively, the 
Provincial Auditor has addressed every question that was put to 
her with respect to this transaction. She fully canvassed all of 
these matters. She went through thousands and thousands of 
documents with her team of experts. They reached the 
conclusion, Mr. Speaker, which she indicated on her press 
release covering the report when she released it, and her 
conclusion was very, very clear that there was no wrongdoing, 
that there was no fraud, and there was no conflict of interest. 
Subsequent to that, when asked whether there were red flags, 
she said there were no red flags. There were no matters that 
warranted further follow-up. And again her conclusion: no 
wrongdoing, no fraud, no conflict of interest. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Of course the questions were to the 
Premier. No answers. Then the question was to the Justice 
minister. Not an answer. But he was the one that flagged this in 
cabinet. Of course no due diligence, and it was pushed forward 
by the scandal-plagued minister. But it was that Justice minister 
that flagged that it was very concerning that there was not an 
identity on this parcel of land. So did that Justice minister not 
find it questionable and strange that just a year later that deal 
was back at the cabinet table with a higher price tag and a new 
name on the title? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, 
that these questions were fully canvassed, including with the 
support of the opposition who called for the Provincial Auditor 
to look into these matters. 
 



November 3, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1123 

The Provincial Auditor was given a mandate to look into these 
matters in whatever way that she determined to be the most 
effective way of doing so. She conducted, with her team of 
experts, a very, very thorough audit. She issued a report on the 
basis of that audit. She made a number of recommendations 
which we accept. We accept the conclusion of that audit. We 
accept the conclusion that she issued subsequently about there 
being no wrongdoing, no fraud, and no conflict of interest. 
 
And once again, Mr. Speaker, I ask the Leader of the 
Opposition to show his support of the Provincial Auditor, his 
faith in the Provincial Auditor — an independent officer of this 
Assembly — and support those conclusions. The auditor did 
very, very good work, and just because the Leader of the 
Opposition doesn’t like the conclusion she came to, he should 
still support it. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Of course we’re hearing the same tired 
talking points from a minister. The question was to the Minister 
of Justice. It was also to the Premier. No answers. 
 
Of course the auditor’s report was nothing short of scathing; it 
exonerated no one. Of course we have faith in the auditor, but 
we have no faith in this government across the floor. 
 
The question to the Justice minister was pretty straightforward. 
Why was it so important and concerning to the minister the first 
time he saw the deal, but not the second time? What changed? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — There was no deal. 
 
But what I would ask the Leader of the Opposition about 
putting his . . . He says he has faith in the Provincial Auditor. 
He clearly doesn’t, Mr. Speaker. The Provincial Auditor 
canvassed these matters, went through thousands of documents 
with her team of experts, and issued a report on that audit. 
 
The conclusion of that audit, as she enunciated in the press 
release accompanying that report, was that there was no fraud, 
that there was no wrongdoing, and there was no conflict of 
interest. If the Leader of the Opposition truly has faith in the 
Provincial Auditor, despite the fact that he doesn’t like the 
answer and the conclusion that she came to, he should support 
those conclusions. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — No answer again. The question was to 
the Justice minister. 
 
There was another email on December 4th, 2012. The deputy 
minister of Justice emailed the deputy minister of the Premier. 
The emails say that the Minister of Justice “gave me some 
information yesterday morning which we’ve acted on,” and the 
minister “wants to be able to update cabinet tomorrow.” 
 
Straightforward, to the Minister of Justice: what was the 
information they acted on? What was the update to cabinet? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, all of these matters were 
looked into by the Provincial Auditor. The Provincial Auditor 
had access to all of the documents, to all of the emails, had 
access to all of the individuals involved in the transaction — 
literally thousands of documents that she examined with her 
team of experts — and she came to a conclusion at the end of 
that process. She retrospectively looked through all of these 
matters at the request of this Assembly through the Public 
Accounts Committee, and at the request of cabinet through an 
order in council passed. 
 
The conclusion of her office and her team of experts after 
having went through those thousands of documents, including 
the document being referenced by the Leader of the Opposition, 
was that there was no wrongdoing, that there was no fraud, and 
that there was no conflict of interest. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Elimination of Deputy Sheriff Positions 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, the Justice Minister is apparently 
very busy monitoring his cabinet colleagues and their shady 
deals. But, Mr. Speaker, recently he’s had to defend some very 
obvious mistakes of his own. He was wrong about their bill to 
remove requirements for coroners’ inquests. He was wrong 
about their definitions bill. And yesterday he was wrong about 
the 16 deputy sheriffs in Saskatoon, Regina, Prince Albert, 
North Battleford, and Weyburn that they’re throwing out of 
work. 
 
When asked about these sheriffs yesterday, the minister said 
that they are not armed. Mr. Speaker, they are. These sheriffs 
keep our courtrooms and our courthouses safe. How can the 
minister defend firing sheriffs whose jobs he clearly does not 
fully understand? And how can he assure the people of 
Saskatchewan that he is putting public safety ahead of the Sask 
Party desire to cut all that they can? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again we have 
to correct the record. These are not armed positions. These are 
the individuals that man the perimeter screening devices at our 
court facilities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve made a decision that we want to look for efficiencies 
with respect to the delivery of that service, Mr. Speaker. But it’s 
wrong to suggest and it’s wrong to fearmonger with the people 
of Saskatchewan that the court security is going to be 
compromised as a result of this action. These are perimeter 
screening individuals, Mr. Speaker. And I can confirm to the 
House and I can assure the people of Saskatchewan that the 
level of service with respect to the security to staff or the 
judiciary will not change, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re very concerned about courthouse security, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re very concerned about the people that access our court 



1124 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2016 

facilities, whether it’s the judiciary, whether it’s the public, or 
whether it’s people that are in conflict with the system. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I can assure the people of Saskatchewan that the level 
of security will not be compromised and that these are unarmed 
positions. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Role of the Global Transportation Hub in Land 
Acquisitions 

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — So it appears that the Minister of Justice 
has found his feet, found his voice here today. So we’ll go back 
to the question that has been put to him without an answer here. 
 
We know that it was the Minister of Justice that flagged the 
deal that was brought forth by the scandal-plagued minister and 
the CIC minister as a problem with the concealed identity. And 
he was the one that essentially stopped this deal in cabinet. 
 
But the question is, why is it not a bit strange that just a year 
later this deal came back in, with this time a higher price and a 
new name on the title? The question to the Justice minister: 
what changed? 
 
The Speaker: — Minister of the Economy and the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well, thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. The provincial auditor examined all of these matters, 
Mr. Speaker. She went through, with her team of experts, the 
thousands of documents, of emails, all of the records which she 
requested including cabinet documents provided to her by the 
government. 
 
She went through all of those, Mr. Speaker, and she came to a 
conclusion after examining all of those documents. The 
conclusion was that there was no wrongdoing, that there was no 
fraud, and there was no conflict of interest. And once again, Mr. 
Speaker, just because the Leader of the Opposition doesn’t like 
the conclusion that she came to, he should accept it. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Privatization of Crown Corporations 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, they’re making it up as they go 
along. Just look at all the ill-conceived legislation we’re seeing. 
And it’s not just the Ministry of Justice. Look at Finance. For 
two days, the Minister of Finance has laughed off genuine 
concerns that Saskatchewan Crown corporations could be 
subjected to federal corporate income tax if they ever become 
less than 90 per cent publicly owned. Mr. Speaker, that is a 
likely consequence of their too-cute-by-half definition change. 
 
Will the Minister of Finance today admit that this is a problem 
he did not consider? And will he tell us what his plan is to stop 
the possible leak of tens of millions of dollars to Ottawa that, 
until now, he has been trying to cause? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, if the Finance critic, the 

old grim leaper over there, has an offer she would like to put on 
the table with respect to one of our Crown corporations, we 
absolutely would do diligence on that offer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What she is asking are complete hypotheticals, Mr. Speaker. 
What we are dealing with here is The Interpretation Act that 
defines privatization. What she is trying to do is, as I said 
yesterday and the day before, laugh it off because it is 
laughable, Mr. Speaker. There has been no offer on any Crown 
corporation in the province of Saskatchewan. We’re dealing 
with the definition of privatization. 
 
Should there be an offer, Mr. Speaker, an unsolicited offer, by 
all means, as I said yesterday, the Ministry of Finance along 
with Crown Investments Corporation — I’m sure the Ministry 
of Justice would weigh in — we would take a look at the 
aspects of that offer and how it applied to any particular Crown 
corporation. And we’d do our due diligence, Mr. Speaker, on 
the cost-benefit analysis of that particular offer here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. It’s a complete hypothetical, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Quite clearly the 
Minister of Finance did not do his homework. He should spend 
more time working to serve Saskatchewan than memorizing 
attack lines or coming up for excuses for their growing deficit 
and deepening debt. Mr. Speaker, here are his excuses: income 
tax, corporate tax, crops, health care, education, social services, 
even people in jail. And let’s set aside the fact that the Minister 
of Corrections says that’s not really true. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the minister won’t let me help stop him from 
sending tens of millions of dollars in new tax dollars to Ottawa, 
will he at least let me help him with the excuses for their 
deficit? How about a $25 million GTH scandal, a $1.5 billion 
job-killing carbon capture tax, tens of millions in health care 
dollars to an American assembly line consultant, and millions 
wasted on out-of-province contractors? Mr. Speaker, would the 
minister like me to go on? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, given what we’ve seen in 
question period today, how are we to accept as fact the 
preambles or the things that members are saying, including 
what the Justice critic had to say about the issue with the deputy 
sheriffs — wrong on that issue — including what the Leader of 
the Opposition has said about members in this House recently 
and, well, a couple of years ago when he had to rise and 
apologize because they were wrong. 
 
[10:45] 
 
And now this member, this member, we’re to accept her 
preamble to the question. Here’s what she wrote just a few days 
ago to the Shellbrook Chronicle. She said this: “In 2009, the 
Sask. Party introduced and, with the support of the NDP, passed 
into law a plan to make the province’s . . . [big] polluters 
pay . . .” 
 



November 3, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1125 

Mr. Speaker, it’s on the record of this Assembly. They voted 
against that bill in 2009. They voice voted against the bill. They 
opposed the bill in committee and in adjourned debates. How in 
the world are we to believe a word that comes from the other 
side of the House? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Children in Provincial Care 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, last week when we raised 
concerns about children in care being left at hotels, the minister 
said there were nine. Now she agreed that this is still a problem 
but, Mr. Speaker, we heard that from the last minister. In fact 
she promised to end the practice altogether, but it’s still 
happening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the previous Children’s Advocate had serious 
concerns with children in hotel rooms, and we assume the new 
one will as well. Will this minister, like the last minister, 
commit to getting all kids in care out of hotel rooms? But unlike 
the last minister, will she actually do something about it and 
bring an end to this disturbing practice? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the 
member opposite for the question because I’m very, very 
pleased to report that, as of the last two days, we have zero kids 
in hotels as a result of emphasizing that we need to move kids 
into emergency receiving spaces sooner, Mr. Speaker. Thank 
you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, the fact is this issue is getting 
astronomically worse. The minister told us last week nine kids 
were in hotels. That was on one given night. And again the 
minister did acknowledge that even nine were too many. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, let’s look at the fuller picture, the last six 
months. In May there were 30 kids in care placed in hotels; 
June, 11; July, 51; August, 44; September, 38; and in the first 
25 days of October, it was 22. Mr. Speaker, in the first four 
months of 2016 there were five occurrences of kids staying in 
hotel rooms. Then in the subsequent six months, we see this 
number jump to 196 kids. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m happy that the minister has indicated that 
they’re working on this problem. But I want to see what the 
long-term plan is from this government to ensure that no more 
vulnerable kids are placed in hotel rooms. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Mr. Speaker, as I said before, 
the issue of children in care is one that we take very, very 
seriously. It is very sad to report that we cannot control the 
number of children in care. That is, I think, very unfortunate. 
However we have taken and we continue to take serious action 
to address this issue. 

For example, we have 105 spaces in Regina, 46 in Saskatoon, 
27 in P.A. [Prince Albert], and 229 province wide. We are 
opening four new spaces here in Regina at the end of this month 
and 10 more in Yorkton. I’m pleased to report that since we 
launched the foster families awareness program, which we’ve 
talked about in this House before, 17 new families have come 
forward. To say that we are doing nothing on this issue, Mr. 
Speaker, is frankly wrong. It is a serious, very serious matter, 
and we are taking it very, very seriously. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

Donations to Saskatchewan Party 
 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday we pushed 
the Premier to commit to getting big money out of 
Saskatchewan politics, to bring Saskatchewan in line with other 
provinces, to ban corporate, union and out-of-province 
donations to make our democracy more democratic. But, Mr. 
Speaker, the Premier said our system is just fine — just fine for 
him and his friends. 
 
But Mr. Speaker, the Premier relies on some of those 
corporations to pay into a fund his party collects to give him a 
nice, big bonus, just for being the leader. Must be nice. But the 
Premier says these big corporations should have a say in our 
political system. He told the media, “How do you deny them the 
chance to participate in democracy?” Participate? Sounds like 
pay-to-play to me. Saskatchewan democracy is for 
Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. So will the Sask Party work 
with us to get big money out of Saskatchewan politics? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s an interesting conclusion 
coming from my honourable friend. Because if what he says he 
believes, then he would accept the fact that unions were paying 
to play the NDP. That is exactly what he’s saying, because up 
until now, of course, they’ve been able to accept and have 
corporate donations and union donations. If the rationale is that 
that’s all about paying to play, then he should maybe disclose to 
the House what unions got paid back for the money they gave 
to the NDP in terms of influence in their caucus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s true that 10 per cent of donations to the 
Saskatchewan Party come from companies headquartered 
outside the province, Mr. Speaker. We’re actually taking that 
money from other provinces and repatriating it back to 
Saskatchewan, putting it to work in Saskatchewan. 
 
That’s an interesting contrast from the NDP, who in the last 
election, with all of the money they raised from unions and 
individuals, spent 70 per cent of all their campaign expenses 
outside the province of Saskatchewan. They had to hire an 
outside-the-province firm to do their staging and lighting, even 
though we’ve got a lot of companies that do that good work 
right here. They had to, Mr. Speaker, hire a company to help 
them co-ordinate their tour of Saskatchewan from outside 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, when the next election comes 
along in about four years, we want to help them lower their 
expenses on out-of-province companies. We’ve got a map of 
Saskatchewan we can send across the way, Mr. Speaker. 



1126 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2016 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. I request leave to 
introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Central Services has 
requested leave. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the minister. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through and to all the members of the Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce, for those of you who don’t know him, Mayor Bruce 
Evans of White City. He has held the post in White City for 10 
years and has presided over unprecedented growth in the White 
City and area. I want to thank him very much for his 
stewardship in White City and continued success. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, I want to join with the minister 
across and welcome Mayor Bruce Evans also, from White City. 
I look forward to working with you in the future and helping 
grow Saskatchewan. So thanks for coming to your Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Government House Leader on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I believe the House Leader . . . minister has 
asked leave to raise a point of order. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I actually 
have multiple point of orders to bring forward. The first point of 
order, the member from Nutana used the phrase “making stuff 
up” which, on March 25th, 2013 in Hansard, was deemed out 
of order. So I’m wondering if we could address that one first, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure if you’ll review the 
record, that it goes to, you know, certainly it’s well accepted 
that there’s no list or unallowed list of words or phrases that are 
not able to be said. But certainly there’s also a question around 
what motive is imputed with the phrase itself. So I’d ask the 
Speaker to review the record because certainly these questions 
were put in earnest and in accordance with the rules of the 
House. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I was listening closely during debate today 
and I will review Hansard and reserve judgment for a later date. 
I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
In regards to the questions that were brought up in question 
period about the Saskatchewan Party’s political donations, I 
believe those were out of order according to rule 20(2) where 
the scope of questions . . . Questions can be asked in question 
period: 
 

. . . relating to any matter within the administrative 
competence of the government or on matters related to 
individual . . . [ministry’s] responsibility may be asked of a 
Minister of the Crown. Questions on issues not officially 
connected with the government, of a private nature, related 
to Board of Internal Economy, caucus, party or political 
responsibilities are prohibited [Mr. Speaker]. 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Certainly 
the electoral finance law of this province and the expenditure 
that is involved on the part of the, in the province of 
Saskatchewan, when it comes to overseeing the electoral 
finance law of this province, surely to goodness that is a matter 
of responsibility and competence for the Government of 
Saskatchewan. And of course that would then lead to the fact, 
Mr. Speaker, that those questions that were . . . the question that 
was put by the member from Saskatoon Centre were indeed 
well in order. 
 
The Speaker: — I will review Hansard and reserve judgment 
for a later date. Why is the Opposition House Leader on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On a 
point of order. 
 
The Speaker: — What is the nature of your point of order? 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. During 
the first exchange at the start of question period, the Minister of 
the Economy, while the Premier was speaking, shouted over 
that, quote: “That’s an absolute lie.” That is of course 
unparliamentary language, Mr. Speaker, against the rules of this 
place, and I’d urge the Speaker to call on that member to 
withdraw and apologize for that comment. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
don’t think it was on record. I’d ask you to review Hansard and 
check exactly what Hansard captured, because I didn’t hear that 
myself, Mr. Speaker. So I’d ask you to review it. 
 
The Speaker: — Now that we’re half hour out of question 
period, I’d like to once again reserve judgment on this until I 
have a chance to review Hansard. Any other point of orders? I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave to move a 
motion please. 



November 3, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1127 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked 
leave to introduce a motion. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Leaves of Absence 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
move the following motion: 
 

That leaves of absence be granted to the members of 
Saskatoon Willowgrove and Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
for Monday, November 7th to Thursday, November 10th, 
2016 inclusive to attend the Global Elections Organization 
Conference in Washington, DC with the Chief Electoral 
Officer. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — Government House Leader has moved the 
motion: 
 

That leaves of absence be granted to the members of 
Saskatoon Willowgrove and Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
for Monday, November 7th to Thursday, November 10th, 
2016 inclusive to attend the Global Elections Organization 
Conference in Washington, DC with the Chief Electoral 
Officer. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answers to questions 138 and 139. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered responses 
to questions 138 to 139. 
 
[11:00] 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Review of Land Acquisition for Global 
Transportation Hub 

 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 

indeed, it’s a great honour to be able to rise to speak to a motion 
today that I think is very important for the people of 
Saskatchewan, and I will move the motion at the end of my 
comments, Mr. Speaker. But as you know and as was published 
in the order paper, we’re calling on this Assembly to do the 
right thing and to continue to work with the Provincial Auditor. 
 
She did great work back in the spring and she did a lot of 
research and she provided us with a very thorough report. And 
now we are calling upon the government to take it further, the 
next steps that are required. First of all, we think . . . And we’ve 
called for this since February, Mr. Speaker, is a judicial inquiry 
into the goings-on at the GTH land scandal. And then we’re 
also looking for a forensic audit because, Mr. Speaker, a lot of 
the numbers are still in question and we need to get the 
transparency and accountability for the people of Saskatchewan 
that they deserve when millions and millions of our taxpayers’ 
dollars are being wasted and improperly spent. And I mean, 
that’s certainly something that the auditor did agree upon, was 
the mismanagement, the gross mismanagement of taxpayers’ 
dollars. 
 
I think what would really bring this issue to rest too is that this 
government fully co-operate with the RCMP [Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police] in the investigation, any current investigation 
that’s going on, and any investigation in the future. 
 
So time is very limited, Mr. Speaker. And I’ve had an 
opportunity to look at the Provincial Auditor’s comments which 
were delivered on the last day of session in June, if you recall. 
She has a very thorough review of the processes. And indeed in 
her preamble to the report itself she made it very clear that she 
thought that her job in this — and her job is not exhaustive — 
but her role in this is to examine the processes and the 
procedures. And that’s certainly what she’s done. 
 
In fact she said, in her first description of what she decided the 
scope of the audit would be, she decided to do two audits 
concurrently — one on the processes of the GTH and the other 
on processes of the Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
during the periods in question. So we are looking at procedures 
and values, and that’s what this report . . . This is the beginning 
of where we need to look into the Global Transportation Hub 
scandal. 
 
What the auditor didn’t do — and this is what we’re attempting 
to do here in the Assembly, what the media’s attempting to do, 
and the people of Saskatchewan are asking — is we’re trying to 
find out why. The auditor looked at how, and the auditor looked 
at what, but it wasn’t her job to determine why. And those are 
the questions that we have been putting to this government, to 
these cabinet ministers day in and day out in this Assembly 
since we reconvened in October. 
 
And unfortunately, as we saw today again, a complete muzzling 
of cabinet ministers who are not being allowed to answer the 
questions that are being put to them. And we see bluster and 
desperation on the part of the current Minister of the Economy, 
Mr. Speaker. And this is what’s completely unacceptable as far 
as what’s going on with the GTH land scandal. 
 
So I’ve identified a number of the whys in her report that I think 
need to be answered. And that’s what a judicial inquiry would 



1128 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2016 

do, and that’s what a forensic audit would do. And I know I 
won’t have time in the 15 minutes that I have to raise all of the 
whys that come out of the auditor’s report. 
 
I don’t know why this government is treating the auditor’s 
report as final when it’s clearly raised more questions. And 
obviously if they don’t want to answer the questions, you’re 
only led to one conclusion, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So the main question I guess is found on page 4 of her report 
where she identifies that, other than the 245 acres in question, 
the Ministry of Highways and Infrastructure bought all of the 
land for the GTH. 
 
So that’s always been a really burning question for me is, why 
didn’t Ministry of Highways and Infrastructure buy all of it? 
And if you look at all the back and forth between the minister of 
Highways, the member for Indian Head-Milestone — he was 
the minister at the time — he knew what his ministry was up to 
in terms of the bypass. And why didn’t he make those 
recommendations to the then minister of the Economy? Why 
was the deviation from the normal practice undertaken? And 
there’s nothing in this audit that tells us the answer to those 
questions, Mr. Speaker. And these members are not providing 
those answers to the public today. 
 
So you have to question . . . Another question, why? Why aren’t 
they sharing that information? What was it that the former 
minister of Highways knew? And what was he telling the 
former minister of the Economy? So why, why aren’t we 
getting the answers to those questions? 
 
Interestingly enough even though GTH is now apparently 
grown up and ready to take on its own affairs, much of the land 
out of the GTH is still in the name of the Ministry of Highways 
and Infrastructure. So there obviously is a very close 
relationship between those two agencies. Highways is doing all 
the work for GTH right from the get-go. And yet for some 
reason — and we don’t know why — GTH management, 
despite the fact that GTH management recommended that the 
GTH not go ahead with the purchase, there was this rush to 
purchase the land and knowing full well that Highways could 
have expropriated it for a much, much, much, much lower 
price, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
On page 9 of her report, the auditor pointed out the following. 
She said: 
 

Effective land acquisition processes, including planning 
processes, involve identifying what and when land is 
needed, and acquiring necessary land in a 
financially-responsible manner. Ineffective processes to 
acquire land can present risks. These include: 

 
Not acquiring land in a timely or systematic manner 
resulting in increased cost to the taxpayer. 
 

Now as we know, the final contract for the bypass was in place 
in 2014. The planning had been undergoing for many, many 
years prior to that, Mr. Speaker, when this government chose a 
P3 [public-private partnership] to create the bypass. So the 
question is, what happened? Why did this government and this 
cabinet not do the work they were supposed to do to represent 

the people of Saskatchewan? And why did they rely on the 
GTH minister at the time, despite the fact the GTH management 
had recommended that they not purchase the land? 
 
We know that in 2008, as early as 2008, the Ministry of 
Highways told the landowners in question that their land was 
about to expropriated. Well you know, Mr. Speaker, if you tell 
me that my land’s about to be expropriated, I will know that it 
is probably going to go up in value if I sold it. Now if it’s 
expropriated, of course then there’s a different process, and fair 
market value is a moving target in terms of what appraisers will 
value that land at. But knowing it’s expropriated, right away 
that’s a red flag going up for anybody who’s interested in 
flipping real estate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So in 2008, Ministry of Highways notified all these landowners 
of its plan to acquire their lands for the connection route. Now 
of course Highways has expropriation authority. So that’s a 
hammer that they have. For some reason this government 
decided not to give GTH expropriation authority, so they were 
stuck. Why didn’t they go to Highways? They knew they 
could’ve got the land for much cheaper. So again we have the 
question, why? Why did GTH decide to proceed with acquiring 
this land when it was very clear that Highways could have done 
it for much, much cheaper? And I think even the average citizen 
would know that, Mr. Speaker, that if you have expropriation 
rights, you’re not dealing with rampant land speculation. 
 
So that’s a huge question that the report of the auditor was not 
even required to do. She was identifying problems with 
processes and indeed identified a number of very serious, 
serious problems with the processes that were followed. But 
again the questions of why aren’t being answered. 
 
Another question. In June of 2012, the GTH was then looking 
for appraisals for the south and the east parcels. And we know 
the south parcel was appraised at a value of about $15,000 per 
acre, and the east parcel, at that time, was appraised at $17,000 
per acre. I believe we paid $103,000 per acre for that land. 
 
Now at this time, the GTH CEO [chief executive officer] was 
suddenly let go, and we have a new CEO, Mr. Dekker, placed 
on an interim basis. So Mr. Dekker was a good friend of the 
Sask Party, and we know that he was put in very quickly to deal 
with the management of the GTH. The question is, why? Why 
was the former CEO, Mr. Law, replaced in 2012? Why was he 
asked to leave? And we don’t have any answers to that 
question, Mr. Speaker, but we do know that Highways was very 
actively involved at the time.  
 
In fact just a month before, in May of 2012, the GTH CEO told 
the board in writing that the Ministry of Government Services 
and the Ministry of Highways was supposed to manage the 
acquisition of the south and east parcels. So here we have May 
2012, the CEO is saying Highways is going to manage the 
purchase of this land, and in June 2012, that CEO is fired or let 
go. We don’t know what the circumstances were or why. But 
we do know from the auditor’s report the fact is that he told the 
board in writing in May that Highways was to manage the 
acquisition of that land. And then the next month, he’s gone. So 
now what happens? 
 
In 2012, September, GTH received an update on Highways’s 



November 3, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1129 

revised concept design for the west Regina bypass. And guess 
what, Mr. Speaker? The GTH board was told at the time that 
the interchange was expected to consume much of those east 
parcels. So we have a CEO from GTH saying, Highways should 
look after this in May. In September of 2012, the board was told 
that Highways was expected to consume much of the east 
parcels, and the GTH management then recommended that 
Highways be instructed to acquire the east parcels. 
 
So here we are in June and September of 2012, where the board 
and management of the GTH are recommending that Highways 
do the work. They knew Highways had the processes. They 
knew Highways had the skills. They knew Highways had the 
personnel. GTH was in no position to be able to do that. So this 
is September. 
 
And in October of 2012, one month later, the management told 
the Chair and the minister, the former minister of the Economy, 
that the GTH should not proceed with the purchase of the east 
parcels. September of 2012, the board recommended to the 
minister that they not do that purchase and that Highways be 
directed to do that work. So we’re talking September of 2012. 
 
And then we have what happened in October-November, or 
sorry, that was in October. So a month before, the management 
said, let Highways do it. GTH management told the minister to 
let Highways manage it. In 2012, this new CEO then entered 
into a contract with a commercial realtor to immediately pursue 
assembly of the south and east parcels. So this for me, Mr. 
Speaker, is the biggest question why. And the question here is, 
why in October did the management say, let Highways buy it, 
and why in November did they start, the GTH themselves start 
purchasing the land? That is one of the biggest questions that is 
. . . Obviously, this government has no interest in providing 
answers. 
 
And then we get the cabinet involvement. And, Mr. Speaker, 
the cabinet’s involvement was there all along obviously, all 
these ministers reporting to cabinet about what’s going on. But 
then we get this rushed package submitted to cabinet in 
November of 2012. They’re moving that the minister ask the 
government to proceed with the purchase in December of 2012. 
The cabinet received the joint submission, and God knows how 
the CIC got involved in all this at this point, although I think 
GTH had no money because they were having trouble getting 
Kal Tire to come forward. And they thought they had Kal Tire 
in the bag, but something happened and Kal Tire decided to 
step away from the deal. So the minister was left empty-handed. 
He had no money to bring to the table, and so CIC was dragged 
into the issue at this point. 
 
So we have all these cabinet ministers who are directly 
involved: the former minister of Highways and Infrastructure, 
the Minister of the Economy, and now the Minister for Crown 
Investments Corporation. And what happens in December? The 
Minister of Justice says, wait a minute; there’s no due diligence 
here. So this scuppered the whole deal for yet another year. 
 
And unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, there isn’t enough time in this 
debate to continue to ask the questions of why. But I know my 
colleagues are going to have a number of questions as well to 
ask about the why. What was going on in cabinet? What was 
going on with the Minister of Highways? What was going on 

with the Minister of the Economy, the Minister of Crown 
Investments Corporation? Why were they in such a hurry to buy 
this land when a month before the management was saying, let 
Highways buy it, let Highways buy it. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to move the following motion and 
ask the Assembly to support it. I will read the motion for the 
record: 
 

That this Assembly supports the work of the Provincial 
Auditor; and 
 
That this Assembly calls upon the government to launch a 
judicial inquiry and a forensic audit into the GTH land 
scandal so that Saskatchewan people can finally get the 
transparency and accountability they deserve; and further 
 
That this Assembly calls upon the government to fully 
co-operate with any RCMP investigation into the GTH 
land scandal that is currently ongoing or may be launched 
in the future. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I so move. 
 
[11:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana has 
forwarded the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly supports the work of the Provincial 
Auditor; and 
 
That this Assembly calls upon the government to launch a 
judicial inquiry and a forensic audit into the GTH land 
scandal so that the Saskatchewan people can finally get the 
transparency and accountability they deserve; and further 
 
That this Assembly calls upon the government to fully 
co-operate with any RCMP investigation into the GTH 
land scandal that is currently ongoing or may launch in the 
future. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
from Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Bonk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am happy to rise and 
have the opportunity to participate in this debate. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m not sure if the members opposite have been listening to the 
answers the Premier and the Minister Responsible for the GTH 
have been giving in the question period, but they are very clear 
on this topic, especially when it comes to the Provincial 
Auditor’s report. 
 
I’m happy to go through it all again for them. Hopefully this 
time they’ll be listening. 
 
On February 9th of this year, an order in council was signed 
that requested the Provincial Auditor to perform a special audit 
to examine whether or not the Government of Saskatchewan 
followed appropriate procedures and received appropriate value 
with respect to the land acquisition at the Global Transportation 
Hub. Mr. Speaker, this included the examination of any 
transaction leading up to the said acquisition. Section 25 of The 



1130 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2016 

Provincial Auditor Act states: 
 

The provincial auditor may examine any person on any 
matter relating to any account that is subject to an 
examination or audit by him, and, for the purposes of that 
examination . . . 

 
Under that authority the Provincial Auditor released her report 
on June 30th of this year. The auditor did find a number of 
instances where the proper processes were not followed. She 
identified those instances and made recommendations on how 
to address them: two recommendations specifically for the 
Global Transportation Hub Authority, and eight 
recommendations for the Ministry of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government appreciates the Provincial 
Auditor’s quick and thorough work on this and we are 
implementing all 10 recommendations. The Provincial Auditor 
also stated in her news release that “The audit did not find 
evidence of conflicts of interest, or indications of fraud or 
wrongdoing by the GTH management or board of directors,” 
which included the minister. 
 
In a subsequent media interview on July 4th of 2016, the 
Provincial Auditor is quoted as saying: 
 

In any audit, as auditors we’re always looking for red flags. 
And because this is a land transaction, we did look for 
conflicts of interest. We didn’t find [any] evidence of 
conflict of interest or indications of fraud or wrongdoing in 
the course of our work, so there were no red flags there. 

 
This side of the House will listen to the Provincial Auditor and 
her team of experts and follow her recommendations. I find it 
interesting that the members opposite asked the Provincial 
Auditor to look to the GTH but as soon as her findings didn’t fit 
their agenda, they refused to accept her report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it would be nice if the members opposite would 
acknowledge the success that the Global Transportation Hub 
has had this far at growing our economy, because let’s not 
forget the great investment and job creation that have come 
from this project. Private sector investment in the GTH has now 
surpassed $485 million. Over 860 jobs currently exist at 
employers that call GTH home. Employment during 
construction has created over 1,800 jobs. Every week there are 
over 4,800 truck movements in and out of the GTH. 
 
The GTH plays a central role for our producers in the province 
to allow efficient movement of their goods by both rail and 
truck. The GTH, now in its sixth year of operation, is admired 
by industry peers who understand that logistics hubs like the 
GTH take 20 to 25 years to reach full maturation. Apparently, 
investment and job creation mean nothing to the members 
opposite because we have not heard one ounce of support from 
them on this project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my role as Legislative Secretary to the Ministry 
of Economy for export development, I recently attended a 
forum in Regina where I met and listened to Tiffany Melvin, 
president of NASCO. NASCO, for those of you who don’t 
know, is the North American Strategy for Competitiveness, a 

tri-national coalition focusing on freight logistics, energy in the 
environment, and skilled workforce certification programs. 
 
Ms. Melvin is an expert in her field, and this is what she had to 
say about the GTH: 
 

Inland ports are huge economic engines and huge drivers 
for job creation, growing local companies, and provide 
opportunities to capitalize on cargo shipping through the 
province — having trade stop here rather than drive on 
through.  
 
We’ve worked with inland ports across North America for 
18 years. We’ve been really amazed at how thoughtful and 
together the GTH are and the progress they’ve made in 
such a short time.  

 
Trade and freight movement is the backbone of this 
nation’s economy and directly impacts the costs and goods 
in the marketplace. The GTH has the opportunity to be a 
major player in the continental freight movement network 
and to put Saskatchewan on the map. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to focus on the last quote from Ms. 
Melvin: “The GTH has the opportunity to be a major player in 
the continental freight movement network . . .” Like so many 
times in the past, the NDP are willing to pass up on an 
opportunity that would make Saskatchewan a major player. Our 
government is committed to growing our province and our 
economy, and it’s clear that the members opposite would like 
Saskatchewan to go backwards, just like their party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, speaking of growing the economy, the GTH has 
made recent inroads into trade with China. The GTH was 
invited to sign a co-operation agreement with one of China’s 
largest economic development groups, the China Overseas 
Development Association, or CODA. During a signing 
ceremony on September 4th of this year in Beijing, CODA 
Secretary-General Zhenwei He said: 
 

The strategic location, high-efficient facilities and 
services, and supporting governmental policies make the 
GTH an attraction for Chinese government organizations 
and enterprises.” 

 
Since that event, 38 companies have requested more 
information on the GTH, and three new companies have flown 
in from China to visit the GTH. 
 
The GTH will be hosting a CODA delegation in Regina in early 
2017. The GTH has recently signed a co-operation agreement 
with the port of Qingdao in Shandong province which is the 
seventh largest port in the world. An agreement of collaboration 
which includes “connecting importers and exporters to 
respective port services, promoting . . . efficient distribution and 
delivery . . . promoting increased trade volumes through 
Qingdao and the GTH, as well as sharing best practices.” The 
GTH has also signed a similar agreement with Henan Imported 
Materials Public Bonded Centre which is a critical inland port 
in China’s Henan province. 
 
On September 24th of 2016, the GTH signed a strategic 
co-operation agreement with China’s Linyi comprehensive 



November 3, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1131 

foreign trade zone. The Linyi warehouse city is ranked third in 
its category in all of China with an annual trade volume of 
approximately $5 billion. The strategic co-operation agreement 
includes best practice and operations knowledge sharing, 
exchanging market resources, and positioning the GTH as 
Linyi’s foreign trade zone’s preferred location in North 
America. 
 
Mr. Speaker, expanding trade markets for our producers and 
manufacturers is crucial for Saskatchewan’s growth. We export 
about 70 per cent of what we produce. Nearly one in five jobs 
in this province are reliant on international exporters. In the past 
decade we have nearly doubled to the $32.5 billion worth of 
goods that were exported last year. 
 
The GTH is playing a significant role in ensuring Saskatchewan 
exports continue to grow. The GTH has allowed for trade 
opportunities and economic growth, but apparently that doesn’t 
interest the members opposite because we haven’t heard them 
talk about the benefits of the GTH. And I think I know why. 
They don’t want the people of Saskatchewan to know these 
facts about the GTH because it doesn’t fit with their rhetoric. 
They won’t believe the Provincial Auditor’s report because it 
doesn’t fit with their rhetoric. Mr. Speaker, this is about them 
trying to gain political points. 
 
I’m happy that I’ve had the opportunity to participate in this 
debate because I am happy to tell the people of Saskatchewan 
about the great investment, trade, and job opportunities that the 
GTH has created for the people of Saskatchewan. I would ask 
all members opposite to support the work that the GTH is doing 
to expand export capability and support long-term economic 
growth for our province. I would also ask once again that 
members opposite accept the findings of the auditor’s report 
that was released on June 30th of 2016. 
 
I will not be supporting this motion. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to stand in my place today to certainly give our 
perspective and our viewpoints on the motion that had been 
passed. And of course I stand in support of the motion by my 
learned colleague and as it relates to having a forensic audit 
done to really expose the challenges behind the Global 
Transportation Hub. And most of the people . . . which we use 
the acronym GTH, Mr. Speaker. Most of the people basically 
want to understand what exactly happened here. What is the 
GTH? What occurred? And, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what 
the opposition is trying to find out, but once again we continue 
getting no answers from the government. 
 
And I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, from our perspective, 
what we know happened is that typically what would happen 
when you build a road is that there’s some people want to not 
sell to you, and on occasion you’ve had that challenge in 
Saskatchewan. Then the Department of Highways had the 
ability to expropriate land. And as a former minister of 
Highways, Mr. Speaker, when we were doing the road near 
Saskatoon, in fact when we were building the road towards 
Whitecap, Mr. Speaker, we had the challenge of some of the 
landowners not wanting to sell land to the Department of 

Highways. And what happened which is something that often is 
not encouraged by government, we had to expropriate land. 
And how you do it, Mr. Speaker, is basically assess the land 
value and offer the party what the assessed value of that land is 
worth, and by law, you can actually force them to sell that land 
to you. 
 
And on that particular highway, Mr. Speaker, we had a great 
lobby by then chief, Darcy Bear, to try and get that road fixed to 
Whitecap. Obviously more people would know the same road 
that runs to the casino, Mr. Speaker. We had landowners along 
that particular highway that were not interested in selling, and 
obviously Highways had to use their legislative authority to do 
that because obviously the road was quite important to build. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that much occurred here 
in the same instance where, typically, what would happen on 
the Regina bypass . . . And for those that may not know the 
history of it, the NDP began the bypass just to make sure that 
there was the safe flow of traffic and goods and services as we 
know that GTH concept is really good for the economy. We 
began that work a number of years ago. And what happens, Mr. 
Speaker, is typically we would come in from the northern part 
of the city, we would go around the northwest first, then of 
course we make a complete circle around the city. That was the 
plan and the work began under the NDP. 
 
And at that time, the costs were pegged at 400 million, Mr. 
Speaker, and now we see that costs have ballooned to well over 
2 billion. And not only has that $2 billion price tag been rising 
over the last number of years, Mr. Speaker, but the route has 
been altered. 
 
And certainly, as you can see, the out-of-country companies are 
now getting that work as if we didn’t have companies here in 
Saskatchewan that could do that work, Mr. Speaker. But 
obviously, the Sask Party made it very easy for a large 
multinational company out of, I think it’s out of France if not 
Great Britain that is now doing the work of building a highway 
around our great city. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have to be very, very cognizant of the 
history of how typically what had happened. And as any case, 
Mr. Speaker, as you know, when the route was designed, there 
were certain people that did not want to sell to Highways. They 
didn’t want to sell their land. In fact there’s court proceedings 
now, as we speak, arguing against that particular value of that 
land. 
 
So what I’m trying to do is draw, as simple as I can, a picture of 
what happened around the Global Transportation Hub, the 
GTH. So what would happen is that traffic enter the city of 
Regina. We can divert some of the traffic around the city as 
opposed to having it all congested within the city, and you 
would make a complete loop around the city and connect to 
Highway No. 1. And of course near the Highway No. 1 the 
interchange would have what they call the Global 
Transportation Hub where goods and services could collect and 
be distributed throughout the region. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s a very simple process, and somehow the 
Saskatchewan Party really messed this one up. And I would 
point out, Mr. Speaker, that one of the things that . . . Obviously 



1132 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2016 

the biggest foul-up is the land deal that we’re talking about, 
where they’re paying, were paid for land over twice as much as 
what the land was worth. And we know that there was a party 
insider that really was part of the benefactors of that particular 
deal. And this is where the people of Saskatchewan . . . I know 
a lot of people in Saskatchewan just don’t like this kind of 
activity at all, and they’re quite, quite angry. They’re very 
angry. 
 
[11:30] 
 
So what the NDP are doing today, what we are doing today 
through this motion is we’re keeping it very simple, and we’re 
keeping it very serious. What we’re asking today is to have the 
Provincial Auditor come in and do a forensic audit. That’s all 
we’re asking. 
 
Now people out . . . The government right now keeps . . . Every 
response they have, they talk about the Provincial Auditor. And 
I want to be very, very clear that the auditor done a process 
audit; it was on the process of this land. The auditor did not do a 
forensic audit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And according to the Government of Canada, a forensic audit 
are, and I quote: 
 

. . . designed to identify and gather evidence to support or 
deny an assessment of possible irregularities, including the 
misappropriation of funds or assets, reported fraud or 
specific allegations on the part of a recipient or an 
individual. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we need a forensic audit. 
 
So we’re looking at some of the situation that we find ourselves 
in. The opposition knows that the Provincial Auditor done a 
process audit. We know that as a fact, Mr. Speaker. And one of 
the headlines here, Mr. Speaker, or one of the . . . On her actual 
news release document, the quote I want to use is, “Auditor: 
government is not doing enough to mitigate taxpayers’ 
exposure to increases in land value.” So that does not exonerate 
anyone. The auditor was very straightforward and clear. I think 
she understood that this was a process audit and that she made 
her recommendations based on that process audit. 
 
But because it’s a serious issue, Mr. Speaker, because it is a 
very, very serious issue . . . And the GTH and the bypass are 
needed for the economies of the province and certainly of this 
region, and the NDP support that, Mr. Speaker. What we don’t 
support is these kind of backdoor deals in which we’re paying 
almost twice the value of land to party insiders, Mr. Speaker. So 
I want to point out that one of the things that’s really crystal 
clear is that the auditor did not do a full forensic audit, and my 
learned colleague, the member from Saskatoon Nutana, has 
indicated that she wants a motion that would identify that. 
 
So the members across the way, the members from across the 
way, if they really want to have the clear conscience necessary 
then they would support this motion. They would ask the 
auditor . . . Because certainly if I was the auditor, I would be 
frustrated right now, Mr. Speaker. I would be frustrated in the 
sense that she knows that there’s a significant difference 
between a forensic audit and a process audit. A lot of people in 

Saskatchewan don’t know that difference, as I don’t, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I think to get to the bottom of this, all the NDP are asking — 
to keep it very straightforward, Mr. Speaker — all the NDP are 
asking is, okay, let us do a forensic audit. Let’s have a full 
picture of what went on; give the Provincial Auditor the full 
authority to hold a forensic audit. That’s what the motion is 
about, Mr. Speaker. We’re asking the Provincial Auditor to 
come here and actually do that. 
 
So the members across the way, in every single one of their 
answers they mention the Provincial Auditor. I think, Mr. 
Speaker, that they should do her justice. They should do her 
justice in her answers instead of using her professionalism and 
her dedication to the people of Saskatchewan as an independent 
officer of this Assembly. They should not use her as a crutch to 
justify the things that went wrong on that end from the GTH. 
 
So if I were the Provincial Auditor, I would say they should be 
very specific. It was a process audit; it was not a forensic audit. 
And if you want answers then I think the support that we should 
give the Provincial Auditor right now is to do a forensic audit 
on what occurred under this GTH land scandal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What is so hard to accept that? What is so difficult, from our 
perspective as an opposition, because this is a serious matter. It 
is not a political matter; it is a serious matter, Mr. Speaker. 
Why? Because quite frankly, if you look at the impact of other 
landowners, as I mentioned in the past, I think there’s court 
proceedings going on. As you build this bypass, there’s going to 
be people that won’t want to sell their land. Other people are 
going to argue that their land is worth more. And we understand 
those arguments. But the government, through Highways, could 
have easily expropriated these lands and build through these 
particular areas. As much as that’s not a preferred option, Mr. 
Speaker, the Department of Highways had that opportunity. 
They had the ability to expropriate land, but Highways was not 
used, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Instead they went to the Global Transportation Hub, of who the 
current minister or the past minister, was the Chair of. And then 
instead of having the GTH buy this land from their own 
sources, Mr. Speaker, they then turned around and got 
SaskPower to give GTH the money. So the Minister for 
SaskPower is the same Minister for the GTH who was the same 
Minister for the Economy. So look at all these connections, Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Time has been expired. I recognize the 
member from Martensville-Warman. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to 
enter into the debate today. I listened with great interest . . . I 
must admit, I missed about the first minute and a half of the 
member from Nutana’s speech, so maybe I missed the point that 
she made in that first minute and a half. But, Mr. Speaker, she’s 
a lawyer. I would expect that considering the amount of time 
that has been taken up in this Assembly talking about this 
particular issue in question period — not good questions, but 
time — and the time that we’re taking today, that she would’ve 
actually made a very compelling case as to why this was 
actually necessary. 



November 3, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1133 

Mr. Speaker, she spent her entire time rehashing a timeline 
which we can all read in the auditor’s report — it’s public 
information — but no compelling case as to why we have to 
have yet another, or have an inquiry into this and a forensic 
audit. So I’m waiting to hear that. The member from Athabasca 
didn’t get into the details of that either. It was his usual rant, but 
not a lot of meaning behind any of that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I do want to point out, on the issue of 
supporting the auditor, when this went to Public Accounts in 
February 10th of this year, the Leader of the Opposition was in 
attendance at that meeting. And I just want to say some of the 
things that, or repeat some of the things that he had said there 
about their support for the auditor. And that’s really key to our 
discussion today, Mr. Speaker. He said, and I quote: 
 

Certainly I think [that] that’s why it’s incredibly important 
for us as a committee and for us as individual MLAs, 
irrespective of parties that we may also belong to, to come 
to this table to support the very important work of the 
auditor in this very important examination . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition went on to say, and I 
quote: 
 

And certainly we need to respect the independence of the 
auditor and the professionalism and integrity of the 
examination which, in the end, absolutely none of us 
should be intervening with. 

 
And he went on to say, Mr. Speaker, because he was 
apparently, in February, very supportive of the auditor. He went 
on to say, and I quote, “. . . we as members, and that we as the 
committee, certainly don’t dictate the work of the Provincial 
Auditor.” 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, why did he say that? Because he supports 
the professionalism and the integrity of the auditor and of her 
office and of those that she employs, Mr. Speaker. So it’s a little 
bit more than passing strange that for weeks, how much time 
has been spent for the opposition to basically be questioning the 
auditor’s report. 
 
Because that is exactly what they are doing. By asking 
questions that have been answered by the auditor, they’re 
questioning her . . . the results in the report, Mr. Speaker. And 
it’s not that she didn’t have latitude. It’s not like she didn’t have 
an opportunity to look at whatever she wanted to look at. As the 
Leader of the Opposition had said at that Public Accounts 
Committee meeting, it wasn’t up for the committee to dictate 
her work. She could find her own path through this and 
determine what she wanted to look at. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when asked by . . . One of our members at that 
very meeting asked the Provincial Auditor, and I quote, “. . . do 
you feel that you have the necessary latitude and authority to do 
a thorough and complete review of this matter?” That’s what 
the auditor was asked. And her answer was yes. So she made a 
determination as to how she was going to proceed, who she was 
going to employ, what method she was going to use, what 
documentation she needed to look at, which people she needed 
to interview, and she did all of those things, Mr. Speaker. 
 

We handed over cabinet documents, which is not something 
that is regularly done in this province. She had free and open 
authority to look at all aspects of this. And she did, and she 
came back with recommendations. And, Mr. Speaker, as I said, 
and now the NDP are questioning the auditor’s report by asking 
questions in this Chamber. She’s answered all of those 
questions. They’re looking for some grand conspiracy theory, 
Mr. Speaker, one that just simply does not exist. 
 
And I’ve said this before in this Chamber, hyperbole does not 
increase the credibility of the NDP. But we see it on the floor of 
this House every day. They’re looking for conspiracy theories. 
They’re trying to ramp things up. They’re looking for a scandal 
that doesn’t exist. And I think one of my favourite questions 
came last week when the Leader of the Opposition, in his very 
conspiratorial tone, said, who is Blackstone? Well, Mr. Speaker, 
it reminds me of the Jason Bourne movies — what is 
Treadstone? All we need is some mysterious background music 
in this Chamber to make their case for them. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have accepted the auditor’s 
recommendations. There are 10 of them. And we admitted, as 
soon as the report came out, that there were mistakes that were 
made. There were communications problems between 
ministries. We’ve accepted every single one of those 
recommendations, and we are working towards implementing 
them, Mr. Speaker, because the auditor did do a very good job. 
And we appreciate the work that she did, and of course we’re 
going to accept her recommendations. But, Mr. Speaker, like I 
said, the NDP just keep looking for scandals. 
 
I have a copy of the actual press release that the auditor sent out 
following the release of her report June 30th of this year, and 
I’m happy to table this in the Chamber, Mr. Speaker. Maybe the 
NDP haven’t read it. It’s online, is where I found it, so it’s 
easily accessible. It’s not hidden anywhere. But if they haven’t 
read it, they probably should because it says, Mr. Speaker, and I 
quote — this isn’t us making this up — this is the auditor’s 
press release: 
 

The audit did not find evidence of conflicts of interest, or 
indications of fraud or wrongdoing by the GTH 
management or Board of Directors. Rather, the Provincial 
Auditor found a series of situations and events contributed 
to delays in buying the land that the GTH viewed as key to 
its commercial success during a time of rapidly escalating 
land prices. 

 
That’s what she found, a series of situations and events 
contributed to delays in buying land that the GTH required. You 
know what she didn’t find? She didn’t find a scandal. She 
didn’t find conspiracy theories. And, Mr. Speaker, she then 
recommended 10 recommendations to us and, as I said, we are 
going to be implementing those. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said, the NDP motion today is nothing more 
than a complete lack of confidence in the auditor and her report 
and her recommendations. And again today, Mr. Speaker, we 
saw the Leader of the Opposition asking questions about some 
mysterious phone call, like this is their smoking gun to all of 
this. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, again the auditor looked at all of these 



1134 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2016 

things. They had all the information. They interviewed people. 
They had documentation. That phone call was no secret to the 
auditor. She was well aware of that and her conclusion was 
what, Mr. Speaker? It wasn’t germane to her investigation, 
which means there was nothing there. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, the very fact that the NDP stand here 
day after day after day asking about this mysterious phone call 
is a clear indication that they do not believe the auditor. And 
they should come out and say that, Mr. Speaker, because that is 
the inference behind all of their questioning. It’s questioning the 
auditor, questioning her findings. They keep asking about a 
phone call, a phone call that the auditor says was not germane 
to any of her investigation. 
 
It’s apparently germane to the NDP and their conspiracy theory, 
but nothing more, Mr. Speaker, and I’m not sure what they’re 
going to be coming up with next. I’m sure that they have some 
other angles that they think they’re going to have. But, Mr. 
Speaker, there’s . . . When I was growing up, my sister is three 
years younger than I am, and she had a pretty active 
imagination growing up. And she would come to my mom and 
tell her stories. And my mom would always ask her, she was 
like, where did you hear that? Where did you come up with 
that? And my little sister’s answer always was, in my pretended 
mind. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know. I don’t think that the members 
opposite have ever met my sister, but apparently they’re kind of 
channelling her because they’re making this up in their 
pretended mind as well. So good luck on that. I think the people 
of this province know better. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I know that there’s others who are going to 
be speaking so I’ll be wrapping up my remarks. But I think, Mr. 
Speaker, we all understand why the Leader of the Opposition is 
going down this path because, you know, scandals might be 
interesting to the people out there. He thinks he might be able to 
get his name into the paper, his face on the news, that 
somebody would think he’s, I don’t know, relevant, Mr. 
Speaker. Because we all know that that’s not the fact. We all 
know that his popularity is worse than both Dwain Lingenfelter 
and Cam Broten. That is an accomplishment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, if he wants to be relevant, he 
says he wants to stand up for the people of this province; well, 
wasting our time today talking about judicial inquiries into 
something that’s already been resolved by the auditor is not a 
good use of our time. It is not standing up for the people of this 
province. If he truly wants to stand up for the people of this 
province, Mr. Speaker, sign a letter. Support us defending 
Saskatchewan to the federal government and a job-killing 
carbon tax. 
 
But instead they don’t do that. He’s had ample opportunities, 
Mr. Speaker, to stand up for our province, to side with us. This 
is not about politics. To save jobs and sectors in our province is 
not a political issue. It’s a Saskatchewan issue. It’s an issue 
about people who are working and paying mortgages and 
raising their kids, Mr. Speaker, and they have failed every 
single time they’ve had the opportunity. 
 
[11:45] 

I will not be supporting the motion, Mr. Speaker. You know 
what I will be supporting? I will be supporting my friend and 
colleague from Kindersley. I will be supporting our government 
as we implement the recommendations of the auditor. And I 
will be supporting the auditor, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure and 
honour to rise today to speak to this motion moved by my 
colleague, which of course I support. Time and time again, 
every single day in this House since the beginning of this 
sitting, we’ve been asking nothing but very, very simple, very, 
very direct questions and getting nothing but tired talking points 
— no answers. So you know, the next step is for us to try and 
get some more answers in this 75-minute debate. 
 
It sounds like, from what I’ve heard so far from the other side, 
we’re not going to get the answers that the people of 
Saskatchewan deserve and that the people of Saskatchewan 
have been asking. So you know, Mr. Speaker, we’re just going 
to keep asking them until we get some appropriate answers. 
Like I said, time and time again, simple, simple questions — no 
answers. So you know, I’m going to start asking these questions 
now. And hopefully some of the members opposite, once we 
have the opportunity to ask them questions, will be able to 
answer them, and if not, we’ll just continue to ask them. 
 
So the first . . . There are so many areas of concern with respect 
to this transaction and the transactions that have happened with 
GTH that it’s almost hard to know where to start. And I’m not 
sure if 10 minutes even . . . I know 10 minutes won’t be able to 
do it justice. But I will start with, the first main point of concern 
for me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is who made this call? 
 
Now it’s been interesting watching this story unfold because 
we’ve been getting different answers. Different answers have 
been given to different people. And it’s interesting to watch this 
selective amnesia progress throughout the weeks. 
 
So first what happened, the ex-minister for GTH when asked 
this question, stated that he could not remember who the call 
was from, which is very, very interesting because later on he 
then said that he couldn’t remember who the call was from. But 
then he was sure that the call was not from the Alberta land 
baron that donates to the Sask Party. 
 
Now I’m not sure how that’s supposed to work in somebody’s 
mind. How somebody can completely forget everything, but 
I’m positive that it wasn’t this person. That doesn’t make any 
sense to me, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It doesn’t make any sense to 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Then later on . . . So this story seems to keep progressing, and 
the answers we get seem to keep changing. And that’s why the 
people of Saskatchewan have so many concerns about this 
transaction, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s not some sort of 
conspiracy that the NDP is trying to make up. The members 
opposite are even making it worse by continually hiding facts 
and then later on providing information piecemeal and at a time 
that they deem is, I guess, appropriate to be providing it. 
 



November 3, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1135 

So what happened most recently in this saga is that an email 
record was essentially leaked out by a government 
spokesperson. I have a hard time saying that it was leaked when 
I know for sure that the government had decided that this was 
the email that they were going to send out, that it wasn’t 
something that was . . . It wasn’t some government 
spokesperson who was breaching some sort of confidentiality 
with his or her caucus. 
 
So anyways, the government spokesperson shared this email 
record that said that the call came from an Edmonton lawyer 
representing a client named Blackstone. So again that’s the 
third completely different answer that we’ve received with 
respect to the question of who made this call. So it’s difficult 
essentially, Mr. Deputy Speaker, believing anything that we 
hear from the members opposite when they seem to so clearly 
have no problem giving us three completely different answers 
on one very, very simple question. This is not a hard question, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Apparently they did have . . . they had knowledge all along who 
this call came from but didn’t seem it appropriate or didn’t for 
some reason seem it appropriate to share that answer with the 
people of Saskatchewan which is very, very concerning. And 
even more strange thing about this is it seems that the 
ex-minister for the GTH failed to write down any contact 
information for both the lawyer or Blackstone. 
 
Now I haven’t sold a lot of parcels of land in my day. I’m, you 
know, not a wealthy land baron, but I think if I was dealing with 
. . . if I was on the government side, and I was dealing with 
multiples of millions of dollars and billions of dollars of 
taxpayer money, I would be making sure that I was taking very 
good notes of all of the . . . and close records of all of the 
conversations I was having with respect to any type of purchase 
or sale that was occurring on taxpayers’ dollars, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And as a lawyer I know that it’s very important to be 
keeping these kinds of records. 
 
So, you know, whether or not the records exist or don’t exist, if 
they don’t exist it’s extremely alarming that we have a 
government that doesn’t see it appropriate to be or necessary to 
be keeping good records, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As the people of 
Saskatchewan and taxpayers, we’re entrusting the government 
with our money, with our tax dollars and hoping and assuming 
that they’re going to expend that money in a way that’s best for 
the people of Saskatchewan and that they’re doing so in a way 
that’s financially sound and fiscally responsible. If the 
government has a practice of not keeping records and not 
writing these things down, I’m somewhat alarmed as to how 
financially prudent this government is, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And then as a taxpayer trying to get answers as to what 
happened to my tax dollars, I get . . . and it’s simple questions 
and the answers change now three times. That’s incredibly 
alarming, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
One of the very interesting things about this phone call is that it 
was the exact pieces of land that the GTH wants to buy. And 
cabinet approved it, which is very interesting. You’d think that 
the minister, once receiving that call, would be very interested 
in learning more about this mysterious caller. How did this 
mysterious caller know to call the ex-minister? How did the 
mysterious caller know to attempt to purchase this specific 

parcel of land, Mr. Deputy Speaker? If I was the ex-minister, I 
would have taken some fairly diligent notes and followed up 
with that call to figure out exactly what was going on. 
 
It seems apparently . . . And this is the story that we’re getting 
right now and I want to caveat all of my comments because it 
seems like this story is constantly changing and the sands are 
constantly shifting in the GTH land scandal. So who knows 
next week what kind of response we’re going to get about this 
question. And that’s why we’re going to continue asking these 
questions because, first of all, it’s very important that there’s 
financial accountability in our government. It’s very important 
that our government answer the questions from the 
Saskatchewan people about what’s going on with their finances 
and with their purchasing decisions. And it’s very important 
that we have answers to these specific questions. And it’s very 
alarming if there’s a practice that ministers aren’t following up 
on this very, very concerning information. 
 
I wanted to . . . There are so many other things I wanted to talk 
about. I wanted to talk about the concerns about what’s been 
going on with the Minister of Justice and what he was privy to 
at the cabinet table, the discrepancy that has very recently been 
uncovered between the Minister’s of Justice story about the 
discussion about this at the cabinet table as well, and what was 
provided to the auditor. Unfortunately, we’re already out of 
time. 
 
Like I said, this is a scandal that needs more time than a 
75-minute debate unfortunately. This 75 minutes is all we have, 
but we’ll continue asking questions in question period. We’ll 
continue pushing this issue to the government, and we’ll 
continue going until we get some clear answers, which is why 
it’s so important for us to have a judicial inquiry, frankly, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
If the government feels that they have nothing to hide, there’s 
no reason why they shouldn’t be supporting the notion or the 
motion that my friend has tabled today. With that, I’ll conclude 
my remarks. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 
is an honour to join in on this discussion today around the 
motion brought forward by the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. But before I get to some of my notes, I just want to hit 
on a few of the points that the member from Regina Douglas 
Park made a couple of seconds ago. 
 
First of all, she said that we keep on quoting the auditor’s tired 
talking points. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t think the 
auditor’s tired talking points are something to debate on this 
floor. I think we should all respect the auditor’s opinion. The 
auditor went through every email, had access to all documents, 
had access to everything she needed to do a full and thorough 
audit. And I don’t think they’re talking points. It’s a matter of 
. . . They use talking points when they talk about the GTH, and 
we use the truth. So I think that’s something that they should 
learn to bring to this Assembly. 
 
We saw in question period today a lot of their questions brought 



1136 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2016 

forward to our ministers, there are some misconstrued facts in a 
lot of those questions. And I think that harkens back to the 
credibility those 10 members have to the people of 
Saskatchewan, that they keep on bringing forward these. As 
some people say, they keep jumping the shark, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. They keep going too far, too fast on saying there’s a 
scandal here; there’s a scandal there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I remember that they did the same thing with IPAC 
[International Performance Assessment Centre] a couple, about 
four years ago. The member, well the former leader who’s not 
here anymore, and the member from Rosemont thought they 
had a scandal with IPAC and they brought that forward, saying 
there’s going to be RCMP carrying out boxes at IPAC and, Mr. 
Speaker, nothing — nothing. 
 
The member from Arm River Watrous was the Chair of the 
committee and they thought they had another gotcha moment. 
But the member from Rosemont has learned that gotcha 
politics, quite honestly, he learned it from the member . . . from 
his first leader, Dwain Lingenfelter. He learned gotcha politics 
is the way you operate so he’s got his 1978 politics going. And 
Mr. Broten had that same form of politics, he had that politics 
as well. He thinks that in some point in time they’re just going 
to catch the government in a scandal, and everything’s going to 
be better. And the people of Saskatchewan are going to see, 
finally they caught them red-handed doing something 
scandalous. But that’s not the way it works, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
What you have to do is work hard to earn the trust of the people 
of Saskatchewan. You bring policy forward. You bring truthful 
statements forward in this Assembly, and ask answers about . . . 
and ask to have truthful questions answered, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I think that’s something important the members have 
not quite figured out yet. 
 
I also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk about the member 
from Saskatoon Nutana’s motion. And in the first sentence, she 
asked that this Assembly support the work of the Provincial 
Auditor. If the members opposite support the work of the 
Provincial Auditor, I haven’t heard it yet. And I’ve asked that 
the members opposite accept that work then if they put that in 
their motion. 
 
In the Provincial Auditor’s report that she released on June 
30th, 2016, she did find a number of instances where proper 
practices were not followed. And we’ve said that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. We’ve said there were some mistakes, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. She identified those instances and made 
recommendations on how to address them. There was two 
recommendations specifically for the Global Transportation 
Hub Authority, and eight recommendations for the Minister of 
Highways and Infrastructure. 
 
The government is implementing all 10 of these 
recommendations. We take their, the auditor’s 
recommendations seriously and we take the auditor’s report 
seriously, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I wish those 10 members would 
as well. 
 
The Provincial Auditor also stated in her news release that the 
audit did not find evidence of conflicts of interest or indications 

of fraud or wrongdoing by the GTH management or board of 
directors, which includes the minister responsible. That’s in the 
auditor’s report and in the news release, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
In a subsequent media interview on July 4th, 2016, the 
Provincial Auditor is quoted as saying: 
 

In any audit, as auditors we’re always looking for red flags. 
And because this is a land transaction, we did look for 
conflicts of interest. [And] We didn’t find evidence of 
conflict of interest or indications of fraud or wrongdoing in 
the course of our work so there were no red flags there. 

 
[12:00] 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know they have heard these tired 
talking points, as the member from Douglas Park said a few 
times, but they’re words directly from the auditor, and the 
auditor had a wide berth to investigate everything she needed to 
in these transactions. The order in council that was signed that 
requested the Provincial Auditor to perform a special audit to 
examine was OC 85/2016. It allowed the auditor to look at 
thousands of documents including cabinet documents on 
whether or not the Government of Saskatchewan followed 
proper procedures and received appropriate value with respect 
to land acquisition of the GTH. Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s a 
pretty open-ended . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Mandate. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Scope. Mandate, thank you. That’s a pretty 
open-ended mandate that the auditor had from the government 
and that’s the government that brought that forward and gave 
the Provincial Auditor that mandate. 
 
So under section 25 of The Provincial Auditor Act, she had the 
authority to “. . . examine any person on any matter relating to 
any account that is subject to an examination or audit by . . . 
[her], and, for the purposes of that examination . . .” 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this side of the House will listen to the 
Provincial Auditor and her teams of experts and follow her 
recommendations and respect her recommendations. The 
member opposite should accept her findings as well. 
 
The Global Transportation Hub has had an immense impact on 
our economy in our province, and particularly right here in 
Regina. That’s why I’m proud to stand and talk about the GTH, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, because it’s had a huge impact on our 
economy in Regina. Private sector investment in the GTH has 
now surpassed $485 million. Over 860 full-time jobs currently 
exist at employers of the GTH. That’s 860 families that are 
cared for, 860 community members that have the opportunity to 
support their family and raise their kids here in Regina because 
of the GTH. 
 
Those employers include: Canadian Pacific Railway, 
Consolidated Fastfrate, Emterra Group, Loblaws, Morguard 
Investments, SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority], Slinkemo Enterprises, Sterling Truck and Trailer. 
Those are 860 full-time jobs that are supporting Regina’s 
economy at a time when we need jobs right here in Regina, 
especially when they won’t support us on a carbon tax, and 



November 3, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1137 

fighting a carbon tax that might affect all employees at Evraz. 
So I don’t know why those people can’t stand up and support a 
GTH that are bringing jobs here. You see, there’s 860 jobs at 
the GTH, 900 jobs at Evraz, and they really are just throwing 
mud at 1,800 jobs here in our Queen City, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
John Lee, president and CEO of Economic Development 
Regina, had this to say about the GTH: 
 

Saskatchewan is a corridor for transportation. The GTH is 
a critical asset that connects the Regina region to that 
international corridor. We see that the GTH is an important 
economic engine that plays a key role in how this province 
and region achieve growth in the next 20 years and 
beyond. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the GT has only been in operation for six 
years and is already succeeding and admired by industry peers 
who understand that logistics hubs usually take 20 to 25 years 
to reach maturation. Steve McLellan, CEO of Sask Chamber of 
Commerce, had this to say about the GTH: 
 

The GTH was never intended to be an overnight thing, but 
an investment in the future success of the province. The 
GTH is something that will keep us in the export world for 
a long, long time. 

 
It is so crucial for exporters to have efficient and effective 
access to our export markets, and that’s what the GTH affords 
our exporting businesses. Companies choose to build at the 
GTH because of the direct access to CP [Canadian Pacific] 
mainline, connecting Saskatchewan to the ports Vancouver and 
Montreal. 
 
GTH has also been designated a foreign trade zone. It is granted 
to the GTH by the previous government in 2015. A foreign 
trade zone, which many people may not know about, is a 
federally authorized zone where imported goods may be stored, 
processed or assembled without being subject to import duties. 
 
The GTH is one of only six foreign trade regions in all of 
Canada. Foreign trade zone status allows the GTH to compete 
with other sites worldwide, opening the door to additional 
marketing opportunities and additional foreign investment. 
 
Speaking of global opportunities, the GTH has been very 
diligent to promote itself as a potential investor. Peter Wallis, 
president and CEO of the Van Horne Institute, which is known 
within Canada and internationally as one of North America’s 
leading research institutes focused on transportation, supply 
chain, and logistics, said this about the GTH: “The development 
of the GTH opens up Saskatchewan companies to benefits of an 
efficient connection to world trade, particularly with the 
Asia-Pacific region.” 
 
In September, the GTH was invited to sign a co-operation 
agreement with one of China’s largest economic development 
groups, the China Overseas Development Association. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, one thing I want to say before my time 
winds up, is the GTH is a large employer for people in Regina. 
And I think it’s come a long way in six years. And I for one will 
be supporting the GTH, supporting the member from 

Kindersley, and supporting this government in expanding trade 
in exporting business, and not supporting the ridiculous motion 
before by the member . . . [inaudible]. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon University. 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, on July 4th, 2016, the 
Provincial Auditor said, and I quote: 
 

In any audit, as auditors we’re always looking for red flags. 
And because this is a land transaction, we did look for 
conflicts of interest. We didn’t find evidence of conflict of 
interest or indications of fraud or wrongdoing in the course 
of our work, so there were no red flags there. 

 
Mr. Speaker, to the member from Athabasca: the Provincial 
Auditor has said that there are no red flags and no conflicts of 
interest. Do you trust that her team has done a thorough job? 
Yes or no? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the Provincial 
Auditor is a professional, independent officer of this Legislative 
Assembly. And that member knows very well that the auditor 
done a process audit. This motion is calling for a forensic audit 
of what happened around the GTH. So if you want to hide 
behind the Provincial Auditor, at least have the courage to say, 
come on back in. Do a forensic audit. Let’s get to the truth. The 
people of Saskatchewan need it. Yes or no, do you support that? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I find it passing strange that the 
member from Walsh Acres won’t support this motion. It says 
the Assembly supports the work of the Provincial Auditor. So 
this means he doesn’t support the work of the Provincial 
Auditor if he can’t support this motion. 
 
Now we know the junior minister from Meadow Lake has said 
he needs to check the policies to see if they can go through the 
phone records. This is funny because they didn’t seem to have 
any issues following policy when it came to the sketchy land 
deal. He was talking about policies earlier. Can the member 
from Regina Walsh Acres please commit to helping the member 
from Meadow Lake check the policies? Or better yet, tell him 
that the right policy option here is to tell the people of 
Saskatchewan the truth and to get those phone records out. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thanks, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There’s a few 
things about that question that are passing strange, as she says. 
One is, I have more respect for the members of this House to 
never refer to someone as a junior minister. She’s been here 
long enough to know that that’s not proper, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. The Minister from the Economy has done great work 
on this file. They made a lot of . . . They were laughing when he 
announced that former Deputy Premier Doug Moen would take 



1138 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2016 

over the Chair of the GTH — great work by the Minister of the 
Economy and the member from Meadow Lake. 
 
Also I do support the auditor’s findings. I also support that the 
auditor said the audit did not find any evidence of conflict of 
interest or indication of fraud or wrongdoing by the GTH 
management or board of directors. I find it funny that we on this 
side have been supporting the auditor the whole time. We’ve 
been supporting the fact that she did a thorough audit of this 
operation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But they have never once said 
they support the auditor’s finding, and I’d ask the member to do 
that right now. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Westview. 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — On September 24th, the Global 
Transportation Hub signed a co-operation agreement with one 
of China’s largest economic development groups, the China 
Overseas Development Association. Since then, 38 companies 
have requested more information about the GTH, and three 
companies have already flown in from China to visit the GTH. 
Despite this, the NDP caucus put on a news release on 
September 28th mocking our government’s efforts to expand 
trade opportunities in China, calling it a Mickey Mouse trade 
plan. 
 
My question to the member from Regina Douglas Park: will 
you acknowledge the fact that Saskatchewan’s exports to China 
have doubled in the last five years? And will you recognize that 
the GTH is making essential contributions to the continued 
growth of Saskatchewan’s export sector? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, the members on this side of the 
House will continue supporting the economy. That question had 
nothing to do with the motion that we put forward today. The 
people of Saskatchewan deserve answers about how their tax 
dollars are being spent. That’s what we’re asking, and those are 
the answers that we deserve. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We 
have a lot of questions of the government and a ton of questions 
around the appraisal. But I’m going to ask the member from 
Martensville, since the member from Saskatoon University 
won’t answer my question, I want to ask the member from 
Martensville, a simple answer, yes or no? If you want to support 
our position that there’s an independent officer of this 
Assembly, a professional named . . . She’s a Provincial Auditor. 
Do you support her doing a forensic audit? No excuses. Yes or 
no? A simple answer. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Martensville . . . 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Warman. Thank you, thank you, Mr. 
Speaker, and I appreciate the member opposite’s feigned 
outrage. 

I could quote again his own leader’s statements from committee 
meeting, Mr. Speaker, where he said it is nobody’s job to tell 
the auditor what to do or how to do her job, Mr. Speaker, which 
is exactly why she had full and free latitude and mandate to do 
the examination that she thought was necessary into this matter 
when it went before committee in February, Mr. Speaker. If he 
doesn’t like what the auditor did, he should just say that. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We keep 
hearing that the minister and his right-hand man weren’t aware 
that Highways was looking at the land. Time and time again, 
GTH management said Highways should acquire this land. And 
the GTH and the Highways minister talked about this at a 
cabinet meeting in June 2013. To the member from Regina 
Walsh Acres: how is it remotely believable that they weren’t 
aware of this? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
I’m pleased to say once again the auditor found a number of 
instances where proper processes were not followed. We agree 
there are some mistakes made, and we had to . . . There’s 10 
recommendations that we’re going to follow, and we’re going 
to do it to make sure the processes are better next time, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
But I also say that the Provincial Auditor said, and I quote, 
“The audit did not find evidence of conflicts of interest, or 
indications of fraud or wrongdoing by the GTH management or 
Board of Directors.” 
 
The point I’d like to make, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that if 
they’re so concerned about standing up for Saskatchewan 
citizens as they say they are, why aren’t they going to stand up 
with us against the carbon tax that’s going to cost the people of 
Saskatchewan money out of their hard-earned pockets? It’s 
going to cost them jobs. It’s going to make sure that they can’t 
put food on the table for their families, and we’re going to have 
low . . . more unemployment in the province. 
 
Why wouldn’t she tell the member from Rosemont to sign what 
our Premier sent to Ralph Goodale and make sure that we go to 
Ottawa with a strong, united voice? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Steele: — Saskatchewan has a trade export-driven 
economy. One in every five jobs in the province depends on 
international exports. The GTH, Mr. Speaker, serves as an 
instrument of trade, providing world-class infrastructure to 
allow efficient, effective movement of goods in rail and truck, 
and assist Saskatchewan producers in accessing supply chains 
for their products.  
 
My question is to the member from Athabasca. Do you not 
agree that the GTH is a vitally important part of the efforts to 
ensure continued growth in Saskatchewan and export 



November 3, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1139 

industries? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
we’ve indicated time and time again, the economy is really 
important to the province overall. It’s very important to the 
NDP. Anything that we can do for efficient movement of goods 
and services, the NDP will support. 
 
But I go back to the point, Mr. Speaker, that the Sask Party 
shouldn’t be waving shiny little objects. The question we asked 
today, do you support the professional independence of the 
Provincial Auditor by giving her great justice to have a forensic 
audit on this GTH land deal, on the GTH land deal, to make 
sure that taxpayers’ interests, and thus lower taxes, is a net 
result of efficient use of taxpayers’ dollars? We think that’s part 
of the economy. It’s a great idea. So do you support it? Yes or 
no? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Canora 
. . . or Kelvington-Wadena. Sorry. 
 
Mr. Nerlien: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member from Athabasca 
did ask a question to . . . Oh, sorry. Okay, my mistake. I 
recognize the member from Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
[12:15] 
 
Mr. Nerlien: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Not only has 
the GTH created jobs and spurred investment in Saskatchewan, 
it has increased global market access for Saskatchewan 
businesses. Mr. Deputy Speaker, my constituents in east central 
Saskatchewan recognize that efficient movement of goods is 
critical to our local economies across all of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleague the member from Moosomin spoke 
further on the significant value of an inland port and our 
relationship with the world through our exports. To the member 
from Athabasca: do you agree that the GTH has helped make 
international markets more accessible to northern and central 
Saskatchewan businesses? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, not wasting millions and 
millions and millions of dollars on land scandals like this will 
help the North. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Time has expired for the 75-minute 
debate. I would simply make this observation, members. 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I would simply make this 
observation, members. First of all, I should apologize for 
making a mistake and taking up some of your time. But what I 
would like to point out is that questions and answers should be 
put through the Chair. So if we could remember that for the 

next 75-minute debate. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 1 — Provision of Medical Imaging Services 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Mr. Olauson.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Thank you for recognizing me, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Today I’d like to talk about the private-pay MRI 
[magnetic resonance imaging] services that were brought into 
force in February of 2016 and the private-pay CT scans that 
were introduced in June of 2016. 
 
The MRI Facilities Licensing Act was brought in to provide a 
free scan for someone from the public wait-list for every one 
that was paid for. Mr. Speaker, it’s hard to believe that only last 
week and this week the NDP were complaining about wait 
times and that they need money for health, and this will only 
help. Mr. Speaker, as of September 30th, 2016, 943 private 
MRIs were provided, including both patients and organizations 
like WCB [Workers’ Compensation Board], SGI 
[Saskatchewan Government Insurance], and others. This means 
943 patients from the public system will receive an MRI at no 
additional cost to the health system. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is equivalent to adding an entire MRI 
machine to the system, operating five hours a day, seven days a 
week, at no cost to the public system. And it has brought to date 
a cost savings of over $835,000 to the public wait-list. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 2015-16, expenditures on medical imaging was 
143 million, up 70 per cent from 2007 of 84 million. Our 
government continues to invest in the public system. With 
recent expansion to the Moose Jaw . . . and the implementation 
of the private MRIs, there has been a reduction of wait times. 
 
In 2007 under the NDP, we had the worst wait times in Canada. 
Mr. Speaker, since 2007, public MRI capacity has more than 
doubled from 15,700 to 33,500 patients a year. Now with the 
recent addition of the MRI to Dr. F.H. Wigmore hospital in 
Moose Jaw in 2016, there are now 10 public MRIs in 
Saskatchewan. And the NDP are saying we’re doing nothing. 
We are serving more people, shortening the wait times, and 
keeping our people from going out of the province, and saving 
$835,000 to date. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it bothers me to hear the members opposite 
complain about us working with the private system. Erin Weir 
and Don Davies, federal NDP, tweeted that they would like to 
put a stop to the use of privately provided CT scans and MRI in 
Saskatchewan. Yet it was okay for the NDP to allow private 
MRIs for the Roughriders and the workmen’s compensation 
board. At the end of the day, do we not want the best for all our 
citizens in Saskatchewan — shorter wait times while saving 



1140 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2016 

money and putting it towards the front line of health care? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan health care system is focusing 
on improving patients’ access needed to diagnostic and 
treatment services and increasing patients’ choices. Expanding 
private-pay services will extend benefits and increase the 
capacity and reduce the CT wait times and services while 
helping the public system. The government spending has 
increased over 150 per cent since 2007. CT spending has 
increased 54 per cent since 2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the private-pay process is simple. A physician 
referral is required to obtain a CT or MRI scan. A person 
wishing to pay for the CT or MRI takes the referral to a private 
facility to book an appointment. After that scan, within 14 days, 
a second scan will be provided to the public waiting list at no 
charge to the patient. I think it’s a great deal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government, since 2007, has committed to 
improving health care in Saskatchewan. We’ve hired 650 
doctors, an increase of 37 per cent, since we took government. 
We’ve hired 3,200 more nurses, all designated for this province. 
We have more than doubled their investments in the hospital 
and health care infrastructures compared to the NDP when the 
NDP were in government. We’ve opened 13 long-care homes, 
more care for the seniors. And under the NDP, they closed 52 
hospitals, and the Fyke report called for 50 more closures to 
hospitals. And they closed 1,200 long-term beds. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe a two-for-one CT-MRI system 
will only help our health system shorten the wait times and no 
cost to our taxpayers. This private-pay CT was a campaign 
promise during the election, and looking at our side of the 
room, I think the people of Saskatchewan have decided on their 
choice. 
 
When I think about the fight to move the private CTs and MRIs 
to our province, it’s not like we’re alone. There are four other 
provinces in Canada that already are allowing this: BC [British 
Columbia], Alberta, Nova Scotia, and Quebec. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would just like to tell a story, a little story about 
my . . . Three years ago I was coaching hockey, midget hockey, 
and one of my players went into the boards and he buggered up 
his knee and he had to go to Calgary . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . Yes, I know. He was the opposition coach. 
 
Anyways, the family had to take the day off. They drove in to 
Calgary. They paid over $800 for that, and he got quick care. 
And I just, you know, I look at it today and I think it’s just a 
great benefit to have this in our province so our people don’t 
have to go out of the province, spend a bunch of money. And 
they can spend it in our province and we get a free one onto our 
waiting list. And I, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am fully in support of 
this. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and thank you 
to the member from Canora-Pelly for his comments on this 
motion. There’s more I’d like to say about this motion, and in 
the coming weeks when the motion comes back I’d like to be 

able to speak on it. But right now I’d like to move to the 
adjourned debates. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Batoche has 
moved to adjourn debate on the motion. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
move that this House be now adjourned. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that this House adjourns. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This House stands adjourned until 
Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:24.] 
 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Marit ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1117 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1117 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1117 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 1117 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1117 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1126 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1126 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 1117 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1117 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1118 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1118 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1118 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1118 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1119 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1119 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1119 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Rally Supports Pipelines and the Oil and Gas Industry 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1119 
 Resident’s Efforts Bring World Broomball Championship to Regina 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1120 
 Increasing Access to Medical Imaging Services  
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1120 
 Award-Winning Authors Tell the Saskatchewan Story 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1120 
 Better Together Food Drive 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1121 
 Carrot River Wildcats Win Division  
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1121 
 Saskatchewan to Surpass Alberta in New Oil Well Drilling 
  Carr .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1121 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Role of the Global Transportation Hub in Land Acquisitions 
  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 1121, 1124 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1121 
  Harrison ......................................................................................................................................................................... 1122, 1124 
 Elimination of Deputy Sheriff Positions 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1123 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1123 
 Privatization of Crown Corporations 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1124 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1124 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1124 
 Children in Provincial Care 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1125 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 1125 
 Donations to Saskatchewan Party 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1125 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1125 
POINT OF ORDER 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1126 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1126 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1126 
MOTIONS 
 Leaves of Absence 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1127 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1127 
 



 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Review of Land Acquisition for Global Transportation Hub 
  Sproule ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1127, 1137 
  Bonk ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1129 
  Belanger ......................................................................................................................................................................... 1131, 1137 
  Heppner ......................................................................................................................................................................... 1132, 1138 
  Sarauer .......................................................................................................................................................................... 1134, 1138 
  Steinley ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1135, 1137 
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1137 
  Buckingham ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1138 
  Steele ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1138 
  Nerlien ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1139 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 1 — Provision of Medical Imaging Services 
  Dennis ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1139 
  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1140 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


