






















































Hansard: November 15, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 42A  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 15, 2016, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (Ind.) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10; Independent (Ind.) — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1321 
 November 15, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Today it gives me great pleasure to introduce 
Saskatchewan’s Olympic delegation to the Legislative 
Assembly. Yes, let’s give them a hand, sure. 
 
[Applause] 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Earlier today the Deputy Premier, 
the Leader of the Opposition, and all MLAs [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] got to participate in a ceremony 
welcoming the Olympians and Paralympians as well as their 
coaches and supporters as well. So on behalf of the Government 
of Saskatchewan, we want you to know how important you are 
as athletes, coaches, and officials; how proud we are of you 
representing us. We want you to know that the role that you 
play as role models in Saskatchewan is very, very important. 
 
Each Olympian and Paralympian and those that participated in 
Rio will be introduced by their respective member of the 
legislature, but at this time, on behalf of all MLAs through you, 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask you to give all of our very, very special 
guests a warm welcome to their Saskatchewan Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, it’s my honour to join with the minister opposite, 
as it was this morning, to welcome this Olympic delegation to 
their Legislative Assembly. This delegation of Olympic 
athletes, Paralympic athletes, of coaches, of builders in sport is 
an impressive group that makes Saskatchewan so proud. It’s an 
honour to have them on the floor of their Assembly here today.  
 
And as we all watched them compete this summer, they need to 
know that they really made us proud. They showcased 
Saskatchewan. They inspired a generation across our province, 
of young people and of all of us, and they displayed of course 
incredible and remarkable perseverance and strength. 
 
So to these athletes, to these sport builders, to these coaches, to 
these officials, I say on behalf of the official opposition and a 
grateful and proud province, thank you so very much, and as 
you step forward, thank you for your continued leadership in 
sport. And whatever you take on, take on that strength, take on 
that perseverance, and that great prairie spirit that makes us all 
proud, and I know you’ll continue to succeed in all you take on. 
It’s my honour to join with the minister opposite to welcome 
these Olympians to their Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm River. 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you. I’d like to introduce Taryn Suttie 
who competed in shot put during the Rio 2016 Olympic Games. 
Taryn is from Hanley and has some impressive 
accomplishments as an athlete. She was a double gold medallist 
at the 2011 CIS [Canadian Interuniversity Sport] championships 
where she was victorious in the hammer throw and shotput. She 
was also named Outstanding Female Athlete at the meet and 
CIS Female Field Athlete of the Year.  
 
Taryn also won bronze shot put at the 2012 NACAC U23 
[North American, Central American and Caribbean Athletics 
Association under 23] meet. She captured the Canadian title in 
2015 after placing second also in 2012 and 2014. She’s been 
third in 2011 and 2013. Following a second-place finish at the 
2016 Canadian championship, she made her Olympic debut in 
Rio. Please join me in welcoming Taryn to her Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, it is my pleasure today to welcome and introduce Carla 
Nicholls. Carla is the high-performance technical lead and team 
leader at the Rio 2016 Olympic games. She has 22 years of 
involvement with athletics that has ranged from small-club 
development, also is serving as head coach at the University of 
Regina. She is also a two-time Olympic team coach. And I’ll 
read a list of other accomplishments and designations. 
 
Carla is a graduate of the Coaching Association of Canada’s 
Women in Coaching apprenticeship program and is an active 
chartered professional coach with Coaches of Canada. She was 
a writer of the new NCCP [National Coaching Certification 
Program] manual for athletics, a contributor to Athletics 
Canada’s long-term athlete development program, and is a 
master learning facilitator for all levels of the NCCP. I know 
that Carla is also a busy mom to two great kids, Arden and 
Dawson, and I would invite all members to invite Carla and 
welcome her to her Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Parent: — I’d like to introduce Al Bodnarchuk. Al was a 
sport massage therapist for the Rio 2016 Olympic and 
Paralympic Games. As a massage therapist, he has a hand in 
some of the biggest moments in Canadian sports. He worked 
with sprinter Donovan Bailey and the Canadian men’s 4 x 100 
relay team, both of them gold medallists at the 1996 Atlanta 
Olympics. 
 
Al has been to the Olympics, Pan Am Games, and the 
Commonwealth Games. He has been a fixture of Canada’s team 
at the World Athletics Championships since 1987. In 2013 Al 
was introduced into the Saskatoon Sports Hall of Fame. Please 
join me in welcoming Al to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the Assembly, 



1322 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2016 

Carter Morrison to the Legislative Assembly. He was one of 
only five Canadians selected by the Ronald McDonald House 
Charities to act as a tree-bearer during the Parade of Nations. 
Carter walked alongside Canada’s flag-bearer, carrying a tree 
sapling which represented the environmentally conscious theme 
of the opening ceremonies. 
 
Carter is certainly a role model and was selected for his 
perseverance and cheerful demeanour while staying at Ronald 
McDonald House. Please join me in welcoming Carter to his 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour for 
me to introduce Erica Gavel to the legislature. Erica was a 
standout basketball player for the Prince Albert Carlton 
Crusaders and was one of the premier female high school 
basketball players in the province. 
 
Erica was courted by several post-secondary institutions, and 
she chose the University of Saskatchewan. Erica played a key 
role in helping the Huskies become one of the top college 
programs in the nation. A chronic knee injury prevented Erica 
from continuing with the Husky team, and Erica was concerned 
that her sports career was likely finished. But then she heard 
about wheelchair basketball, and she actively pursued that and 
earned an athletic scholarship to the University of Alabama. As 
a result of her hard work, Erica earned a full-time roster spot on 
the senior women’s national team and earned a silver medal at 
the 2015 Parapan American games in Toronto while 
representing Team Canada.  
 
Mr. Speaker, residents in Prince Albert are very proud of Erica 
and her hard work and dedication that led her to all of the 
successes, and I would like to ask all members to join with me 
in welcoming Erica to her Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
University. 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
introduce Logan Campbell who earned a bronze medal in 
sailing keelboat three-person sonar during the 2016 
Paralympics. Logan made his second appearance at a 
Paralympic Games after competing in London in 2012. He has 
had some very impressive international results, including first 
place in the 2016 Miami World Cup and third place in the 2015 
ISAF [International Sailing Federation] Sailing World Cup. In 
2011 he earned a bachelor’s degree in mechanical engineering 
from the University of Saskatchewan. Please join me in 
welcoming Logan to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to introduce 
Samantha Ryan who represented Canada in para-swimming 
during the 2016 Paralympic Games. At age 15, Ryan was the 
youngest member on Team Canada at the 2014 Pan Pacific 
Para-Swimming Championships in Pasadena. She collected 
bronze medals in the 10- to 100-metre butterfly and 200-metre 
individual medley in addition to reaching five other finals. 

In 2015 she showed that she is one of Canada’s fastest rising 
stars in para-swimming. At the Toronto 2015 Parapan Am 
Games, she swam in seven events, winning silver in the 
100-metre butterfly. A few weeks earlier she took fifth place in 
the same event in the IPC [international paralympic committee] 
World Championships. Also very notably she won five medals 
for Team Saskatchewan at the 2013 Canada Games, including 
two gold. Please join me in welcoming Samantha to her 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce Shawna 
Ryan. Shawna competed in two para-cycling events and rode 
tandem in the 2016 Paralympics. She is a former member of 
Canada’s national goalball team and competed at the 2008 
Paralympic Games in Beijing. 
 
Shawna started tandem cycling in 2013 when she attended an 
athlete identification camp organized by Cycling Canada, 
Saskatchewan Blind Sports, and the Saskatchewan Cycling 
Association. Shawna started on the international stage in 2014 
with pilot Audrey Lemieux, and since 2015 she has teamed up 
with Joanie Caron. With Caron she won a bronze medal at the 
Parapan American Games in Toronto in the mixed road time 
trial and placed fourth at the track time trial. She enjoys the 
sport because it allows her to experience speed, tactics, and 
competition. Please join me in welcoming Shawna to her 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I’m pleased to introduce Rick Reelie, 
athletics coach for the 2016 Paralympics. He’s currently the 
Athletics Canada events coach and the Athletics Canada relay 
team coach. He was also the coach of 2016 Rio Paralympic 
Games bronze medallist Alex Dupont and 2016 Rio Paralympic 
Games bronze medal relay team. 
 
Rick has quite an accomplished sporting career and has been 
recognized for his contribution to the sports community: 2012, 
Saskatchewan Athletics Coach of the Year; 2012, SWSA 
[Saskatchewan Wheelchair Sports Association] Coach of the 
Year; 2011, Saskatchewan Sports Hall of Fame inductee; 2011, 
Saskatoon Sports Hall of Fame inductee. He is a five-time 
Canadian Paralympic team member, a former world 
Paralympic, and national record holder. He has also won five 
gold, three silver, and one bronze Paralympic medals. Please 
join me in welcoming Rick to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 
Ms. Lambert: — I’d like to introduce Katie Miyazaki, 
wheelchair basketball assistant coach for the 2016 Paralympic 
Games. Katie has been the high-performance coach for 
Saskatchewan since August 2013 and began working with the 
Women’s Wheelchair Basketball National Team in the summer 
of 2014. Through wheelchair basketball, she has had the 
opportunity to coach at world championships, the Parapan Am 
Games, Canada Winter Games, and the Paralympics.  
 



November 15, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1323 

Before her coaching career, she played at Simon Fraser 
University from 2007 until 2010 and the University of 
Saskatchewan from 2010 until 2012. During that time, she won 
two CIS championships, three Canada West championships, 
and was named CIS Defensive Player of the Year two times. 
Please join me in welcoming Katie to her Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — I am pleased to introduce Simon 
Merkosky to his Legislative Assembly. Simon was a 
para-swimming international technical official in the 2016 
Paralympics. He’s been involved in swimming since 1998 as a 
competitive swimmer, coach, and official. Simon achieved his 
master official certification with Swim Canada in the fall of 
2015. He was selected to be the national technical official for 
the Parapan Am Games in Toronto the following year. Please 
join me in welcoming Simon to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 
 
Ms. Carr: — Mr. Speaker, through you and to you, it is my 
pleasure to introduce Sheila Guenther to the Legislative 
Assembly. She is seated on the floor. Sheila was a 
para-swimming assistant technical delegate for the Rio 2016 
Paralympic Games. Her responsibility was to assist the 
technical delegate to oversee all technical matters, to set up and 
conduct the competition, and to ensure IPC swimming rules 
were upheld. 
 
Sheila is from Estevan and has been a swimming official for 
over 20 years. In 2007 she became an international technical 
official for IPC swimming. Last year she was certified as an 
IPC swimming technical official educator, one of nine in the 
world. Since becoming an international official, she has been to 
Brazil, Malaysia, Mexico, Scotland, the USA [United States of 
America], Venezuela, and Portugal. 
 
And on more of a personal note, I would like to add that Sheila 
is quite the athlete herself. I’ve had the opportunity to golf with 
her on more than one occasion, and I’ve been blessed to have 
her on my team. So please join me in welcoming her to her 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
University. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to introduce Louise Ashcroft to the Legislative 
Assembly today. Louise served as an international classifier for 
sitting volleyball during the 2016 Paralympics. She was one of 
only two international sitting volleyball classifiers in Canada 
who made the trip to Rio. Louise is a well-known 
physiotherapist in the city and a co-owner of synergy physio in 
Regina. She enjoys touring Saskatchewan by bike and playing 
the violin. Please join me in welcoming her to her Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to introduce 
someone who really almost needs no introduction in this House. 
I’d like to introduce Wayne Hellquist to the Legislative 

Assembly today. He’s a community leader. Wayne was a 
member of the jury for the sitting volleyball event and 
responsible for overseeing the social media team for the sport 
during the 2016 Paralympics. He is currently the vice president 
of World ParaVolley, which is the international federation 
responsible for the sport of volleyball for athletes with physical 
impairment.  
 
Wayne has attended four Paralympic games in an official 
capacity, including serving as the chef de mission for the 
Canadian Paralympic team in Sydney in 2000. He also attended 
the games in Athens in 2004 and in London in 2012 as a 
member of the world paravolley team. He served on the board 
of Volleyball Canada for 11 years and served two terms as the 
president of volleyball Saskatchewan. Please join me in 
welcoming Wayne to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, to you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, I have the honour 
of introducing a number of important guests who have joined us 
in the legislature today. The Adoption Support Centre is a vital 
partner in supporting families in our communities across 
Saskatchewan. Whether that person is pregnant and needing 
information about adoption, an adoptee searching for their birth 
family, a prospective adoptive parent, or a family who has come 
together through adoption, the Adoption Support Centre of 
Saskatchewan is here to help. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m honoured to introduce the president of the 
Adoption Support Centre of Saskatchewan, Candy 
Hamre-Wyka, who is seated behind me; executive director 
Sylvia Cholodnuik; and resource director Leah Deans. They are 
here today during Adoption Awareness Month to celebrate 
adoptive families in our communities. This month is also a 
special way to recognize that as many as 6 out of 10 
Saskatchewan people are connected by adoption in some way 
during their lifetime. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me 
in welcoming these three representatives of the Saskatchewan 
Adoption Centre to their Legislative Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition, I also want to welcome the members here 
from the Adoption Support Centre. I actually just last night was 
looking on your website and looking at all the wonderful 
services that you provide to many people in our province, and 
I’m very grateful for everything that you do for people who are 
going through the adoption process. And so I want to also 
welcome you to this Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to introduce to you and through you to all the rest of the 
members of the Legislative Assembly, 24 grade 7 and 8 
students from MacNeill School — give us a wave, excellent — 
seated in your west gallery. They’re accompanied by their 
teacher, Ms. Charlene Enion, and their intern, Sarah Wishira. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is my third group of school groups to the 



1324 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2016 

Legislative Assembly this fall. Now we have a little friendly 
competition going with the member of Regina Gardiner Park. 
Today we’re tied, and I think later on this week I’m going to 
have one more school group. So there you go. So welcome to 
the Legislative Assembly. And I’ll have an opportunity to meet 
with them later on to have probably a fairly robust conversation 
of what they see today. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 
 
Ms. Carr: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, seated in 
your gallery, I’d like to introduce someone who actually needs 
no introduction at all — former MLA for Estevan, Doreen 
Eagles. And with her is her partner, Al Brigden. It is a pleasure 
to have them both in the gallery today. I know she’s making her 
rounds visiting everybody, and I want to send a special thank 
you to her from me and our constituency. She left me in a good 
place. She was a mentor when I needed one, and thank you so 
much for being you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join with the member from Estevan in saying hello to Doreen 
Eagles. Welcome back to your legislature, Doreen. I don’t think 
I’m giving away any secrets, but Doreen was a pretty fierce 
opponent in the political arena, but also a pretty lovely person. 
And it’s good to see her here, and it’s good to see her doing 
well. And, you know, if we can get a few more of her 
colleagues shifted up to the gallery from the floor, that’d make 
a good day’s work, Mr. Speaker. But it’s really great to see 
Doreen here at her Legislative Assembly. 
 
And I also want to say, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, a 
word of welcome to a gentleman by the name of Dave Boan. 
We’re here today to celebrate the Paralympians and the 
Olympians, and the great work that people like Dave Boan do 
out in amateur sport across the province is . . . this is one of the 
products of their labours. And I’m speaking about Dave 
because I know him through the Regina Water Polo 
Association, Mr. Speaker, and the home pool for Regina Water 
Polo of course is the Lawson Aquatic Centre, which is in the 
fair riding of Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
And Dave started playing water polo before I was born and was 
already accruing, like, Sask Sport water polo builder awards in 
1983 when I was younger as well, Mr. Speaker. But anyway I 
just want to take this opportunity to pull Dave’s leg, out of the 
pool, and certainly to say this: you know, we’re here today 
because of the work of people like Dave as president of the 
Regina Water Polo Association, as heading up sport 
development with Water Polo Saskatchewan, as playing a lead 
role in the coaching around various of the championship teams 
that are coming out from the Regina Armada. And again, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s really good to see Mr. Boan here wearing a 
business suit and not perhaps a swimsuit. 
 
But please welcome these two individuals to their Legislative 
Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

in the west gallery I’ve got a school group — Vanier Collegiate 
from Moose Jaw is here to watch proceedings. And I’d like to 
welcome the 21 students along with the teachers, Mr. Doug 
Panko and Mr. Kelvin Turberfield, that are accompanying with 
them. Mr. Speaker, also on the floor is the student, Makenzie 
Wood, is there at the far end along with Mrs. Tara Cathcart, part 
of the Vanier group. 
 
I met with the group just before lunch, Mr. Speaker. They asked 
a lot of interesting questions. I was able to answer most of 
them, so that was gratifying. Also presented them with a flag, a 
Saskatchewan flag that was autographed by the designer, 
Anthony Drake, when he was here earlier in the summer. It’s 
nice to see them here in the legislature. 
 
Just an aside note about Vanier Collegiate, I along with the 
Minister of Social Services and the member from Wakamow 
were at a key presentation for a Habitat for Humanity home in 
Moose Jaw this morning, and during that presentation there was 
a special thanks to the students from Vanier from the 
entrepreneur class. They were involved with raising money and 
helping with the home as well. So that gives you an impression 
of how valuable they are and the good work that Vanier does to 
our communities. So I’ll ask everyone to welcome them to their 
Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I too would like to join with the member from 
Moose Jaw to welcome a guest in our gallery. Mr. Doug Panko, 
if you could stand and give us a wave. I would like to welcome 
him and his class from Moose Jaw. 
 
Doug is a valuable member of our Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Institute steering committee. SSTI [Saskatchewan Social 
Sciences Teachers’ Institute on Parliamentary Democracy] 2016 
starts on Saturday, November 19th and goes until Wednesday 
the 23rd. 
 
Doug was good enough to bring his students through my office 
earlier today after they had a meeting with their member from 
Moose Jaw. I was disappointed to hear that he never got ice 
cream for the students. But I promise the students now that after 
talking to the member from Moose Jaw, he will be visiting your 
school before the end of the year with ice cream sandwiches. 
 
So would everyone please join with me in welcoming Doug and 
his students to his Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition to reverse cuts to the 
Lighthouse program. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that 
in April 2014, the minister of Social Services, the then minister 
of Social Services said that the Lighthouse in Saskatoon would 
“. . . take pressure off existing detox facilities, hospitals, and 
police cells, while keeping people safe, especially in our 
brutally cold winters.” That same day, Mr. Speaker, the 
petitioners point out that the minister of Health said, “We want 
to ensure that individuals with mental health and addictions 
issues have a safe place to stay.” 



November 15, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1325 

The petitioners also point out that this government has 
repeatedly, since that time, indicated that the Lighthouse 
stabilization unit is a valuable tool for keeping individuals out 
of hospital or emergency rooms and jail cells. And with recent 
record over capacity in the Saskatoon Health Region in our 
emergency rooms, in our hospitals there, Mr. Speaker . . . 
Obviously the Lighthouse isn’t the whole part of the problem 
there, but making these cuts to the Lighthouse stabilization unit 
certainly doesn’t help, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately reverse 
their recent cuts to funding that allows extremely 
vulnerable people to access the services of the Lighthouse 
stabilization unit in Saskatoon, and revisit their imposition 
of a strict and narrow definition of homelessness in 
November of 2015 which forced the Lighthouse to cut 
back its hours of essential services in February of 2016, 
and take immediate steps to ensure that homeless people in 
Saskatchewan have emergency shelter, clothing, and food 
available to them before more lives are lost. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens from 
Manitou and Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition regarding wetlands. Wetlands serve a very vital 
function to our ecosystem. They take the form of marshes, bogs, 
fens, swamps, and open water. Wetlands are home to wildlife, 
including waterfowl. They clean the water running off of 
agricultural fields and they protect us from flooding and 
drought. They are a playground where families can explore and 
play. 
 
In the worst cases, such as some areas on the prairies, as much 
as 90 per cent of our wetlands have disappeared. As they 
continue to disappear, so too do the many benefits they provide. 
Sound wetland policy will allow Saskatchewan to provide 
sustainable development for all sectors of business in the 
province. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the petition that reads as follows, respectfully 
request the Government of Saskatchewan to: 
 
Increase funding to do the proper inventory work, putting 
Saskatchewan in a better position to manage the water 
resource; 
 
Speed up the evaluation of high-risk watersheds where 
there is significant damage annually from flooding. This 
evaluation must include a recognition of drainage works 
that could be closed or restored that will alleviate some of 
the issues downstream with respect to flooding and nutrient 
loading; and 
 
Create a sound and transparent mitigation process that 
adequately addresses sustainable development. The 
sequence should first focus on avoiding the environmental 
harm whenever possible, before a secondary focus on 
minimizing the harm with compensation being sought only 

when the development is deemed essential and the first two 
stages cannot be met. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals who have signed this petition are 
from here in the city of Regina. I so submit. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition in support of Wakamow Valley 
Authority in Moose Jaw. And we know that as a result of the 
passage of The Wakamow Valley Authority Amendment Act, 
2016 on June 30th, the Wakamow Valley Authority lost its 
statutory funding of $127,000 from the Saskatchewan 
government in addition to $30,000 in supplemental funding. 
This loss of annual funding negatively affected the ability of 
Wakamow to maintain its lands and repair its parks, repair its 
buildings, and provide services to the community of Moose Jaw 
and surrounding areas. We know that on June 21st, 2016 the 
provincial government, including the two members from Moose 
Jaw, voted in favour of this bill resulting in cuts to Wakamow 
and subsequent job losses. 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan takes the 
following action: 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to immediately repeal The Wakamow Valley Authority 
Amendment Act, 2016 and reinstate statutory funding to the 
Wakamow Valley Authority in Moose Jaw. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
the city of Moose Jaw. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present this petition in favour of child care 
amendments in Saskatchewan. Those signing this petition wish 
to draw our attention to the following: many of our licensed 
non-profit child care centres pay commercial property taxes, 
and this is not done in Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario, BC [British 
Columbia], or New Brunswick. 
 
Child care is essential to the economy, yet most centres struggle 
to balance their budget, and this impacts not only the quality but 
the number of spaces. Quality child care has an enormous 
positive impact on a child’s future outcomes and yields high 
rates of economic return. 
 
I will read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan recognize 
that licensed non-profit child care centres provide 



1326 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2016 

programs that are foundational to a healthy society by 
including them in The Education Act and exempt all 
licensed non-profit child care centres in Saskatchewan 
from property tax through changes to the appropriate 
legislation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those residents signing the petition today reside in 
Fort Qu’Appelle, Regina, and Sedley. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition calling for a stop to the Sask Party sell-off of 
SaskTel. The petitioners point out that SaskTel is owned by all 
of us and it was built with Saskatchewan hard work and 
innovation and pride. And they point out that in the recent 
election campaign the Sask Party promised they would not 
privatize SaskTel. But you know, the petitioners are also calling 
for, instead of looking at their own waste and scandal, the Sask 
Party is now talking about breaking that promise and looking to 
sell off SaskTel to make a quick dollar. 
 
They also point out that in the last five years alone, Mr. 
Speaker, SaskTel has returned $497 million to support 
government programs and services like education and health 
care. They also point out, Mr. Speaker, that once SaskTel is 
gone, there’s no getting it back and no telling what else the Sask 
Party will sell. 
 

In the prayer that reads as follows [Mr. Speaker], the 
petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the Saskatchewan Party 
government to keep their promise, stop their plan to sell off 
SaskTel, and keep our valued Crown corporation in the 
hands of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular iteration of the petition, in addition 
to the many others, this one is signed by people from Regina. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present a petition calling on the government to reverse the cuts 
to the Aboriginal court worker program. The Government of 
Saskatchewan cut the budget for the Aboriginal court worker 
program in the 2016-2017 provincial budget. Those on this side 
of the House know that Aboriginal court workers play an 
important role helping Aboriginal people in criminal and child 
apprehension cases. Aboriginal peoples are disproportionately 
represented in Saskatchewan’s correctional centres and 
Aboriginal court workers successfully help to make our 
communities safer through reduced recidivism rates. I’d like to 
read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan reverse its 
short-sighted and counterproductive cuts to the Aboriginal 
court worker program. 

 
I have several pages of this petition to submit today, Mr. 
Speaker, and those signing these pages come from Saskatoon, 

Churchbridge, Esterhazy, Prince Albert, Weyburn, Raymore, 
and Montmartre. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
to stop the redirection of funding of the Northern Teacher 
Education Program Council, Inc. A recent report shows that 94 
per cent of NORTEP [northern teacher education program] 
grads found employment in the North. NORTEP has improved 
teacher retention rates in the North. NORTEP has a positive 
economic impact in northern Saskatchewan. NORTEP provides 
high-quality, face-to-face instruction and services to students. 
The province’s financial deficit cannot be fixed by cutting 
indigenous education in the North and a program that has 
served the North for over 40 years. And the prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to immediately restore 
their five-year agreement to fund the Northern Teacher 
Education Program Council, Inc. and to continue to fund 
NORTEP-NORPAC programs in La Ronge. 

 
It is signed by hundreds and hundreds of people in northern 
Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to 
the federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, this will impose a 
regressive tax on all of our exports, be it agriculture, mining, or 
oil. Unfortunately we will then be uncompetitive on the world 
markets and when that happens, there will be unprecedented job 
losses. This tax was dreamt up by the Trudeau government with 
absolutely no thought to economic realities. And as if that isn’t 
bad enough, the NDP [New Democratic Party] right here in 
Saskatchewan will not vote against this tax and stand up for the 
hard-working people of this province. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
This petition is signed by the good people of Arborfield, Zenon 
Park, Tisdale, Nipawin, Aylsham, Ridgedale, and Carrot River. 
I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 
 

Recognizing Olympic and Paralympic Participants 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We are 



November 15, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1327 

honoured to celebrate the Saskatchewan athletes, officials, 
coaches, support staff, and volunteers that participated in the 
Olympic and Paralympic Games in Rio this summer. To 
compete and contribute as athletes at the most elite level known 
to sport is an honour to be proud of. Mr. Speaker, we all should 
be proud of these athletes in the way they have represented our 
country and our province on the international stage. 
 
Their commitment to sport provides many positive benefits to 
our province. Not only do they contribute to the great quality of 
life sports brings to the people; sports brings the people of 
Saskatchewan together. Mr. Speaker, these athletes also serve 
as role models to an entire generation of our youth, showing 
them that their dreams have no limits and that gold is truly 
within reach. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in 
congratulating all the athletes, coaches, officials, and volunteers 
on their achievements, and we wish all of you the best of luck 
in your future endeavours. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Hear, hear. Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the 
Official Opposition, I’d like to stand and recognize those 
individuals who really embody true Canadian and 
Saskatchewan spirit and pride — our amazing Canadian 
Olympic and Paralympic athletes and coaches. These athletes 
and coaches proudly represented our country on the world stage 
this summer with dignity and grace, and reminded us that 
Canadians can compete with the very best from around the 
world. 
 
In particular I’d like to recognize our very own Saskatchewan 
athletes for their impressive performances. This summer our 
athletes came from proud communities all across this great 
province and joined with teammates from across Canada to 
shine throughout the Olympic and Paralympic Games as a 
united team, Team Canada. 
 
And what a diverse group of elite athletes we have from our 
province. They included a golfer from Weyburn — go figure 
there, Mr. Speaker; a shot putter from Hanley; a volleyball 
player, a wrestler, a para-cycler, a swimmer, a wheelchair 
basketball player, a sailor, and a wheelchair racer, all from 
Saskatoon; along with a wheelchair basketball player from 
Edenwold; a swimmer and a wheelchair rugby player, both 
from Regina; a heptathlete from Humboldt who brought home 
the bronze; and of course the Ronald McDonald youth 
ambassador, Carter from Carlyle. 
 
Along with our diverse array of athletes, it’s also important to 
recognize Olympic and Paralympic coaches and support staff. 
Their knowledge, experience, and leadership are vital in guiding 
each of these athletes to success. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I call on all members to join with me in 
congratulating Canadian Olympic and Paralympic athletes and 
coaches across Canada, and especially those who did us so 
proud right here in Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 

Adoption Awareness Month 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise in the House to note that November 2016 has been 
proclaimed Adoption Awareness Month. This month celebrates 
adoptive families across Saskatchewan. Almost 37,000 
adoptions have occurred in Saskatchewan since 1922, and we 
want to thank those that have opened their hearts and their 
homes. 
 
The Adoption Support Centre of Saskatchewan is a wonderful 
partner. They have planned a variety of exciting events across 
the province to celebrate Adoption Awareness Month. The 
Adoption Support Centre began in the ’80s as a group of 
adoptive parents providing support to one another. Today, they 
have grown into a province-wide, confidential service that 
provides pre- and post-adoptive information and support for 
domestic, private, step-parent and adult adoptions. 
 
This month we will also be reminding all adult adoptees and 
birth parents that access to birth registration information is 
changing on January 1st, 2017, as the new regulations come 
into effect. These changes are meant to improve access to 
information, and support Saskatchewan adult adoptees and birth 
parents in learning more about their own history and, if they 
choose, to strengthen their connection to their culture or birth 
family. 
 
I ask that members join me as we celebrate our adoptive 
families across the province and important work being done at 
the Adoption Support Centre. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Girl Guides of Canada Make a Difference 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Every day in this 
province, people volunteer their time and skills to ensure that 
young people in our communities have opportunities to learn 
and grow. Recently I had the pleasure of meeting with the Girl 
Guides of Regina units No. 44 and No. 49 at St. Theresa 
elementary school. This group was attended by young women 
ages 5 to 14. I was invited by the leaders of these troops, 
women who volunteer their time and their energy. 
 
Girl Guides of Canada is an organization of choice for women 
and girls that aims to empower young women and make 
positive differences in the lives of every girl and woman who 
experiences guiding, so that she can contribute responsibly to 
her community. 
 
While with these young women, I sat on the floor in a circle in 
the gym and these young women asked me a number of 
questions regarding my job and my role as an MLA. Their 
questions were thoughtful. They were fun. They asked me what 
my job entails, what my favourite part of the job is, and they 
were very interested in what we eat in the cafeteria at lunch . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . I’m getting comments from this 
side. This experience was educational and enriching and, as I 
told them, it sincerely was the highlight of my week. And I 
wished each of them happiness and success in their futures. 
 



1328 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2016 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of this Assembly to join 
me in celebrating these wonderful young women and all those 
such as their troop leaders who lend their time to mentor, 
encourage, and enable young people in our province to find 
their path. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 
 

Stem Cell Donor Honoured 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with great pleasure 
that I rise today to recognize, to salute, and thank a young man 
who lives in my constituency. Julien Meier was recently 
honoured at the 17th annual Honouring our Lifeblood gala held 
at the Canadian Museum of Nature in Ottawa. Julien, who is a 
native of Hanover, Germany, registered with the German 
National Registry of Blood Stem Cell in 2005. When he was 
contacted in 2013 and told that he was a potential match for a 
patient in Canada, he thought that it was fate. 
 
You see, Mr. Speaker, he had been planning to move to Canada. 
Once he was here, he joined the OneMatch Stem Cell and 
Marrow Network in 2014, and went to great lengths to 
expediate the process of obtaining Saskatchewan health 
insurance to make the donation possible. He then travelled from 
North Battleford to Winnipeg to donate. 
 
On September 12th he was one of 30 regional and national 
award recipients. Mr. Speaker, Julien knows that when you 
donate life-giving blood or stem cells, you’re not just giving to 
one person. And when he was asked why he donates, Julien 
replied, “When you donate, you’re giving the patient’s family 
and friends more time with that loved one. Why wouldn’t you 
want to do that?” 
 
[14:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in thanking and 
congratulating this new resident of Saskatchewan for his 
generosity in donating stem cells to a patient in need. We 
certainly welcome Julien to Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 

Inauguration of Regina Mosque 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier this month, the 
Khalifa of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Jama’at, His Holiness Mirza 
Masroor Ahmad, spent a week in Saskatchewan. During his 
tour of our province, His Holiness inaugurated Mahmood 
Mosque in Regina by delivering the Friday sermon which was 
broadcast live in 200 countries and translated in 17 languages. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is Saskatchewan’s first purpose-built mosque. 
The Ahmadiyya Muslim Jama’at built this mosque and are its 
custodians, but it really belongs to everyone. Mr. Speaker, any 
person of any faith or ethnicity is welcome to attend the mosque 
to pray in their own way. The mosque is open to all neighbours 
for community activities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the motto of Ahmadiyya Muslim Jama’at is, 
“Love for all, hatred for none.” During the reception for the 

opening of this mosque, His Holiness said, “The true teaching 
of Islam is peace, love, and harmony, right. That is what we 
have been preaching; this is what we have been practising 
everywhere.” 
 
I ask all the members to join me in congratulating Regina’s 
Ahmadiyya Muslim community on the opening of the first 
purpose-built mosque in Regina. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 
 

Fire Chief Presented With Protective Services Medal 
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to recognize the outstanding volunteer contributions of a 
constituent of mine. Mr. Speaker, Chief John Bexson was 
recently presented with the Saskatchewan Protective Services 
Medal by the Lieutenant Governor in recognition of his 26 
years of exemplary volunteer service with the Britannia Wilton 
Fire Department. 
 
Chief Bexson joined the fire department in its first year of 
operations in 1990. Within three years he was promoted to 
captain, and in 1996 he was promoted to chief, a position he has 
now held for 20 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fire department has grown significantly during 
Chief Bexson’s tenure, which has seen the design and 
construction of a new fire hall in 2009, the purchase of a new 
pumper truck in 2010, and the creation of a full-time paid 
position with the department. Chief Bexson was among the 
many firefighters who helped to fight the La Ronge wildfires of 
2015. 
 
Firefighting has been a proud Bexson family tradition since the 
1950s, Mr. Speaker. John’s son Riley, who has been a 
firefighter since he was 16 years old, represents the fourth 
generation of Bexson firefighters in the Lloydminster area. 
 
I ask all members to join me in thanking Chief John Bexson and 
the Bexson family for their many years of firefighting service in 
Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Auditor’s Report and Statements During Question Period 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Sisters of Our Lady of 
the Missions got one price from Highways: 11,000 an acre. And 
two well-connected businessmen got another price from the 
Sask Party through the GTH [Global Transportation Hub]: 
103,000 an acre. And those two gentlemen walked away with 
$11 million of profit from Saskatchewan people’s hard-earned 
dollars. Mr. Speaker, this is a question to the Deputy Premier, 
not the minister of tired talking points and non-answers in this 
Assembly . . .  
 
The Speaker: — I caution the Leader of the Opposition to refer 
to the minister by his proper title. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — This is a clear and simple question for 



November 15, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1329 

the Deputy Premier of Saskatchewan: how can he possibly 
justify giving the nuns one price, and well-connected 
businessmen millions more? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The fact of 
the matter is the auditor had full authority to look into all of the 
matters, the transactions in question. The auditor testified as 
recently as last week in front of the Public Accounts 
Committee. She underlined and confirmed the findings of her 
report. She refuted every single one of the allegations put 
forward by the members opposite. She did identify challenges 
in that report, Mr. Speaker. We accept the recommendations 
that she made in that report, and we’re working on 
implementing those recommendations. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the question of course was 
to the Deputy Premier. No answer again from that minister here 
today. I guess that surprises no one. 
 
Everyone in Saskatchewan knows it wasn’t a forensic audit 
from the auditor. And the question here is potential criminal 
breach of trust, and this is something that is a very serious 
matter, Mr. Speaker. The Ministry of Highways bought land 
from the nuns under the threat of expropriation, far, far less than 
they paid the Sask Party-supporting businessman. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Deputy Premier: why did that businessman 
get the royal treatment and a sweetheart deal from that 
government, and why were the nuns treated so differently? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Day after day, Mr. Speaker, the Leader 
of the Opposition comes in here with smear, with allegations. 
Today he made a very serious allegation in that question, a very 
serious allegation. I challenge the Leader of the Opposition to 
make that same allegation outside of the House, outside of the 
House, not protected by the absolute privilege of this Chamber. 
I challenge him to make that exact same allegation outside of 
the House. Will he have the courage of his convictions to do it? 
Yes or no? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that minister will not 
intimidate this opposition . . . [inaudible] . . . on the floor of this 
Assembly or outside in the rotunda any day of the week, which 
is why we wrote the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] a 
long time ago. I think the minister needs to keep up with this 
file. 
 
The members opposite can characterize the simple questions 
we’re asking on behalf of Saskatchewan people any way they 
like. They can heckle, laugh, guffaw, try to brush things off as 
no big deal. But when asked by a journalist about this scandal, 
Sister Veronica Dunne of the Sisters of Our Lady of the 
Missions said it was something quite different going through 

her mind. Mr. Speaker, if not for me or for the people of 
Saskatchewan, will the Deputy Premier explain to Sister 
Veronica Dunne why the well-connected land speculator from 
Alberta seemed happy to go ahead with buying land from the 
nuns even though they were facing potential expropriation? 
Why were they treated so differently? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Smear. Allegations. The Leader of the 
Opposition made a very serious allegation of criminal 
wrongdoing just two questions ago, Mr. Speaker. He did. He 
stood in his place . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And the 
Deputy Leader can . . . The Deputy Leader can heckle and 
guffaw all that he wants, Mr. Speaker. The Leader of the 
Opposition . . . I would venture to speculate, Mr. Speaker, that 
the Leader of the Opposition will not have the courage of his 
convictions to make that same allegation outside of the House. 
Why is that? Why is that, Mr. Speaker? He can come in here, 
protected by privilege, and smear members of the government, 
smear members of the public. He can do that all he wants in 
here where he’s protected. Why won’t he do it outside? 
 
We know that he’s done that in the past. He has a record of this, 
Mr. Speaker. He’s actually been . . . This is coming from the 
Leader of the Opposition in charge of a party that was found in 
contempt, was found in contempt of parliament just a few 
months ago, Mr. Speaker. He himself was on the verge of being 
found in contempt of parliament, just last year, two years ago 
for a similar allegation. Will he have the courage of his 
convictions? Will he do that and make that same allegation 
outside of the House? Yes or no? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are 
getting pretty sick and tired with that kind of nonsense. Millions 
have been wasted of hard-earned dollars. And as for potential 
criminal breach of trust, that’s exactly what we asked for to be 
investigated by the RCMP, something we said outside of this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and something we wrote a long period 
of time ago, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The question again, and it’s not to the minister who’s going to 
not answer a question. It’s to the Premier, in this case the 
Deputy Premier: why were those businessmen treated so 
differently than the nuns who got far, far less than they ever 
should have, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Here are the facts, Mr. Speaker. The 
Provincial Auditor had full authority to look into these matters 
in whatever way she saw fit. She did, by her own account, a 
very thorough job examining thousands of documents, 
conducting interviews with all of those involved in the 
transaction in question. What was her conclusion, Mr. Speaker? 
Her conclusion was very clear, reiterated again last week — no 
wrongdoing, no fraud, no conflict of interest. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 



1330 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2016 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Utter nonsense, Mr. Speaker. That 
answer undermines the respect that this House deserves. It’s an 
honour for all of us to represent in this Assembly. And debate in 
this House takes all sorts of different forms — sometimes 
tragic, sometimes serious, sometimes funny. But at all times, 
we’re working for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Yesterday that GTH minister who’s been assigned to answer 
these questions — or not answer them — on behalf of a Premier 
who’s ducking and hiding from doing so, was asked by 
journalists about his refusal to answer questions. And he 
quipped that there’s hyperbole in the House. He even said, 
“Look, question period is question period.” What does that even 
mean? This is the place where Saskatchewan people expect 
their government to be held accountable. 
 
So this is . . . I’m not looking for any sort of response from that 
minister. This is to the Deputy Premier: will he finally stand up 
today, lead by example, endeavour today to cut the spin and to 
cut the nonsense that we see and provide some answers to 
Saskatchewan people who deserve nothing less? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Nonsense and hyperbole. Pretty rich 
coming from the Leader of the Opposition who day after day 
comes in here and makes very serious allegations, smears 
members of this Assembly, smears members of the public. 
Won’t do it outside of the House though, Mr. Speaker, he won’t 
do it outside of the House. Doesn’t have the courage of his 
convictions to do the same thing outside of the House. He’s 
protected by privilege inside of the House. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, who’s worked very hard on behalf of 
the public of Saskatchewan? The Provincial Auditor. The 
Provincial Auditor who was tasked by the Public Accounts 
Committee to look into the matter, to get to the bottom of the 
matter, which she did — which she did, Mr. Speaker — 
examining thousands of documents, talking to all of those 
involved in the transaction. And what was her conclusion, Mr. 
Speaker? That there was no fraud, that there was no 
wrongdoing, and there was no conflict of interest. That was her 
conclusion whether the Leader of the Opposition likes it or not. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that minister’s petulance 
and arrogance day after day is outrageous in this Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker. I know this is . . . You know, this is coming from the 
very minister who was out in the rotunda yesterday and 
couldn’t answer a question in front of the media who were 
pressing him on why he wouldn’t provide answers in the 
Assembly. 
 
That minister was asked about, you know, the matter of the 
hyperbole in the House that the minister was referencing and he 
was backing up his claim that supposedly we’re pushing some 
sort of theories. Well no, not so. We’re pushing for basic 
answers to some pretty simple questions about millions of 
dollars that have been wasted. And he was asked, he was asked 
to provide a single example and he even failed to do that. 
 

Mr. Speaker, far from spreading any theories, we’re asking 
simple questions and trying to get finally some straightforward 
answers on this scandal. So does the Deputy Premier support 
the minister’s latest talking point, and will he answer in here 
what his minister refused to answer out there — just one 
example, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Of course, Mr. Speaker, we’ve 
responded to every question put to us by the opposition. As 
importantly, perhaps more importantly, do you know who else 
responded to every question put to her by the opposition? The 
Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker. Last week at Public Accounts 
for a hour and . . . Well we know that they don’t respect the 
work that the auditor did, or they definitely . . . And they think 
it’s funny. They’re laughing about it. The fact is the auditor 
answered every question that was put to her just last week by 
the opposition. Her testimony refuted the allegations that are 
being made by the Leader of the Opposition and by members of 
his party very directly, Mr. Speaker. She addressed all of these 
questions as she was asked to do by the Public Accounts 
Committee. 
 
Her conclusion after having went through that entire process, 
having done a very thorough job by her own account, was that 
there was no fraud, there was no conflict of interest, and there 
was no wrongdoing. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Support for School Boards 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, today the minister spoke with the 
SSBA [Saskatchewan School Boards Association], and while 
school boards have many questions, the minister is short on 
answers. This government has underfunded the teachers’ 
contract and left school boards to pick up the tab. They refused 
to provide mid-year funding adjustments and again left school 
boards to pick up the tab. And just last month they threw school 
boards under the school bus when the Sask Party had the gall to 
somehow imply that school boards are to blame for 
underfunding in classrooms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to top it all off, when asked again today whether 
the Sask Party was considering throwing out recently elected 
school board trustees, the minister refused to say that that was 
off the table. 
 
Will the Sask Party get rid of school board trustees? Will they 
amalgamate? How many school boards do they envision? Who 
have they consulted? What is their consultation plan with 
teachers, with parents, with students across the province? You 
can see there are many questions, but, Mr. Speaker, does this 
minister have any answers? 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m glad of the question 



November 15, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1331 

the member opposite asked. Mr. Speaker, June of earlier this 
year, and I quote, the member opposite said: 
 

The Education minister says that it’s the teachers who need 
to start looking for more savings. He said that school 
divisions should “sit down with a blank piece of paper” 
and then listed off . . . the things they [can do] . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, I want to correct what was actually said. In a June 
2nd scrum I said, and I quote: 
 

The challenge that I would say to all school divisions is sit 
down with a blank sheet of paper and say, ‘How many 
things can we share with another school division? Can we 
do a common set of payroll? Can we do things where we 
have common buying? How many superintendents do we 
really need? Can we have the principals do more of the 
management, more of the . . . 

 
Nowhere did I say the teachers need to look for savings, Mr. 
Speaker. We have over 10,000 teachers in our system. They 
work hard. We give them credit. And we’re not saying to them, 
look for savings, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister rattles on and on 
and on about the past and other things that I’m not sure what 
was being answered there, Mr. Speaker. But after a decade, 
nearly a decade of reign, it’s past time that he accept some 
responsibility. 
 
Understandably, school boards are frustrated. Teachers are 
frustrated. The Sask Party has underfunded school boards, 
forced them to cut, and then blames them for underfunding. 
Even when there was a glimmer of hope with this WCB 
[Workers’ Compensation Board] kickback to employers and it 
looked like maybe a little extra money was going to find its way 
back into our schools, the Sask Party clawed back every penny. 
This is just one piece of the underfunding puzzle, but it is that 
minister who happily handed over to businesses with one hand 
and took back from school boards with the other. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the WCB committee of review has stated that 
more transparency and more communication is needed 
surrounding the surplus paybacks. The minister’s actions spoke 
volumes. Will the minister admit his mistake in two of his 
portfolios and pay back the WCB refund to school boards? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve talked about 
Workers’ Compensation Board payments in the past. If it had 
been the other way and we’d been short, the school divisions 
would have come back to government and said, make up the 
shortfall. And we likely would have, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this was unexpected revenue back to the school 
divisions. I don’t deny for an instant that they would have put 
the money back to good use. But, Mr. Speaker, let me say this, 
is we have a billion dollar shortfall on this side of the House. 
We are going to work hard to remedy that issue. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we look at all places, all the way across the province. 
We look for efficiencies. We look for best places to spend our 
money. And, Mr. Speaker, one of those places is in the 
classroom. We are going to continue to do that. 
 
In 2007-2008 when we formed government, there was $1.41 
billion spent on education. 2016-17, that has gone up to $1.88 
billion, Mr. Speaker — a huge increase, 33 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker, in that time. Mr. Speaker, enrolment has gone up 9 per 
cent; our spending has gone up 33 per cent. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

Workers’ Compensation Board Review 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, private employers got big fat 
rebate cheques, and school boards and health regions, well they 
got theirs clawed back. And what are the workers of our 
province getting? Well according to the workers’ compensation 
committee of review, WCB is simply not working for the 
workers. Mr. Speaker, the WCB is spending an outrageous 90 
per cent of its time on backlogged appeals, and as a result the 
good connections with workers have now been replaced by 
those in need being made to feel that they are on trial. 
 
Mr. Speaker, workers pay into WCB. It’s theirs, but backlogs 
mean that workers and their families are simply waiting too 
long. In fact the turnaround times now for initial payments to 
Saskatchewan workers are among the longest in the country. 
Families are left to struggle while they wait, and some have 
even lost their homes. 
 
Will the minister take responsibility for this absolute failure and 
total mismanagement? Will he commit to showing some basic 
empathy and human decency to address these failures? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
raises several points, and I’m pleased to speak about workers’ 
compensation in our province. Mr. Speaker, when Workers’ 
Compensation Board is in an overfunded position, as they 
occasionally are, we try and refund that money back to the 
workers, to the employers. That is where the money came from. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our goal is to make sure that the fund stays stable 
and is able to service all of the claims that the workers submit. 
And, Mr. Speaker, it has never happened where that situation 
has existed where we were not able to fund all of the claims of 
the workers. In 1998, $23 million was returned; 1999, $36 
million was returned; year 2000, another $36 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the committee of review recently has filed its 
recommendations, and some of the recommendations are that 
they do a better job of communicating with both the workers 
and the employers. The Workers’ Compensation Board officials 
have indicated they accept those recommendations and are 
working to implement them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 



1332 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2016 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, these criticisms of the 
management of WCB are not new. We’ve heard this before 
from workers and employers from past reviews but it doesn’t 
seem to get any better. 
 
This review highlighted that these issues come from the top, 
and I quote: “There is a particular skill set that members of the 
board should have. These skill sets should be kept in mind 
when appointing members.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the report goes further and blatantly states that 
proper governance is not being achieved at the WCB. I know 
they love to use their total failure to manage responsibly as an 
excuse for the GTH, but are they proud of their mismanagement 
here too? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s the Sask Party that appoints these board 
members. When the Minister Responsible for the GTH went 
looking to address management problems on the GTH board, 
the first person he ticked off was himself. Well fair enough, Mr. 
Speaker. Now if the Minister Responsible for the WCB isn’t too 
busy picking fights with teachers and making cuts with our 
kids’ classrooms, can he tell us how he will ensure the 
consensus recommendations from this report will be addressed? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know where the 
member opposite thinks that I sit on the Workers’ 
Compensation Board. The member opposite also was at one 
time in his past the Minister Responsible for Workers’ 
Compensation Board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we go through a review process called committee 
of review every four years. They make recommendations every 
four years. Mr. Speaker, four years ago they recommended over 
50 things. All but one or two of those things were accepted and 
in fact implemented. They have made recommendations now, 
Mr. Speaker. Likely all or most of those things will be accepted 
and recommended. 
 
One of those was that they speed up their appeal time. The 
appeal time was almost a year long. Mr. Speaker, I’m told that 
the appeal time now is measured in a few weeks, two, three 
months at most. They had a rapid turnaround on how the 
appeals are working. 
 
They recommended as well that we look at the governance 
process for WCB and, Mr. Speaker, I look forward to 
consultation and discussion with the members opposite about 
how that might roll out. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Support for Vulnerable Citizens 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, every year we get another 
report about food bank use in Canada, and every year it’s on the 
rise again here in Saskatchewan. In just the last year alone, food 
bank usage in Saskatchewan is up a whopping seventeen and a 
half per cent. Mr. Speaker, what’s most alarming about these 
numbers is that nearly half of those who rely on the food banks 

in this province are children. Kids, Mr. Speaker. They need 
nutritious and healthy meals in order to grow and thrive, and 
more and more they are having to rely on the food banks. 
 
I think that everyone in this House would agree that these high 
numbers are unacceptable, that we must do a better job. The 
Sask Party blew through the surplus and the rainy day fund, and 
here’s where we are now. So what is this government’s plan to 
lower the number of Saskatchewan people who are forced to 
rely on the food banks? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 
would agree that these are not figures that we like to hear. The 
Social Services budget in my ministry, Mr. Speaker, has gone 
up by almost 70 per cent since we formed government. This is a 
government that cares about vulnerable people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also have the Saskatchewan poverty reduction 
strategy, Mr. Speaker, which is committed to reducing the 
number of Saskatchewan people who experience poverty for 
two years or more by 50 per cent by 2025, Mr. Speaker. Part of 
that includes, Mr. Speaker, our income assistance redesign 
which is focused on making income assistance more 
people-centred, more simple, more transparent, and more 
sustainable. 
 
These were also things that were talked about in the hunger 
report that was released today, Mr. Speaker. We will continue 
to work on this issue. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — The fact is our province’s food banks are 
being used by a growing number of people. Mr. Speaker, 
10,000 more people looking for work than a year ago. And the 
Sask Party is punishing Saskatchewan’s most vulnerable and 
making them pay the price for the Sask Party’s 
mismanagement, scandals, and waste. 
 
Yesterday the minister brought back the Sask Party cuts to the 
social assistance. It’s just a phase-in of the same cuts we saw in 
July that they were forced to back down on. Shockingly, Mr. 
Speaker, the Sask Party still has no idea who and exactly how 
badly these cuts will hurt. They still don’t even know how 
much they will save with this cold and callous attack on 
Saskatchewan’s most vulnerable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, supports like these that help the most vulnerable 
are most needed when times are tough. So why is the minister 
suggesting she’s concerned while her cuts are actually making 
things worse? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Mr. Speaker, what cuts? This 
government has invested $3 billion over its entire ministry for 
people with disabilities. Yesterday we rolled back issues on the 
2,700 people that the member opposite has talked about day 
after day. We’ve taken 112 people off the income tax rolls, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ve increased our child care spaces. We’ve 



November 15, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1333 

increased the shelter allowance nine times. We’ve increased our 
disability programs by 134 per cent since taking office, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I would say that this government is very committed to people 
who are vulnerable in this province, and we’ll continue to 
demonstrate that we are so. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Funding for Health Care Facilities 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, as of yesterday, City Hospital in 
Saskatoon is under a boil-water advisory. Thirty-nine surgeries 
have been postponed and other procedures have been cancelled. 
These delays and backlogs will only get worse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not the first time something like this has 
happened. Saskatchewan hospitals are struggling with huge 
infrastructure needs and this government is refusing to address 
them. RQHR [Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region] needs $23.8 
million a year for capital renewal, and that, Mr. Speaker, is just 
to keep the facilities functioning. 
 
But that Sask Party gives them zero. Zero planned dollars, Mr. 
Speaker. We have hospitals that are literally crumbling with 
serious maintenance needs and the Sask Party is simply letting 
them fall apart, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, forget that minister’s usual rant about the past. 
What is he going to do to bring an end to these dangerous 
failures? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
the boil-water advisory, I was informed that as of last night the 
boil-water advisory was put in place. Tests are being conducted 
today and results are expected very quickly. Officials are taking 
all the appropriate precautions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
To the member’s comments about inadequate funding, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s just simply not the case. Mr. Speaker, we’ve 
made health care funding a priority. A 50 per cent increase in 
funding since we were given the privilege of forming 
government in 2007 . . . Mr. Speaker, the member asks a 
question but apparently doesn’t want to listen as she continues 
to heckle from her seat. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, for the rest of the members, they’ll be 
interested to know that in health care, again a priority, we’ve 
recruited close to 650 more doctors in the province, thousands 
more nurses, Mr. Speaker. We’ve built new facilities. We’ve 
built a hospital in Moose Jaw. We’re building a hospital in 
North Battleford. Thirteen long-term care facilities around the 
province. Hundreds more long-term care workers. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, health care is a priority for this government and 
that’ll continue. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 174 through 176. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled the 
responses to questions 174 to 176. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 34 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 34 — The 
Provincial Lands Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and as always it is 
my absolute honour to be able to rise in the Assembly today and 
enter into the adjourned debates as we have been for the last 
few days, Mr. Speaker. And certainly this is an important part 
of the procedures in this House, as you know. 
 
Bill No. 34 is described by the minister as an entire revamp of 
The Provincial Lands Act. And as he points out in his original 
comments, this is an Act that has been around for a long, long 
time, Mr. Speaker. . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . It’s been an 
Act that’s been around for a long, long time. And maybe I’ll be 
able to make some comments now without a lot of back and 
forth. We’ll see what happens. 
 
I think one of the starting places whenever we talk about land 
here in Saskatchewan, and certainly in any country, is the 
importance of the land to the people. And as the minister 
pointed out, there’s 161 million acres of land in Saskatchewan, 
100 million acres of which is owned and controlled by the 
people, by the government for the people. 
 
And when we look at our relationship here in Saskatchewan 
with the first peoples that were here, I think it’s very important, 
as always. And, Mr. Speaker, we have evidence of that here on 
the table, where we have an acknowledgement of the rights of 
the First Nations people and also the rights of the Métis people. 
We have the sash representing the rights of the Métis people 
and their homelands, and also we have the banner with the sun 
shining and the rivers flowing. 
 
And we know that our obligations to the treaty people stem 
from those promises that were made over 120 years ago now, 
Mr. Speaker, coming up on . . . You know, in the 1870s most of 
this territory, which was then described as the Northwest 
Territories under the Dominion government, was actually the 
land, the sovereign land of the First Nations that occupied this 



1334 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2016 

land at the time. And as you know, Mr. Speaker, the land we’re 
currently sitting on, standing here today is in Treaty 4. Treaty 4 
was signed in 1874 and in Saskatoon, where I am from, Treaty 
6. So Treaty 4 and 6 are two of the larger territories that belong 
. . . that are part of what is now the province of Saskatchewan 
under the Dominion law. 
 
And I think one of the things we need to look to, when we’re 
looking at legislation from this government in relation to the 
use of land, is how the relationship with First Nations fits in. 
And sadly, Mr. Speaker, it just doesn’t exist in this bill. We’ve 
seen governments put in all kinds of preambles to bills. We’ve 
seen governments insert all kinds of political actions such as 
The Interpretation Act that we’re debating as well at this time, 
Mr. Speaker. But what do we see in this bill? There’s one small, 
tiny reference in section 25 of this bill to the obligations that the 
province has under the Treaty Land Entitlement Agreement. 
But there’s nothing, there’s nothing in here that acknowledges 
the relationship of our First Nations to the land, their ongoing 
treaty rights to those lands. And I think it’s a sad indication, Mr. 
Speaker, of the value that this government puts on those 
relationships. 
 
I took a quick peek at the Truth and Reconciliation Commission 
of Canada and some of the recommendations that were made 
there. And just through the simple process of doing a search for 
the word “land,” I came up with some of the calls to action that 
the Truth and Reconciliation Commission made regarding land 
and our approach to our relationship with the land here in 
Saskatchewan. And there’s a few recommendations that I want 
to get into the record because we certainly don’t see any 
reference at all in this Act to those calls to action from the Truth 
and Reconciliation Commission. This government has access to 
that commission. This government has access to those calls to 
action, and we do not see any reference whatsoever to those 
important calls to action. And there was plenty of opportunity, 
Mr. Speaker, and I’ll get into that a little bit later. 
 
But the first call to action that I want to share today and get on 
the record is no. 45, and it reads as follows: 
 

We call upon the Government of Canada, on behalf of all 
Canadians, to jointly develop with Aboriginal peoples a 
Royal Proclamation of Reconciliation to be issued by the 
Crown. The proclamation would build on the Royal 
Proclamation of 1763 and the Treaty of Niagara of 1764, 
and reaffirm the nation-to-nation relationship between 
Aboriginal peoples and the Crown. The proclamation 
would include, but not be limited to, the following 
commitments:  
 

i. Repudiate concepts used to justify European 
sovereignty over Indigenous lands and peoples such as 
the Doctrine of Discovery and terra nullius.  
 
ii. Adopt and implement the United Nations Declaration 
on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples as the framework 
for reconciliation.  
 
iii. Renew or establish Treaty relationships based on 
principles of mutual recognition, mutual respect, and 
shared responsibility for maintaining those relationships 
into the future.  

iv. Reconcile Aboriginal and Crown constitutional and 
legal orders to ensure that Aboriginal peoples are full 
partners in Confederation, including the recognition and 
integration of Indigenous laws and legal traditions in 
negotiation and implementation processes involving 
Treaties, land claims, and other constructive agreements.  

 
Mr. Speaker, the next call to action also references these types 
of ideas within the context of the Indian Residential School 
Settlement Agreement.  
 
This morning we had the opportunity to meet with the United 
Church of Canada’s representatives, and they made the very 
specific point, Mr. Speaker — and I hope government members 
had an opportunity to listen to them as well — that we need to 
place our relationship with First Nations and Métis people at a 
much higher priority. This is the call that we got from the Truth 
and Reconciliation Commission, and this is the government 
who has that opportunity and has chosen to not priorize it. 
 
And I think that’s a sad indictment, Mr. Speaker, in these days 
when we know we see murdered and missing Aboriginal 
women on, you know, in the news on a regular basis. We see 
the terrible suicides that are taking place in the North. We have 
our colleagues here on this side who continue to bring forward 
the plight of the northern people here to this government and 
often falling on deaf ears, Mr. Speaker. The NORTEP program, 
the Aboriginal court worker program — all of these things are 
opportunities for this government, and yet we see them failing 
time and time again. And The Provincial Lands Act, Mr. 
Speaker, is no exception. And I think it’s just really a sad 
indictment on this government who are totally ignoring exactly 
what the courts have been saying about our relationship with 
the land and our relationship with Aboriginal peoples. 
 
Now, for example, we know that the Constitution Act talks 
about Aboriginal rights and I’m going to put that in the record. 
This is in 1982, the Constitution Act, 1982, was enacted. Part II, 
Rights of the Aboriginal People, section 35 reads, “The existing 
aboriginal and treaty rights of the aboriginal peoples of Canada 
are hereby recognized and affirmed.” 
 
This is in our Constitution, Mr. Speaker, but we see nothing 
when it comes to an Act that deals with all of the Crown lands 
that currently exist in Saskatchewan. What a missed 
opportunity, what a missed opportunity for this government to 
show it’s serious about treating with First Nations and Métis 
people in a fair manner in a way that recognizes their rights. 
 
There’s another really important court case that came out in 
2014, Mr. Speaker, and this is the Roger William case. And the 
Supreme Court gives us more of an explanation of what section 
35 of our Constitution Act really means. And here’s what they 
say: 
 

Section 35 . . . protects Aboriginal rights against provincial 
and federal legislative power and provides a framework to 
facilitate negotiations and reconciliation of Aboriginal 
interests with those of the broader public, [paragraph 118]. 

 
While rights that are recognized and affirmed are not 
absolute, s. 35 requires the Crown to reconcile its power 
with its duty, [and that’s paragraph 119]. 



November 15, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1335 

And they go on to say: 
 

As discussed, s. 35 of the Constitution Act, 1982, imposes 
limits on how both the federal and provincial governments 
can deal with land under Aboriginal title. Neither level of 
government is permitted to legislate in a way that results in 
a meaningful diminution of an Aboriginal or treaty right, 
unless such an infringement is justified in the broader 
public interest and is consistent with the Crown’s fiduciary 
duty owed to the Aboriginal group. The result is to protect 
Aboriginal and treaty rights while also allowing the 
reconciliation of Aboriginal interests with those of the 
broader society.  

 
Mr. Speaker, and that’s paragraph 139. 
 
So what we see here is an indication of the highest court of the 
land — when interpreting our constitution, which is the highest 
law of this land — and we’re seeing that there’s, we need to 
look for opportunities for reconciliation. Same message that 
comes from the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And when it comes to land, there’s nothing more fundamental 
than land to our relationships with the First Nations, with the 
Métis people. And again we see that right on the table in this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, is the importance of the land and the 
water as it relates to our relationships with First Nations. 
 
So just to begin, that’s sort of my big disappointment with the 
opportunity that was presented when we have two ministers — 
in this case, Agriculture and Environment — who are 
undertaking important work. And I believe that Bill No. 34 is 
very important work because it’s modernizing our land 
legislation. And as the minister pointed out in his second 
reading comments, this is very important. We need to 
continually reflect what’s happening. But his whole take on 
this, Mr. Speaker, is all about improved investment climate, 
which is an important thing, but I think it needs to be balanced 
with our relationship with the land and our relationship with 
First Nations. 
 
When the bill was first introduced, it was introduced in 1913 
. . . or sorry, no, a century later — 2013, Mr. Speaker. And I 
know that at that time, the ministers engaged in what they 
called meaningful consultation with First Nations. 
 
Unfortunately they, when . . . I think it was Perry Bellegarde 
was the chief. And he wrote a letter to the ministers at the time, 
in June of 2013, and indicated why what the province was 
proposing was nowhere near consultation as it is described 
within the legal framework of this land. And as the ministers 
knew, they rely on the Government of Saskatchewan’s First 
Nation and Métis Consultation Policy Framework. The 
ministers know that has been rejected outright by the First 
Nations of this province and the Métis peoples as an 
unacceptable framework that does not meaningfully engage in 
what the courts were describing when it comes to duty to 
consult. 
 
So right off the hop, these ministers insulted these First Nations 
leaders by referring to that framework. So that’s right off, strike 
number one. 

Secondly, they only set aside three consultation meetings to 
engage 74 Saskatchewan First Nations. And as the FSIN 
[Federation of Sovereign Indigenous Nations] has pointed out, 
that contravenes the Supreme Court’s declaration that standard 
public notices and open houses are not sufficient and the First 
Nations are entitled to a distinct consultation process. So strike 
number two, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also they made reference, Chief Bellegarde made reference to 
the TLE [treaty land entitlement] First Nations and specific 
claim First Nations who are actively acquiring land. Now this 
one actually was incorporated into The Provincial Lands Act, 
but I’m going to speak to that a little bit later. It’s deficient, but 
it actually did make its way into the Act. And then there was a 
couple more problems that the chief identified. The new Act 
must also ensure First Nations are granted continued access to 
hunt, fish, and trap, and gather on provincial lands. Not a word 
of that is mentioned, Mr. Speaker, in the bill itself that’s on the 
floor today. 
 
So that’s strike number three, and guess what? There’s actually 
a strike four as well. So it’s different rules for this government. 
The review, as the chief pointed out, does not provide for any 
long-term engagement for the review of the proposed legislative 
amendments to ensure the First Nations constitutional and 
treaty rights are not impacted or abrogated. And, Mr. Speaker, 
there’s nothing, nothing in the bill that deals with the abrogation 
and the non-derogation of First Nations rights. 
 
So it’s four strikes that this government got from the First 
Nation leadership. And a month later the Minister of 
Agriculture replied and gave some examples in their view that 
this was a low trigger for the duty to consult and therefore 
there’s no problem. Basically they just shrugged off the 
concerns of the leadership of First Nations. That’s not what 
reconciliation is about, Mr. Speaker. That’s not what the Truth 
and Reconciliation Commission is about, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
not what the Supreme Court is talking about when we talk about 
the honour of the Crown, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[15:00] 
 
And unfortunately that’s what we have in front of us today. And 
I think it’s disturbing and it’s unsettling that this government 
has missed a wonderful opportunity to begin the process of 
reconciliation, to begin the process of the nation-to-nation, 
sovereign-to-sovereign conversations that need to happen 
before we start affecting 100 million acres of Crown land over 
which First Nations have extensive treaty rights, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the ball is dropped. Four strikes against this government. 
And what did they do back in May of this year? They had 
another opportunity because they decided they’re going to 
reintroduce this bill. What did they do? They just said, okay you 
guys — FSIN, you get less than a month to comment. Ignoring 
completely all the concerns that the FSIN had already raised. 
 
So I think, Mr. Speaker, on that level alone there’s, well 
definitely a lost opportunity but I think some serious disregard 
of the recommendations of the Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission, serious disregard of the principles enunciated in 
our Constitution Act, and certainly serious disregard of the 
Supreme Court of Canada’s enunciation of what the honour of 



1336 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2016 

the Crown is about when it comes to our relationship with the 
land and our relationship with First Nations and Métis people, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
In terms of the Treaty Land Entitlement Agreement itself, Mr. 
Speaker, I had the honour of working in that program for 17 
years, back from 1994 till I left that job to come and be a 
member of the Legislative Assembly. We moved over 700,000 
acres of land to reserve. And I can tell you the most difficult 
part of that whole process, the most difficult part of the whole 
process was dealing with third party interests that the provincial 
Crown had issued on provincial Crown lands. And there has 
always been an opportunity for this government to make that 
right and they choose not to, Mr. Speaker. It’s a real problem 
because what they’re doing is they’re issuing third party 
interests but they’re allowing those interests to actually overrule 
in many cases the need and the rights and obligations of the 
treaty land entitlement First Nations to fulfill the obligations 
under the promises of the treaties that were made back in this 
province in the 1870s. 
 
And one of the problems is that when you have the provincial 
lands regime as it now exists, individuals are given leases, let’s 
say a grazing lease or something, even hunting and trapping 
leases for non-First Nations people under trappers’ . . . What are 
they called? Lines, traplines, Mr. Speaker. There’s no ability for 
this government to shut down that lease if that individual starts 
holding out for a lot of unreasonable requests when it comes to 
replacing their interests under the Indian Act. And I spent a lot 
of time doing those replacement agreements. 
 
I’ve seen situations where bands were held ransom by lessees to 
pay inordinate amounts of money just to get that lessee to 
accept the lease that would put them in an equal position after 
the land was created, after the reserve was created. In one case I 
know, a farmer got $800,000 just to sign over a lease that he 
would be in the same position that he was before. There’s every 
opportunity for this government to fix that as they brought this 
bill forward and they have failed to do that, Mr. Speaker. They 
have absolutely failed, and I think that’s a huge failure on the 
part of the government to recognize the issues in relation to 
third party interests for treaty land entitlement. And I think it’s 
a big problem for our ongoing relations with First Nations. 
 
And I know that the FSIN is following this, and one of the 
biggest issues they had was that they weren’t able to even see 
the bill before it was tabled so they had no idea what they were 
dealing with, Mr. Speaker. And it just seems that it’s an 
unfortunate approach that is very disappointing that this 
government is bringing forward. 
 
Some of the things that the minister has indicated and in terms 
of the positive attributes of this Act . . . There are positive 
attributes, I think, despite my disappointment in terms of the 
opportunities that were presented for First Nations relations and 
Métis relations, Mr. Speaker, and improving our relationships 
on those levels. There are some important changes that are 
being made in this Act. And as the minister indicated, in this 
case it will make the lands . . . It’ll be easier for the lands to be 
used in a proper way, and it will also be easier for making sure 
the lands are not being misused. So there’s a number of changes 
that are being made. 
 

It’s a complete wholesale rewrite of the previous Act, which has 
been amended a number of times. It was generally introduced in 
1978 although it has been amended, you know, in 2015, 2014, 
2013, and 2010 and many times before that. 
 
But it’s a complete reshift, and as we go through this, Mr. 
Speaker, the government is also introducing new regulations 
because much of what’s being placed in the regulations now is 
things that were codified within the legislation itself. So what 
we’re going to see is an ability for longer term leases, and I 
think this is a really important aspect as long as the treaty land 
entitlement obligations are taken into account. Unfortunately 
they’re not. 
 
I’m part of a company that actually has a lease for recreational 
land up at Nesslin Lake, Mr. Speaker. And a few years ago, we 
wanted to do some significant improvements to this site, 
including running water and some power sites in the 
campground, and we were able to get a longer term lease so that 
we could actually finance the improvements that we wanted to 
do. So in that sense, from a development perspective, that 
makes a lot of sense as long as treaty rights are not being 
trumped. And I think that’s what’s missed in this bill, is an 
acknowledgement of that. 
 
They’re also looking for increased access under some of the 
clauses. Unfortunately the minister didn’t identify which 
clauses those were. But I think if you look at division 1 of the 
new bill, basically sections 2-1 to 2-7, you’ll see a lot of the 
minister’s responsibilities in how the lands are going to be 
administered. I think that’s pretty much the key section I guess 
of this new bill, is division 1. 
 
There’s some unusual numbering. I haven’t seen this kind of 
numbering before in new bills, so I don’t know if this is a new 
format. But we see section 1-1, 1-2, 1-3. And then they jump 
into part II which is all numbered section “2-.” And then there’s 
part III and part IV. And so there’s this kind of weird 
numbering system, but it’s maybe the latest and greatest in 
legislative drafting. I’m not sure. 
 
At any rate, the sections 2-1 to 2-7 really talk about what the 
minister’s approach is going to be with relationship to these 
lands. 
 
Another thing that I understand is in here, and I’m not exactly 
sure where it shows up because I wasn’t able to find it, but the 
minister indicates that individuals will now be able to use their 
Crown land lease as collateral for financing. I think at common 
law that’s already something that’s available to individuals, and 
certainly we use that in our campground lease where we use the 
long-term nature of the lease as collateral to get financing. So 
there may be some other issues here but I think many, many 
people who have the opportunity to lease Crown lands can use 
that, the long-term lease as collateral to secure improvements 
on the lands, or I would think for ranchers, you know, 
improvements in the water system or the fencing and the 
maintenance of that land for the use that they’re given it for. 
 
Some other things the minister’s talked about is abilities for the 
Crown to act much more nimbly when it comes to — I’m losing 
my words today — infractions of the lease. So in this case . . . 
Currently you had to either go to court or actually cancel the 



November 15, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1337 

lease in order to stop people from doing bad things on their 
lease land, basically. And now there’s going to be a stop-work 
order that can be issued if the lessee is doing something 
inappropriate. When you think of all the surface leases that are 
out there, Mr. Speaker, there’s spills or people aren’t managing 
their surface leases properly, this way the government can 
actually move in and issue a stop-work order, although I think 
with the oil and gas leases, they already have the right to do that 
within the lease itself. But this is actually codifying it in the 
law. 
 
And there’s other things like these special management zones. 
Now the minister talked about them, but I couldn’t actually find 
it, and certainly once we’re in committee I’ll have an 
opportunity to ask that question. But he talked about these 
special management zones. And I’m wondering how this is 
going to work in relation to The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. 
So I will have some definite questions about that, Mr. Speaker, 
as we move into the committee phase of this bill. 
 
But he’s talking about these zones, and he said they could be 
very small areas where . . . They’re called special management 
zones, but when I searched for those words in the new bill, I 
couldn’t find them. Maybe it’s going to be in the regulatory side 
of it. But they will be able to . . . [inaudible] . . . very small 
portions of land — I’m thinking maybe again a large grazing 
lease on sensitive land near the Great Sand Hills — and they 
would be a small area which they would call a special 
management zone wherein the operator or the lessee could 
maybe construct some sort of granaries or feed stations. But 
certainly I’m going to have some questions about that once this 
bill is moved into committee. 
 
He says that it also will “. . . create more opportunities for the 
industrial and recreational use of Crown land.” So quite often 
there are competing interests who, as you know — 
snowmobilers, cross-country skiers, quadders, camping — they 
would all like to have access as well to these Crown lands. So 
there’s going to be more ability for the Crown to be nimble in 
those areas as well and assure that access would be provided. 
 
Unfortunately, as I mentioned earlier, there’s no sort of clear 
understanding in this bill in terms of First Nation treaty rights 
and the exercise of those on these lands. 
 
One other I think big improvement in terms of administration 
will be the ability for the ministers to exchange lands between 
themselves in order to move them into different uses or . . . He 
says: 
 

Changes to the PLA would also remove some of the 
administration burden for small land transfers between 
ministries. These small parcels of land could include 
decommissioned roadside campgrounds or rest sites, for 
example. The owner of that quarter section of land adjacent 
may be interested in purchasing the small parcel, but [now] 
before that can happen the land must be transferred to the 
Ministry of Agriculture and the ministry can then sell it to 
the owner directly.  

 
This is a huge administrative burden for the officials, Mr. 
Speaker, because they have to require an order in council to do 
that now. So this would be something that would now just go 

between ministries and then Agriculture would be able to sell it. 
 
Again some concerns have been raised about, what if these 
lands are wildlife habitat protected Act lands? What’s the role 
of the Ministry of the Environment in that context, and how will 
those protected lands be replaced? And that’s something, when 
I was talking to individuals who were concerned about this Act, 
is what’s the impact on the current inventory we have? 
 
We have international obligations in terms of our representative 
area networks. We have international obligations in terms of 
migratory birds, caribou migration. There are all sorts of 
overarching uses of our Crown lands that have to be taken into 
account when we’re dealing with privatizing them. And we 
know the minister is quite keen on privatizing a whole lot of 
Crown land, and certainly offered an incentive program last 
year that was so popular that it was oversubscribed very 
quickly. 
 
So we have to keep in mind the balance, and I think that’s the 
role of government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is to ensure that all 
things, all factors relating to the people’s land, is taken into 
account when we are privatizing it in the fashion that this 
particular government is going forward with. 
 
The other thing I found was the “General Matters re Ecological 
Reserves.” One of the things this bill is also doing is repealing 
The Ecological Reserves Act, and that is a separate Act. 
Currently it’s a very short bill, but it’s being subsumed into this 
particular bill. And I think more than anything, I’m not too sure 
how many people know that these ecological reserves actually 
exist. I know that we have the Great Sand Hills. That was under 
. . . My colleague from Saskatoon Centre was instrumental in 
ensuring, when we were in government, that that land, those 
lands were protected. And they continue to be protected under 
this bill, which is encouraging, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And The Ecological Reserves Act is a unique piece of 
legislation, and part of what it does is it protects something 
called the Ecological Reserves Development Fund, and this is 
all found in part III division 1. So I’m just going to pull that up, 
Mr. Speaker. And what that does is it continues the fund. I was 
unable to find any information in relation to that fund when I 
used my Google, so I’m going to be asking some specific 
questions about that particular fund as well when we go into 
committee. I’m just curious to know how much money has been 
appropriated by the legislature for the purposes of the fund, 
what sort of uses it’s being used for. So that will be an 
interesting conversation and I look forward to that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[15:15] 
 
And also there’s a division 2, which is a new division, and it 
didn’t exist in the old Act. And it creates the Great Sand Hills 
representative area. So section 3-11 says, “The Great Sand Hills 
Representative Area described in the Appendix is designated as 
an ecological reserve.” This is the only one that’s created in, 
that’s actually codified in this legislation, Mr. Speaker. And 
certainly I think we have some clauses here that talk about the 
restrictions on the activities that are allowed. For example, you 
can’t go hunting, trapping, angling, mushroom picking, or berry 
picking in that area unless you have authorization. There’s other 



1338 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2016 

things — walking, hiking, backpacking, snowmobiling, 
backcountry camping, horseback riding. So I can see the one 
thing that’s not listed there is cross-country skiing, Mr. Speaker. 
So I’m not sure why that was left out, but that’s another 
question we can ask the committee and the officials once we get 
into committee. 
 
So I think in terms of including the Great Sand Hills 
representative area, Mr. Speaker, it’s a great inclusion in this 
bill, and I certainly hope that there will be other representative 
areas that will be added eventually in time. I’m not sure that 
only having one meets our requirements under our obligations 
internationally when it comes to representative area networks, 
but at least we have one that’s now being codified in the bill. 
And I look forward to further amendments in the future as we 
include other representative areas as we go. 
 
So at this point, Mr. Speaker, I know other of my colleagues are 
hoping to have an opportunity to speak to this bill. And I 
certainly look forward to be able to raise some of these specific 
questions around why they failed to include the 
recommendations of the truth and reconciliation committee as it 
comes to our relationships with First Nations people and Métis 
people. 
 
I think that’s a big failure on the part of the government, and 
it’s a signal, as far as I’m concerned, to First Nations and Métis 
people that the recommendations from the TRC [Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission] are irrelevant, and I think that’s 
wrong. That is wrong, Mr. Speaker. But it’s simply incorrect for 
this government to treat the TRC in that fashion and just 
completely overlook it when it comes to an opportunity like 
revamping of our provincial lands Act, Mr. Speaker. And so I 
think that’s really shameful, and certainly I think First Nations 
are going to take a message from that, Mr. Speaker, and Métis 
people, and I think it’s not one that will be received well. 
 
Other than that, modernizing the bill makes a lot of sense, and I 
think the approach that the minister is using in terms of more 
ease for administration of provincial lands makes total sense. 
But I think they missed the mark right off the hop when they 
didn’t even acknowledge any of those recommendations from 
the TRC, but also the acknowledgement of the relationship with 
First Nations and Métis people and the land. This is a perfect 
opportunity for governments to show some leadership here, and 
I think this government has failed miserably. 
 
So at this point, I’ll move to adjourn the debate on Bill No. 34, 
An Act respecting Provincial Lands, repealing certain Acts and 
making consequential amendments to certain Acts. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The member from 
Saskatoon Nutana has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 34, 
The Provincial Lands Act, 2016. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 26 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 26 — The Patient 

Choice Medical Imaging Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the 
Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair of 
Committees. Good to join debate this afternoon on Bill No. 26, 
The Patient Choice Medical Imaging Act, or as others might 
refer to it as the queue-jumping enabling Act, or the let’s 
privatize some more of our health care system Act. There are 
different ways where, you know, the sort of lingo that this 
government likes to use to cover their tracks rubs up against 
what is the true intent. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve put on the record in different 
regards in this Assembly over the years, Mr. Speaker, as regards 
diagnostics in our system in general, this is a hugely important 
aspect of the system. And if you haven’t got proper access to 
diagnostics, then you’re going to have a hard time getting a 
diagnosis. You’re going to have a hard time getting a course of 
treatment prescribed by your medical practitioner, and you’re 
going to have a hard time getting healthy. You’re going to have 
a hard time getting better. 
 
And it terms of the extreme frustration and worry and concern 
that comes with people who languish on long wait-lists for 
various of the diagnostic services that are out there, Mr. 
Speaker, from MRIs [magnetic resonance imaging] to CAT 
[computerized axial tomography] scans to on down the list, it’s 
a hugely concerning development. It’s something that is 
wrenching for those families to go through that are confronted 
with being on that wait-list, that are confronted with being in 
that bind where they can’t get the diagnostics to get on with 
doing what they need to do as an individual to try and get some 
control over their health. 
 
And like I say, Mr. Speaker, this is something that . . . This is a 
bind with which my family is far too familiar in terms of what 
it’s like to be confronted with a long wait for a particularly key 
diagnostic and then the impact that can have on the subsequent 
decisions that you make for a course of treatment, say — be it 
for a cancer patient, and what may be required in terms of 
chemotherapy or radiation therapy — that all those decisions 
awaiting a bottleneck that can arise around diagnostics. And I 
guess one thing, Mr. Speaker, that, you know . . .  
 
So I guess I’m always interested in approaches that can improve 
the situation where those critical diagnostics are available in 
timely and appropriate supply to health professionals, to 
individuals that are confronted with a situation where they need 
those diagnostics. And I guess, Mr. Speaker, I’m interested in 
things that make actual progress for that. I have less patience, 
Mr. Speaker, for something where it, you know, it proclaims the 
virtues or the values of patient choice but instead favours those 
that can . . . As the Premier in an earlier iteration, I think back 
in 2008, was talking about how they wouldn’t be proceeding 
with any sort of private approach around diagnostics and 
specifically around MRIs, I believe the Premier back then 
talked about how they wouldn’t be advantaging people with a 
bulging wallet to pay their way to the head of the line. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, again I think I’m well on record saying that 
as part of when we had the privilege in the New Democratic 



November 15, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1339 

Party of Saskatchewan to serve on the government benches, 
ours was not a perfect record certainly. I think I was part of a 
government that tried to do its best each and every day for the 
people of Saskatchewan to improve the quality of life, to work 
hard on behalf of those that sent us here and all of the people of 
Saskatchewan. But we certainly weren’t perfect, Mr. Speaker, 
and certainly when mistakes were made, there’s . . . You know, 
it’s always best to own up and then try to correct the mistake 
going forward and not, you know, God willing, do it again. 
 
And I guess the two-for-one aspect that the government seized 
upon around, you know, you can buy your way ahead in the 
queue with a public MRI and now this legislation, of course, 
expanding that dynamic to a CAT scan, but also, Mr. Speaker, 
and I’ll get into this a bit more in my remarks, to other services 
as prescribed, so other sort of diagnostics or scan services that 
are required. It’s most interesting, Mr, Speaker, that they’ve left 
that door open to make moves that they can accomplish through 
regulation instead of coming to change the legislation and going 
through a debate like the one that we’re having right now, or 
going through a debate like the one that we had in 2015 around 
the move that they’d made around MRIs in particular. 
 
But again, Mr. Speaker, they’ve gotten, I think, a taste of 
privatization, and they quite like it. And they’ve also found that 
they’ve got an argument that at least serves as a pretty decent 
cover to privatize one more public sort of service. And again, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not a surprise because this is who this 
government is. They like to privatize things. They’d privatize 
the lots, the entirety of public services if they could get away 
with it. But you know, they’ve learned some lessons that the 
sideways, the incremental approach is better than being sort of 
straight up and straight ahead with the people of Saskatchewan 
in terms of what they’re looking to privatize. 
 
That they’ve written into the legislation the other services as 
prescribed is an interesting power for them to reserve for 
themselves. And of course, Mr. Speaker, if past is indeed 
prologue or, you know, to coin a phrase that the Premier 
certainly likes to use and that certainly the former premier of 
Manitoba, Gary Doer, liked to use, the best indicator of future 
behaviour is past behaviour. And you know, a government that 
likes to privatize will only go for more and more in that regard. 
 
But it leaves aside the question, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the 
information that is available in the public realm from bodies 
such as the Canadian Institute for Health Information, does this 
private option within a public system improve the situation in 
terms of access to the services for patients, for people that are, 
and again I say this from experience, Mr. Speaker, that are on 
waiting lists that are desperate to get those diagnostics so that 
they can get on with confronting the illness that has come 
crashing into their lives? And we know that, you know, people 
were, you know . . .  
 
One of things that should be a response is that you should be 
improving the supply of those services. You should be 
improving the availability and the accessibility of those critical 
diagnostics so that our public system is consistent and serves 
people in a timely and appropriate manner, again referencing 
the critical nature, the critical role that diagnostics play in terms 
of getting on to that course of care. 
 

But instead of seeing that, Mr. Speaker, we see what this 
government, you know, despite near a decade ago having 
forsworn any sort of approach that would involve people with a 
bulging wallet — again to use the Premier’s words — a bulging 
wallet to buy their way to the head of the line. And they’ve 
changed their mind on that, Mr. Speaker, obviously. They’ve 
gone back on what was once a promise. And you know, you can 
add that to the ever growing list of broken promises on the part 
of this government. 
 
But in terms of . . . I think about the analysis that was done by 
respected health care policy analyst, Dr. Steven Lewis, who’d 
said that in terms of expanding on this approach, on the two for 
one, it was like arranging your entire system around a mistake. 
 
And if there was a mistake made, Mr. Speaker, certainly . . . and 
in terms of recognizing that and then trying to build out the 
system so that you’ve got supply adequate to the demand, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s one thing. But what we’ve seen this government 
do is moving from MRIs now into CAT scans and then who 
knows into what other services as prescribed in the regulation 
and decided by that cabinet. What other services will be 
susceptible to this approach and what other services will be 
effectively privatized? And what services will then, in terms of 
who has access, will be determined by indeed what they can 
afford? 
 
And you know, there’s a lot of talk over the years in terms of 
. . . one of the great benefits of public health care is that it’s 
about checking the condition before you’re checking the wallet. 
And one of my other colleagues was up on this debate and had a 
lot of static from the side opposite, and you know, it’s against a 
backdrop where we need look no further than to the south of us 
in the United States, where there still is too much of a 
two-tiered system, where there’s one for the rich — a rich 
system for the rich — and a poorer system for people that can’t 
afford it, and far too many people falling through the cracks. 
And we’ll look to see what happens in the days ahead, Mr. 
Speaker, as regards the repeal of what is commonly referred to 
as ObamaCare. 
 
[15:30] 
 
But in terms of who can afford health care, of course one of the 
leading, the leading cause of personal bankruptcy in the United 
States of America is still personal health emergency and the 
bills that attend to that. And that is a dynamic that we were 
happily able to put paid to with the introduction and the 
implementation of medicare. First, you know, in the number 
one health district of Swift Current in 1947, and then certainly 
as it moved across in the early ’60s with the great medicare 
debate. And of course, Mr. Speaker, I guess this is not 
surprising because people that now like to talk about their 
support for medicare, well, we know what side they were on 
historically. They were out with Ross Thatcher and the folks 
kicking the door of the legislature, kicking and screaming 
against the implementation of medicare. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in terms of what people should be able to 
expect when the . . . Again as I pointed to the Premier’s remarks 
in the latter part of the last decade where he talked about they 
wouldn’t be enabling anything that saw people buying their way 
to the front of the line, where bulging wallets weren’t the main 



1340 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2016 

consideration in treating patients, I think the people of 
Saskatchewan had a reason to expect that he’d be as good as his 
word on that, and that’s of course not what is happened. So that 
they’ve, you know, established a bridgehead with the MRIs and 
have moved now into CAT scans and then into who knows 
what other scan services, Mr. Speaker. In terms of, as Dr. 
Steven Lewis termed it, building out the system on a mistake, 
you know, we’ll see how this works. 
 
But in terms of that private component and the way that this has 
worked in other jurisdictions, we’ve seen this approach of the 
government brought into question by bodies such as the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association, by the doctors in the 
system. We’ve seen the stats draw this approach into question, 
coming from bodies like the Canadian Institute of Health 
Information, CIHI. And, Mr. Speaker, we see the questions that 
remain as, you know . . . 
 
It’s one thing to go on the propaganda offensive, but there are 
far too many people still languishing on wait-lists, and the 
answer to that is supply the services to increase the capacity of 
the public system instead of starving the public system, instead 
of, you know, again pursuing this slavish devotion to a 
privatizing, right-wing ideology. And again, Mr. Speaker, that 
doesn’t serve the people, the people that are the public, in the 
public health care system very well at all. It works out pretty 
good for the folks that have the cash, but for those that are in 
those desperate straits, it poses some very wretched decisions to 
be made. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I know that other of my colleagues will 
have more to say on this yet, but for the time being, I would 
bring my remarks to a close. But again pointing out that the 
title, even the title of the bill, this government can’t help 
themselves from politicking in the worst kind of way in trying 
to proclaim themselves as some kind of boosters of choice. But 
in fact, Mr. Speaker, this opens up the array for the folks that 
can afford it and in, you know, both in terms of the withdrawal 
of resources in terms of staff, in terms of the health care 
professionals from the public system where it’s more 
advantageous to go over into the private system. It worsens the 
situation overall in a number of ways. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, for those and other reasons certainly, we’ve 
got some significant questions about the wisdom of this bill. 
But we have no question about why the government’s doing 
this because, as I pointed out earlier, the government loves to 
privatize things. They’re a right wing government and this 
shouldn’t come as a surprise. 
 
But I guess, you know, I guess the main sort of fault lays in 
taking the Premier at his word in times like 2008 when he says 
that people with a bulging wallet aren’t going to be buying their 
way to the head of the queue. So again, Mr. Speaker, you’d like 
to take people at their word in these things, but they’re a long 
way from those kind of commitments now. 
 
But with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move to adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 26, The Patient Choice Medical Imaging Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader adjourned 
debate on Bill No. 26, The Patient Choice Medical Imaging Act. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 28 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 28 — The 
Extension of Compassionate Care Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
enter the debate today on Bill No. 28 which the minister has 
referred to as the compassionate care Act, but it is actually in 
fact An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Employment Act, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I’ve got multiple tools for information here. I’ve got my laptop 
going and some other articles I’d like to read into the record, 
Mr. Speaker, but I will be using many, many resources here to 
help inform my comments here today. 
 
So this particular bill, Mr. Speaker, does a few things. So one of 
the priorities of this bill is providing job protection for those 
individuals who take time off work to take compassionate leave 
to care for a loved one who is at imminent risk of dying, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And what this bill actually is simply doing, it’s not providing 
extra benefits. This is about job protection, Mr. Speaker. The 
job protection piece happens at the provincial level and the 
benefits, Mr. Speaker, happen under employment insurance. 
That’s how the system currently works. So the benefits part of 
this fall under the federal law, and it comes out of a change that 
the federal government has made to extend benefits. Sort of the 
wage replacement rate, Mr. Speaker, that people would receive 
under employment insurance if they take a leave. 
 
So as the minister points out that on January 3rd, 2016, the 
federal government amended the Employment Insurance Act, 
allowing employees to collect up to 26 weeks of benefits after 
observing a two-week cooling-off period. Well that two-week 
cooling-off period is, under EI [employment insurance], it’s like 
a deductible, Mr. Speaker. When you apply for EI, you have to 
wait two weeks. So that two weeks is considered to be a 
deductible. And there’s an argument whether or not that’s a 
good thing to do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But they have the two-week deductible period and then the 26 
weeks of compassionate care benefits that are provided by the 
Employment Insurance Act now, Mr. Speaker. So for a half a 
year you can take a job, or you can take . . . you can get those 
benefits. But at the provincial level, there was the risk that if 
you didn’t have job protection . . . so you might have been able 
to have the benefits but it didn’t provide you the job protection. 
So this is a move the government has made to have the job 
protection aligned with the benefits, Mr. Speaker, moving from 
what it used to be. You could only take six weeks in the past, I 
believe, Mr. Speaker, plus the two-week period where you 
would wait before your benefits would kick in, which would be 



November 15, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1341 

the deductible, as I’ve said. 
 
So this is a substantial increase in job protection, as it should 
be, to align with benefits that Canadians who pay into 
employment insurance are entitled to, Mr. Speaker. That is the 
right thing to do. And I know the government had heard from 
organizations like the Canadian Cancer Society, the 
Saskatchewan Palliative Care Association, Mr. Speaker, all 
kinds of organizations had brought this forward. And I know 
that the government, in their election, had committed to making 
sure that this was something that they were going to do, Mr. 
Speaker. And it’s an easy change, but it is the right change and 
the right thing to do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s interesting to me as . . . The federal EI program interests me 
as a parent. In the time that . . . Both on the compassionate care 
side of things, but also as someone who’s taken maternity and 
parental leave, Mr. Speaker. I think there’s some good 
discussion that could happen. 
 
Actually Quebec, several years ago, went it alone and actually 
won a court decision to be able to opt out of employment 
insurance and to be able to take their chunk of money, to be 
able to offer enhanced benefits to their . . . to parents actually, 
Mr. Speaker. They actually created an entrenched paternity 
leave under their own wage replacement benefit program. So 
under the notion that . . . So you’ve got a maternity leave or 
maternity benefits for moms to be able to recover from the 
physical part of childbirth, Mr. Speaker. There’s that 
component. And then there’s parental leave that either parent 
can tap into. And then the entrenched paternity leave was really 
important to encourage fathers to have an opportunity to stay 
home too, Mr. Speaker, because parental leave is still by and 
large used by women, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So that entrenched paternity leave that Quebec now has, it’s a 
use—it or lose—it approach, Mr. Speaker. If dad doesn’t take 
those benefits, they’re lost. So that’s a good opportunity to help 
fathers be involved with their new babies in those early days, 
Mr. Speaker, that key bonding. And to send the message . . . It 
really is a cultural thing, sending the message that mothers and 
fathers play a huge role in their children’s lives. 
 
So that was something Quebec did more than a decade ago, I 
believe, Mr. Speaker, was opt . . . They won a court case to opt 
out of employment insurance and go with their own. If the 
federal government wasn’t going to improve employment 
benefits, Quebec had decided they were going to do that. 
 
One of the things Quebec has also done was made parental and 
maternity and paternity benefits more flexible, Mr. Speaker. 
Recognizing that what you get from employment insurance 
benefits, Mr. Speaker, is 55 per cent of your salary, so 55 per 
cent . . . And up to a cap, and I’m not sure what the cap is right 
now. But for many employees taking 55 per cent of your 
income will not allow you to stay home. And that’s the whole 
goal is to be able to provide parental care and bond with your 
child in those early months, Mr. Speaker, in that first year of 
life. 
 
So it’s interesting that what Quebec did was create an 
opportunity. What you could do is you could take an increased 
benefit rate and fewer weeks, Mr. Speaker, or you could take 

the longer leave and have slightly lower rates than what those 
who are taking a shorter leave. So there was some flexibility in 
it and some opportunity to think about your own family and 
what you need, but recognizing that 55 per cent of many, many 
employees’ wages or salaries is not sufficient to be able to stay 
home. 
 
Can remember reading some statistics around that time, Mr. 
Speaker. And about three months postpartum, lower waged 
employees are back in the workplace en masse, Mr. Speaker. So 
at a time where me as a privileged individual would be able to 
manage with a husband or a partner, be able to manage taking a 
full year off . . . And sometimes, I know, many families, it can 
be tricky for some families getting that whole year, but they’re 
able to balance their finances. But for many, many lower-waged 
employees the average return to work was three months 
postpartum, which I think is not a fair way of supporting all 
employees. It’s a program, if you put a socio-economic lens on 
it, you see that there are some people disadvantaged by that 
program, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as a breastfeeding advocate, Mr. Speaker, it always 
troubled me that lower-waged mothers would be forced into the 
workplace. And you can totally breastfeed and work, although it 
is more challenging, especially with a new baby who nurses 
quite often, on demand. New babies like milk a lot, Mr. 
Speaker, and need milk a lot. So having a new mom back at 
work three months postpartum often would put an end to the 
breastfeeding relationship, which I think has long-term health 
impacts for both mothers and babies. But it also I think isn’t 
fair, Mr. Speaker. So those are things that I think need to 
change or could change with our benefits, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[15:45] 
 
And I’ve heard over the years people have said we need two 
years of maternity and parental and an entrenched paternity 
leave, and I wouldn’t disagree. And there are jurisdictions 
around the world who do that, Mr. Speaker. There are really 
amazing jurisdictions around the world — Finland, Sweden, 
many of the Scandinavian countries — who provide the 
opportunity for longer leaves. But they also have really good 
child care and they also have systems in place to support if a 
family decides they want to parent at home. They provide those 
systems to ensure that parents can parent the way they want, 
Mr. Speaker. So I have heard over the years people call for two 
years of those benefit wage replacements, and I think that that’s 
not a bad idea. But I would like to ensure first, Mr. Speaker, 
that all parents who have a child have an opportunity to have 
equal access or the support that they need to be able to stay 
home with a child, particularly in the first year. 
 
So I think, to my mind, rather than expanding a program to two 
years it would be much better to make sure initially that 
everybody has the opportunity to access that leave. So that’s 
one piece of employment insurance, and we’ve had job 
protection in Saskatchewan under the labour code protecting for 
many years that part of employment insurance. 
 
And I know in the time that I’ve been a mom, which is 18 
years, Mr. Speaker, almost 19 years this March, but when I first 
became a mom there was only six months of maternity leave 
and there was no parental leave at that time. It was just 



1342 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2016 

maternity leave. And I opted actually to leave my employment 
as a reporter and become a stay-at-home mom for the next 
almost seven years, Mr. Speaker. But I know that six months, 
I’ve spoken to many women who . . . There was a day where 
there was no such thing as maternity leave. So we’ve seen an 
evolution over time where there was no leave, and then we had 
. . . or no benefits. 
 
And so there’s the two parts here. I just want to point out that 
the two important pieces are the benefits — so income 
replacement so you can afford to stay home — and then the 
second piece that we deal with here with Saskatchewan 
legislation is job protection. 
 
So here in Saskatchewan under the previous administration, 
when there were only six months of maternity leave and then 
the federal government expanded it to a year of maternity and 
parental leave, at that time the provincial legislation that 
governed it was then amended to make sure that people had job 
protection so you could be protected to take the benefits that 
you were entitled to, Mr. Speaker. And we see the same thing 
happening here with this piece of legislation, where this is 
around compassionate care. 
 
And I just actually am going to tell you a little bit about the 
federal government’s approach to compassionate care benefits 
and what they’re designed to do. And I’d like to tell you a 
personal story here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So from the federal government’s own website on employment 
insurance compassionate care benefits, so I’d just like to read 
into the record what it is we’re talking about here Mr. Speaker. 
So these are: 
 

. . . care benefits are Employment Insurance benefits paid 
to people who have to be away from work temporarily to 
provide care or support to a family member who is gravely 
ill and who has a significant risk of death within 26 weeks 
(six months). A maximum of 26 weeks of compassionate 
care benefits may be paid to eligible people. 

 
And so what is care? How do they classify or determine what 
care or support is, Mr. Speaker? Care or support in this context 
of these benefits are “. . . providing psychological or emotional 
support; or arranging for care by a third party; or directly 
providing or participating in the care.” 
 
And who is eligible, Mr. Speaker? 
 

You can receive compassionate care benefits for up to a 
maximum of 26 weeks if you have to be absent from work 
to provide care or support to a gravely ill family member at 
risk of dying within 26 weeks. If you are unemployed and 
already receiving EI benefits, you can also apply for 
compassionate care benefits. 

 
To be eligible for . . . [these] benefits, you must be able to 
show that: 
 

your regular weekly earnings from work have decreased 
by more than 40 per cent; and you have accumulated 600 
insured hours of work in the last 52 weeks, or since the 
start of your last claim . . . 

So the term language is really important here, Mr. Speaker, and 
who we include in family is also very important. And I think 
that definition has broadened over the years, Mr. Speaker. And I 
know in many indigenous communities, family is much broader 
than we sometimes think of it in our settler communities, Mr. 
Speaker. So those terms have broadened. 
 
And so in terms of employment insurance and who is 
considered a family member, I’ll talk a little bit about the bill 
and who’s classified as well here. So your own family 
members, it can be your children; your wife, husband, 
common-law partner; your father, your mother; your father’s 
wife, your mother’s husband; common-law partner of the father 
or the mother; brothers, sisters, stepbrothers, stepsisters; 
grandparents, stepgrandparents; grandchildren, their spouses or 
common-law partners; sons-in-law, daughters-in-law — 
married or common-law; father-in-law, mother-in-law — 
married or common-law; brothers-in-law, sisters-in-law; uncles, 
aunts, their spouses or common-law partners; nephews, nieces, 
their spouses or common-law partners; current or former foster 
parents; current or former foster children, their spouses or 
common-law partners; current or former wards; current or 
former guardians, their spouses or common-law partners. 
 
You can see by that list that it’s a good thing, Mr. Speaker, that 
the definition of family . . . There is not one cut-and-dried 
definition of family anymore, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But in terms of family members of your spouse or common-law 
partner, are also considered to a somewhat lesser degree in 
employment insurance benefits, the benefits side of this, Mr. 
Speaker. And that includes if it’s your spouse or common-law 
partner. It can be their children; their father; mother, married or 
common-law; father’s wife, mother’s husband; common-law 
partner of the father or the mother of your spouse or 
common-law partner; brother, sister, stepbrother, stepsisters; 
grandparents; grandchildren; sons-in-law, daughters-in-law — 
married or common law; uncles, aunts; nephews, nieces; current 
or former foster parents; or current or former wards, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I think it’s a good thing that, again, definition of family has 
broadened over time and legislation has broadened over time to 
recognize the many different kinds of families that we have 
here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had a . . . As many people in this Assembly 
know, this spring my father broke his hip four days into the 
election campaign, and suffers from dementia, Mr. Speaker. He 
had been probably experiencing a little bit of it prior to breaking 
his hip. Actually in hindsight, just having the Alzheimer Society 
here and learning more about dementia in the last . . . well in 
my time as the Health critic but also as a child of someone who 
has dementia, you sure learn that there are probably signs that 
you miss all along. And that’s why awareness of those warning 
signs is really important. 
 
But my father had been probably ill before breaking his hip. 
And then after he broke his hip, Mr. Speaker, it was like falling 
off a cliff. As he would attest to, he probably wasn’t the best 
patient at Royal University Hospital. My normally sort of . . . 
My dad didn’t curse a day in my life, Mr. Speaker, and his 
personality was very different post-surgery. I think there was 



November 15, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1343 

some surgical delirium. 
 
But we brought him home post-surgery, probably before he . . . 
while he was still post-operative and should have been in the 
hospital, but the hospital was proving not to be the best place 
for him in light of some of the difficulties that he was having 
with his delirium, and he wasn’t doing well. In fact, that whole 
time that he was in the hospital, which was the duration of the 
election campaign, we had to have a family member stay with 
him overnight. Or I suppose we didn’t have to, but the one night 
that they physically restrained him and as well then used 
chemical restraints, my dad, who is not a . . . My dad is not a 
wallflower, and said he would not be hogtied. So he doesn’t 
have very fond memories of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But we brought him home before he probably was ready to 
come home. But it was quite an interesting several months, Mr. 
Speaker. The first month and a half, my sister . . . There are 
seven kids in my family. I’m the youngest of seven, and there 
are five of us in Saskatoon. I live two blocks from my parents 
and everybody else is fairly close. But my parents up until this 
year have always provided more care for me than the other 
direction, Mr. Speaker. But managing my dad and trying to 
support my mom . . . My one sister doesn’t have any children 
herself, but has a very busy and demanding job. But she, my 
sister Michelle, who I’ve often referred to in here as one of the 
people who enables me to be able to do this job, tried to manage 
work and supporting my parents. And that was too tough and 
my dad was not doing well. 
 
And my sister was able to get compassionate care leave, Mr. 
Speaker, and ended up spending much of May, June, July, 
August — well actually, not much of — all of May, June, July, 
and August trying to ensure that my mom had the supports to 
care for my dad, my dad assessed as needing long-term care, 
which was a bit of a shock for all of us because my parents . . . 
My dad has always said he’s not going anywhere; the place that 
he’s going to die will be at home, Mr. Speaker. So long-term 
care didn’t seem like much of an option. And as the Health 
critic, I know there’s really wonderful people who work in 
long-term care, but that’s a system that’s under huge strain, and 
staffing is a huge issue. And so despite the many wonderful 
people I’ve met who work in long-term care, we as a family 
knew that that’s not where we wanted my dad. 
 
So my sister was able to and willing to take compassionate care 
leave for the course of the summer for my dad. And it’s an 
interesting thing when you decide to take that and a doctor signs 
off on it, because it means your loved one is gravely ill or at 
risk of dying, Mr. Speaker. And I guess that’s a reality for all of 
us, but it was really wonderful to have my sister at home. 
 
And my parents . . . She returned to work in September, which 
was a bit of a strain trying to figure out how we were going to 
manage my parents. My dad doesn’t want anybody else in the 
house other than . . . So there is the capacity to bring in 
caregivers, Mr. Speaker, but my dad is not a fan of that at all 
and . . . Why would you need strangers in the house when 
you’ve had seven kids, Mr. Speaker? So he was not a fan of 
having anybody else in the house aside from his kids or 
grandkids. 
 
So day by day, it’s an interesting time trying to manage and 

support him, and I have to confess I am probably the weak link 
in the chain as a single mom with my own kids and this job here 
that pulls me away from home quite often. But I know my sister 
was grateful to have that opportunity to spend that time with my 
dad and my mother, and I’m happy to report that my dad’s still 
chugging along, Mr. Speaker. And we never know how much 
time we have left on this earth, but every day is a new 
adventure for my parents. 
 
But we’re very grateful that my sister was able to take those 
four months and spend that time trying to get my parents sort of 
stable and ensuring that things were okay. So it’s interesting 
because my sister, obviously, because this piece of legislation 
hasn’t passed yet, Mr. Speaker, my sister didn’t have job 
protection, as do all the other people who take compassionate 
care benefits at this point in time. But fortunately she works for 
a progressive employer, the city of Saskatoon, and was able to 
go back to her job without any difficulty, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So this change is really important around ensuring job 
protection for those who are able to take benefits. I would argue 
again that 55 per cent of your salary or wages does not mean 
that you’re going to be able to take that leave; for many lower 
waged employees, much like maternity and parental leave, that 
that will leave them at a disadvantage. And people can’t afford 
to do that. And recognizing as a government, whether it’s the 
federal government or the provincial government here, there are 
huge, huge benefits accrued to a society when caregivers are 
properly supported, Mr. Speaker.  
 
There’s many unpaid workers, or many people who put their 
own employment at risk, not because they’ve taken a leave, Mr. 
Speaker, but on a daily basis, that’s what they manage. They go 
to work, a full-time job, Mr. Speaker, and spend some time 
stopping in the morning to see a loved one at night, Mr. 
Speaker. And by and large, not that there aren’t male 
caregivers, but by and large, this is something that’s still, if you 
look at the statistics, it is women by and large who are bearing 
the brunt of caregiving, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I think it’s incumbent upon us as legislators and as society to 
think about how we can better support that caregiving function. 
And we, I think, as a society sometimes diminish the role of 
caregiving, whether it’s . . . If you look at many professions that 
are . . . Well the social work profession, which is considered the 
caregiving profession, and how we pay people in those 
professions, Mr. Speaker, I don’t . . . or at-home moms. 
 
And I talked a little bit about the bill before us yesterday, Mr. 
Speaker, and I can’t recall . . . There are many bills that come 
before us, but there was one particular bill making an 
amendment — oh, the SGI bill, Mr. Speaker — recognizing that 
there needed to be an increase, if you were a homemaker, in the 
benefits that would be paid to you in the case of an accident, 
Mr. Speaker. But I think we don’t do a great job as a society 
valuing the work of caregiving. And I think that that’s 
something we can do a much better job at, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[16:00] 
 
We have an aging population here in Saskatchewan. And I think 
this piece, I know in my conversations with organizations like 
the Palliative Care Association, the Canadian Cancer Society, 



1344 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2016 

that we need a palliative care strategy here in Saskatchewan, 
which this ties into. This ability to get benefits from the federal 
government and job protection from the province all tie into the 
need for a broad palliative care strategy, Mr. Speaker. We need 
to ensure that palliative care, that in rural Saskatchewan those 
flexible beds . . . There are many people in rural Saskatchewan 
providing wonderful, the best possible palliative care services 
that they can provide, but they would tell you that it is a unique 
specialty, Mr. Speaker, and people need to have support and 
training. 
 
We have a limited number of beds. St. Paul’s Hospital in 
Saskatoon, I’ve spoken to staff there who’ve had to send people 
home, Mr. Speaker, because they didn’t pass away quickly 
enough, Mr. Speaker. Palliative care is about making sure you 
can manage pain and live your life comfortably for as long as 
you’ve got left. And often death can be imminent when you end 
up at a place like St. Paul’s Hospital, in the palliative care ward, 
but because of the lack of beds, they’ve had to send people 
home. 
 
And there are some wonderful palliative care home care 
workers, but there just are not enough, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 
not that there aren’t some positives, but we don’t need an ad 
hoc approach to this, Mr. Speaker. This bill and this job 
protection is part of an ad hoc approach. We need a long-term, 
permanent strategy around . . . a long-term, 
beyond-election-cycle approach to palliative care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I remember hearing about a really great proposal or a piece of 
work in Ontario where there’s a 1-800 line where you have a 
couple of specialist doctors who do palliative care work and 
ensure that family doctors who are struggling in their own 
community with providing the right medications or aren’t sure 
or are nervous about some of the medications that they have at 
hand or don’t have full knowledge, you can call this number 
and have assistance from palliative care specialists, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So there are many things that we can be doing here better in 
Saskatchewan around palliative care, Mr. Speaker. So I’d just 
like to point out, so this is the big piece to this bill, is the change 
around job protection for those taking employment insurance 
compassionate care benefits. 
 
But as I started out my comments, this is An Act to amend the 
Saskatchewan Employment Act, Mr. Speaker. This is a bill that 
has been . . . It was passed in May of 2013, Mr. Speaker. It was 
introduced in the dying days of 2012. So actually to take you on 
the path of this Saskatchewan employment Act, in spring of 
2012 — again I think, I believe it was in the dying days of 
session; it was in May of 2012 — the government announced 
that they were going to roll together 12 pieces of labour 
legislation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They were doing a comprehensive review of labour legislation, 
which I’m not opposed to a comprehensive review of labour 
legislation. But you sure as heck better do some really thorough 
consultations, and I know that is not what the community at 
large felt had been done. 
 
So this bill, the government signalled in May of 2012 that they 
wanted to do this, and then in that December, right before 

session ended, they introduced The Saskatchewan Employment 
Act. They passed it in May of 2013, and we’ve had it before us 
on several occasions, Mr. Speaker. There are big holes in this 
Act. 
 
This government hasn’t been great at labour legislation. Bill 5, 
as you know, ended up in the Supreme Court, and actually that 
was the essential services law. And it is now . . . The 
government got a judgment against them and the right to strike 
is now entrenched in law across Saskatchewan. But my point, 
Mr. Speaker, is that when you bring in legislation, you should 
consult and make sure you’ve done a thorough job. 
 
When the Canadian Labour Code was reviewed in 2005, it 
actually was a very lengthy process, years actually, Mr. 
Speaker, where in-person consultations with a committee, all 
kinds of things, Mr. Speaker. And this government, because of 
their rushing this Act has left . . . continues to have to bring it 
forward because they’ve made errors and left pieces out or have 
realized that there were unintended consequences. 
 
I know the firefighters will be before us here in a couple of 
weeks talking about their concern around the employment Act. 
I know the government hasn’t made it broadly known that this 
Act is before us. They’ve called it the compassionate care leave 
Act, Mr. Speaker. But it is very important when a government 
brings legislation before us that they do full and meaningful 
consultation and take that into consideration, Mr. Speaker. And 
this is something this government hasn’t done piece after piece 
of legislation, and the employment Act is just one of those 
pieces, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I believe that I’ve had my piece. I could go on actually on 
this Act, but I know that I have colleagues who also want to 
enter the debate on this. So with that I will move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Riversdale has 
adjourned debate on Bill No. 28, The Extension of 
Compassionate Care Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 1 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 1 — The 
Crown Corporations Public Ownership Amendment Act, 2016 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in on Bill 
No. 1, The Crown Corporation Public Ownership Amendment 
Act. Just I guess to make some comments, and I know the 
public and those individuals are paying attention to this. It’s 
interesting when the government’s amending the Crown 
protection Act, and there’s 40 stores that they’re selling off, 
privatizing. And I guess at the end of the day, we’ve been 
thinking about this and those families that will lose their jobs. 



November 15, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1345 

Some of these are good-paying jobs that provide for, you know, 
families. 
 
Not only is it a wage that, you know, gives these individuals an 
opportunity at — whether it’s part time, full time — but there’s 
benefits that help individuals with running, I guess, medical 
services and prescription drugs. There’s different plans that 
when you’re an employee that there’s benefits that you get. And 
not all employees get the benefits; not all employers have that 
kind of coverage. But I believe most of these and, you know, I 
don’t have any facts on it, but I’m sure most of them would’ve 
been covered under some type of health plan to cover, you 
know, the medical costs that can . . . But having said that, here 
we have a government, you know, that’s going out and selling 
off. And we wonder why, when Crowns and any type of dollars 
that come into this province to help offset the taxes, you know 
. . . They’ll scream about being the best one to look after not 
raising taxes. 
 
Well you cannot continue to mismanage the province budgets 
and the resources that we have in our government coffers. You 
cannot continue to have the kind of situations we see with 
taxpayers’ dollars being spent to buy land, paying over $11 
million. And we’ve been hounding and asking questions — 
hounding, hounding. And you know, I give credit to the 
members on this side to try to hold this government to account 
and all those that are asking the questions back home. You 
know, those individuals back home are very concerned about 
their tax dollars. 
 
And those backbenchers and those ministers are going to pay a 
price. And I know they heckle and they laugh and they say, well 
the last election we got 51; what did you get? They’re 
constantly doing that. And they’re taking the good people of 
this province for granted. And let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, the 
good people of this province have done the hard work to earn 
the dollars that are in the government coffers. And you were 
entrusted, all of you.  
 
You know, at the end of the day, we look at the costs and the 
costs have . . . and the dollars that are being spent by this 
government, showing different ways, you know, whether it’s 3 
million for SkipTheDishes, special land deals, all kinds of 
things going on. Why? And we’ve been asking about that. 
Why? Why do some benefit so much and some don’t? And 
people want the answers. And they’re going to ask for the 
answers, and we’re going to continue to do that. 
 
But I just want to show you, at the end of the day, showing a 
comparison to this bill. So now we’re selling off 40 liquor 
stores. But did they, in this legislation, did they say, well we’ll 
only amend or, you know, amend the legislation for the 40 
stores? No, no, no. They’ve taken all of them out of the 
protection under the Crown Act, to protect our Crowns. 
They’ve taken all. And now you could sit there and say, well 
why would you do that? Why not just make the amendment for 
the 40? 
 
And there’s a lot of questions people are wondering. And I have 
some questions. I think, at the end of the day, the people of this 
province are going to be asking some tough questions and want 
some answers. Not the type of answers we’ve been getting in 
this House, you know, from some of the members and ministers 

on that side. It’s just, it’s sad the way they’re carrying on. But 
the public will. 
 
And the public’s waking up. I can tell you that, Mr. Speaker. 
Going out and talking to individuals back home and in the rest 
of the province, people are not happy. People are not happy. 
They’re not happy with the way government is handling. You 
know, you had a boom. We had year after year, record revenue. 
And this government did not manage well, and the people are 
starting to see that. 
 
And I’ve heard some of them referring them to the previous 
Devine government. They say they operate the same way. I 
think they’re worse than them. So that’s what I’m hearing from 
people making those comments. And you’ll see posts all over. 
So people are getting tired of it. You know, maybe if they 
would have come forward before the campaign and the election 
about our finances exactly, maybe they wouldn’t have had 51 
seats over there. But did they come forward? No, no, they 
waited until after. Now we’re seeing all the bad news coming 
out and, you know, it’s terrible. 
 
But at the end of the day, you know what’s more appalling? It’s 
going to be our kids and our grandkids that are going to pay for 
the mismanagement of this government. That’s what’s going to 
happen. It’s going to be our grandkids, our great-grand. They 
will be paying a long time for this debt.  
 
So we wonder why; they’re looking for money? So they’re 
selling off 40 stores. Well are they going to sell off all the stores 
because now there’s no protection? Why would you bring that 
in even, you know, to even dare to bring that in here and say, oh 
well, no, no, no, no, we’re doing this. We’re amending the 
legislation. We’re amending the legislation so we can sell off 
40. No, that’s not what they’re doing. They’re amending it to 
actually sell off all the stores. You’re taking all the liquor 
stores, our Crown corporations, and you’re taking them out of 
protection. 
 
Now they can say what they want at the end of the day. They 
can heckle all they want and say . . . And like I said, sometimes 
at the end of the day, you know, those members over there, 
they’re kind of arrogant, think they have an entitlement to 
everything that they’re doing. The good people of this province 
have worked hard. And I’ve said that before: our grandparents, 
our parents, the next generation, our grandkids will pay for the 
mismanagement, and that’s sad. That’s sad. So I will see why 
they’re trying to sell them off. And you know, we see the 
government looking at other Crown corporations. And I know 
the public out there are signing petition after petition to say, 
stop selling off our Crowns. They need to protect . . . They 
belong to the people. They don’t belong . . . 
 
And if you look at the polling, and they do polling. They love 
doing polling. The government, they can do . . . The Sask Party, 
they do their polling. It’s very clear that the people out there are 
telling a message: do not sell off our Crowns. And it’s clear. 
And if they haven’t heard it, and they just eat away, you know. 
 
And you look at a government that has made the most 
vulnerable pay — our seniors, kids. When they look at the cost 
of medication, they put that on the back of our seniors and our 
kids: $5 more here, $5 you’ve taken away. It’s cost of going up, 



1346 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2016 

cost for Saskatchewan residents who are struggling. You know, 
you look at poverty. You look at the food bank. You’re talking 
about everything. 
 
This government doesn’t get it. They laugh. They mock it. You 
know, it’s sad that we have a government that’s not taking it 
serious what’s going on in this province: many people 
unemployed, many people struggling losing their homes, losing 
their business, losing everything. And you have some of them, 
they think it’s funny over there. I don’t find it funny at all. I do 
not find this funny at all. But go ahead. Heckle and think it’s 
funny. 
 
But at the end of the day, like I’ve said, this legislation here 
takes the protection of our liquor stores. And it’s sad. It’s sad. 
 
You know, you look at all the areas where we need to be doing 
a better job of governing, and I say it’s a trusting. The good 
people of Saskatchewan have trust in the government, granted, 
but I’ve also said in this House when we looked at the budget 
and, you know, you look at different comments that people are 
making, you know, the Sask Party’s got an opportunity here. 
They govern. It’s good to govern when all, you know, the 
coffers are full. You have a rainy day fund. You have lots of 
money in the bank left from the previous government, but you 
spent it, and at the end of the day it’s gone. You had an 
opportunity to save and do some good things for many people 
of this province. And here we have a government, all they’ll do 
is brag and say, we paid off the debt. We paid off the debt. 
 
Get down to the facts. And the backbenchers, do a little bit of 
research. Do a little bit of research and see how you’ve paid off 
the budget. Have a look at it. See how you’ve paid off the debt. 
It’s pretty sad when you see the government backbenchers. Ask 
some tough questions. I’ve been saying that. Get after the 
ministers. Ask them to explain it to you. You were elected to 
represent the people. Fight for the people. Fight for the 
grandkids. Fight for the family members. Don’t just accept this, 
that they do whatever they want. You will pay a price for this. 
You will pay a price at the end of the day, and you know, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s pretty sad at the end of the day, pretty sad at the 
end of the day. You’re going to take off some protection of all 
the liquor stores and . . . [inaudible]. 
 
[16:15] 
 
Now I know I could go on and talking about the different areas 
and the debt, but you know what? The sad reality is, the sad 
reality is again I’m going to . . . My final comments on this 
before I adjourn is this. It’s going to be our grandkids and our 
kids who will be judging what this government did. You had 
such an opportunity. The backbenchers, when you’re telling 
your grandkids, well why didn’t you fight for us? Why didn’t 
you . . . Your constituents come to you and say, why didn’t you 
fight? Why didn’t you say something? You seen this was 
happening and what did you do? Oh, we couldn’t say nothing. 
We couldn’t say nothing. 
 
You’re elected. Have a voice. Don’t just have to sit there. You 
can actually say some things. You can question some things. 
Don’t just be there as a figure and not actually do anything to 
fight for the constituents and the people that we act for in this 
province. And that’s what we don’t see. 

Well my colleagues will say certain things, but you know, at the 
end of the day, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think I’ve said what I 
need to say on this bill and I’m prepared to adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 1, The Crown Corporations Public 
Ownership Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 32 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 32 — The 
Automobile Accident Insurance (Benefits) Amendment Act, 
2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in on Bill 
No. 32, The Automobile Accident Insurance (Benefits) 
Amendment Act. 
 
If you look at this bill and what they’re doing and changing, 
Mr. Speaker, there’s about 30 changes, I believe. And there 
might be more of them, but I just happened to notice there’s 
about 30 of them that they’re proposing. They’re different 
ways, and I know that in committee we’re going to have to flesh 
these out. What exactly are they going to mean? I mean we 
could sit here and talk about individual ones, but I know there’s 
going to be a process that has to go through, and I know we’re 
going to do the good work in committee to deal with these bills 
and ask these tough questions like who . . . And I guess the one 
thing I’d say is, who did they consult and who did they ask on 
some of these? 
 
And I’ll give you an example. I just want to focus on one I was 
noticing, and it really came out to me. Like I realize 
government wants to control certain things and benefits, and the 
less benefits they pay out, the less benefits that the government 
pays out, SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] pays out, 
I guess that’s good. But if you look at this, they want to 
prohibit, SGI’s going to prohibit from paying benefits to a 
person who’s in prison. Now I don’t know what the previous 
provisions were. If you were disabled, if something happened to 
you and you were getting SGI to cover you and you were 
getting a benefit, you were getting a benefit, how is it that all of 
a sudden now you’re incarcerated, something happens and for 
some reason you get incarcerated . . . Like who knows what 
happened? But let’s just say you do get incarcerated, and now 
the benefits that SGI was giving you . . . Because you might 
have a disability. I don’t know, for all . . . You could be in a 
wheelchair. You could be some type of disability where you 
can’t work. We don’t know what’s going on. Like I mean 
there’s many different types of benefits that people get in a car 
accident and SGI covers. But having said that, if you, like I 
said, one of the areas I was looking at, you go into a 
correctional facility, the benefit ceases to exist. 
 
I know we’ve got to work out these questions in committee, and 



November 15, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1347 

there’s a lot of them. They’re talking about the different 
benefits going from 40 hours to 20 hours. There’s different 
things. And I know my colleagues will want to go through line 
by line, change by change, and ask some tough questions. And I 
know we’ll be consulting with individuals, talking to people 
and asking for advice. And I know the critic will do a great job 
in committee of asking some of these questions, and finding 
out, who did you consult? Who brought this forward? Was it 
SGI? Was it individuals? Were there clients? Were there people 
that were denied benefits? Like why the changes? And there are 
so many of them. I mean in here there’s quite a bit. Like I said, 
I think there could be 30, maybe more of them. But at this 
point, Mr. Speaker, I’m prepared to adjourn debate on this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 32, The Automobile Accident 
Insurance (Benefits) Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 33 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 33 — The Child 
and Family Services Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
always good to have you in the Chair for one of my 
interventions. Not to involve you in debate or anything, but I 
always like the rolling into it with the “r-r-recognize the 
member.” 
 
Anyway, good to be part of the debate on this particular piece 
of legislation, Bill No. 33, The Child and Family Services 
Amendment Act, 2016. And in this particular case, Mr. Speaker, 
in a relatively small piece of legislation, we see something that 
doesn’t get to the heart of what is one of the biggest issues that 
we have in front of us as a province, Mr. Speaker, one of the 
most important. And I would submit that that’s the very future 
of our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it goes to the way that this government, after a lot of talk 
over the past near decade, Mr. Speaker, in terms of things like 
Jordan’s principle where the . . . You know, I can remember the 
then minister, now private citizen, Bill Hutchinson, then 
minister for First Nations and Métis Relations stating, about 
2008-2009, the support of that government for Jordan’s 
principle. And Jordan’s principle of course, Mr. Speaker, is the 
idea that you should fix the problem first. You should address 
the needs of the child first, and figure out the jurisdictional 
wrangling after. 
 
And it’s a fairly common sense principle that arises from an 
uncommonly horrible circumstance that saw a young man by 
the name of Jordan die in a Manitoba hospital, where this kind 
of jurisdictional wrangling went on back and forth between the 
federal government and the provincial government and, you 

know, who held the responsibility in the case of Jordan? 
 
And like I say, Mr. Speaker, there were folks that came forward 
and said, you know, surely to goodness we’ve had enough of 
this. Surely we can all recognize that the most important thing 
here is the well-being of the child and that everything should be 
secondary to that, including the assignment of who’s got the 
jurisdictional authority or the responsibility to pay. So that was 
one important step along the way that, you know, this 
government at the time, and again it was the then minister of 
First Nations and Métis Relations who got to be the 
spokesperson for, Mr. Speaker, saying that that government 
would respect Jordan’s principle. 
 
And you know what, Mr. Speaker? We agreed with that on our 
side of the House and I think we agree with that in a lot of 
different ways. But you think about the kind of consensus that 
there was around Jordan’s principle, and then moving forward 
from that, the kind of work that this government and the kind of 
consultation that this government had done under the then 
member from Kelvington-Wadena and then minister of Social 
Services, June Draude, and the work that was done particularly 
with First Nations and Métis people in terms of the work around 
improving the situation in child and family services, in terms of 
improving the floor and the basic conditions that are attached to 
the Indian Child and Family Services agreements that are 
available throughout the province. That as well was a good 
piece of work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I know there were . . . I certainly have friends and 
colleagues out in the field that appreciated the commitment that 
the then minister brought to that work. They may not have 
agreed on everything, Mr. Speaker, but they didn’t doubt the 
commitment of the then minister to the advancement of the file 
and the recognition that the best interest of the child should be 
first and foremost. And again that was a moment where, you 
know, you’d like to think that as a province, surely to goodness 
we can come together and agree that the best interest of the 
child should be the most important thing, and that you can 
arrange . . . You can certainly work on the relationships. You 
can arrange the protocols to ensure that that is supported, not 
just in proclamation but indeed in the way that the system 
works. 
 
And there was some good progress that was observable on that 
front. And I guess, Mr. Speaker, my concern is that that was 
indeed years ago now, that the progress that had been made on 
that front I think has stalled. And I think folks are moving back 
into the different corners of jurisdiction in terms of fighting and 
the way that this government likes to use a big stick when it 
comes to enforcing co-operation from First Nations. 
 
I think that there are some things about this legislation that are 
relatively straightforward, but there are some things that 
indicate I think a lack of progress on that file that again we 
should all be able to agree on in terms of the well-being of First 
Nations, indigenous children in this province so that we learn 
from the experiences and the horror stories of the residential 
school system, of the Sixties Scoop, that we not be repeating, 
that we learn from history rather than repeat those mistakes. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, you know, we’d seen these moments 
of co-operation and moments of agreement. Another notable 



1348 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2016 

milestone along the way was the work, the Canadian Human 
Rights Tribunal challenge that was brought by Cindy 
Blackstock and the folks with the Caring Society, in terms of 
saying that the funding that the federal government provides on 
the one hand is significantly less than the funding that the 
provinces are providing on the other. 
 
And how is this in any way fair? How does this meet the basic 
demand of fairness that we should have in terms of how a 
Canadian is treated regardless of jurisdiction? How did that 
square with, again, the near universal support expressed for 
Jordan’s principle? And how did that square with the work that 
had been done in terms of the child and family services review 
that had been done in conjunction with First Nations, again near 
half a decade ago now? 
 
Mr. Speaker, that tribunal ruling came in and they said, this is 
unfair. First Nations kids should be treated just as well as 
anyone else in the country. And the alarming part of that 
question, Mr. Speaker, is that we still have a federal 
government that is a laggard in responding to that ruling, that 
still hasn’t put the money, the resources forward to ensure that 
you’ve got that basic equitable level of service to kids. 
 
And I guess, Mr. Speaker, it’s compounded by what we see as a 
general state of disarray in the Ministry of Social Services. And 
a lot of people that work for that ministry, both on the ministry 
side and on the front lines of the service delivery, the way that 
. . . The continual disarray that is on display in terms of how 
services aren’t being provided in a timely and adequate way for 
people on the grassroots level, Mr. Speaker, on the service 
level. 
 
You know, that’s bad enough, but where that kind of 
dysfunction finds . . . A terrible consequence is in the situation 
that we see where the ministry and the Saskatoon Tribal 
Council are going to court. And you think about how far we’ve 
come from when there was that review being done to how the 
ministry is going at it hammer and tong in court with Saskatoon 
Tribal Council. And, Mr. Speaker, that kind of conflict is an 
alarming sign in terms of what have been some genuine steps of 
progress made along the way. 
 
And to be sure, Mr. Speaker, you think about the different 
reports that have come from the Children’s Advocate over the 
years and the way that too many times, again and again, we 
come together as a province to examine the death of a child. 
And everybody lines up to take the pledge that, you know, one 
child is too many and never again. But the systemic, the 
structural aspect of things keeps moving in the opposite 
direction from those commitments. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m 
worried that instead of the concrete action and the commitments 
to co-operation and the spirit of co-operation that has been 
demonstrated on all these other aspects of the history that I’ve 
talked about, that that is being taken away from in this 
particular piece of legislation. So that gives me cause for 
concern, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know that other of my colleagues have, I’m sure, much better 
informed and wiser remarks than I to add to this debate, so in 
aid of that I would move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 33, The 
Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2016. 
 

The Speaker: — Opposition House Leader has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 33, The Child and Family Services 
Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 35 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 35 — The Small 
Claims Act, 2016/Loi de 2016 sur les petites créances be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to enter 
the discussion today about Bill No. 35, The Small Claims Act, 
2016. Mr. Speaker, I’m going to just put on the record here, I’m 
going to look at the minister’s second reading comments to tell 
you a little bit about this bill. This bill does a few things here, 
Mr. Speaker. “The first recommendation that was implemented 
as a result of review, occurred this past February when 
regulatory amendments increased the small claims monetary 
limit from . . . [20,000] to $30,000,” Mr. Speaker. 
 
[16:30] 
 
And I just . . . I will tell you a little bit about what the bill is 
about, but I know that when this bill gets to committee, Mr. 
Speaker, that our critic will have much to say and many 
questions to ask, to dig a little bit deeper, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister points out that: 
 

This bill will implement additional legislative changes that 
were identified during the consultation and that review 
process . . . the bill will expand the court’s authority to 
award costs to be paid from one party to another. [And the 
minister points out] In particular, the changes will grant the 
court authority to award costs where a party fails to attend 
or purposely delays any step in the proceedings. 

 
Third thing this bill does, Mr. Speaker: 
 

. . . the court will be granted authority to award general 
costs at the conclusion of a matter based on factors such as 
the behaviour of the party. [The minister points out] By 
discouraging disruptive and uncooperative behaviour by 
the parties in court, [the minister argues that] these changes 
will help provide timely and cost-effective dispute 
resolution. 

 
And again, these are things in committee that the critic will 
have an opportunity to delve a little bit more deeply into, to 
understand where these exactly . . . unintended consequences, 
all those kinds of things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister points out that: 
 



November 15, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1349 

This bill will also require all defendants to file a reply to a 
claim. Under the current rules, a defendant is not required 
to file a defence unless they are ordered to do so by the 
court. In practice this means that a claimant may receive no 
notice of a defendant’s defence until the day of the trial 
[Mr. Speaker]. 

 
You can see how that could make things difficult for a claimant. 
So: 
 

Requiring all defendants to file a copy of a reply to the 
claim will ensure that claimants have early notice of the 
defence that will be made. [And he points out that] This 
change is intended to encourage parties to actively engage 
in an early stage in the proceedings and promote a timely 
resolution . . . [Mr. Speaker]. 

 
This bill, the minister also points out: 
 

Where a defendant fails to file a reply and does not attend 
proceedings, the bill will clarify the powers of the court to 
award a default judgment in favour of the claimant. [He 
points out that] In particular, the updates will address the 
court’s authority to award a default judgment at the earliest 
stage of a proceeding, otherwise known as the first 
appearance. Existing protections will remain in place that 
will allow defendants to apply to overturn a default 
judgment where a defendant demonstrates that they have 
had a reasonable excuse for not appearing and have a valid 
defence for the . . . [Mr. Speaker]. 

 
And the minister also points out, aside from those other 
changes, this bill also grants: 
 

. . . the court authority to cite individuals for contempt in 
appropriate circumstances. It will provide judges express 
authority to question parties in order to obtain all necessary 
facts and details of a case, and it will implement additional 
housekeeping and administrative changes to modernize the 
Act. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I know . . . And the minister talks about this in his 
second reading speech. He talks about the justice innovation 
agenda in 2014 that the Ministry of Justice developed “. . . with 
a vision to create understandable, timely, and affordable justice 
for Saskatchewan citizens. [He points out that] as part of that 
agenda, the ministry is reviewing the way justice services are 
delivered and what improvements can be made to ensure 
Saskatchewan citizens have access to these important services.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, that justice innovation agenda that he speaks of, 
and in light of decisions that have fallen under his purview, 
gives me pause for consideration. We can think about The 
Coroners Act, Mr. Speaker, that just was taken off the table 
here yesterday — rightfully so, Mr. Speaker. This was a bill 
that was brought forward by the Minister of Justice without 
proper consultation. And had he only spoken to families who 
had lost a loved one in custody, in a death in custody, he would 
have known that there were some challenges with this bill, The 
Coroners Act, which would have seen in-custody deaths no 
longer automatically receive a coroner’s review, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Anyway, I think about his justice innovation, and I think about 

the closure of the Buffalo Narrows minimum security facility, 
Mr. Speaker, in this last budget, and how that impacts justice. 
Mr. Speaker, the privatizing of 14 armed deputy sheriffs, Mr. 
Speaker, who although the minister had gotten up in the House 
and said they weren’t armed, that wasn’t the case at all. So 
laying off trained people who carry firearms, Mr. Speaker, may 
be problematic. So when the minister talks about his justice 
innovation agenda, as I said, it gives me pause for concern. 
 
I just want to point out an interesting little tidbit here, Mr. 
Speaker. The small claims court actually was the first in North 
America. Actually, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan small claims 
court was the first small claims court in North America, brought 
in in the 1940s by a CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation] government. 
 
There’s been many things, actually, that Saskatchewan has been 
a first in, particularly in that administration. Yesterday I spoke 
about air ambulance, Saskatchewan Air Ambulance, celebrating 
70 years, Mr. Speaker. That was the first service of its kind, 
again in North America. That CCF government also introduced 
the first arts board in North America, Mr. Speaker. There are 
many interesting firsts and things that we still cherish here 
today in Saskatchewan. And other jurisdictions have followed 
suit, Mr. Speaker. But just an interesting little tidbit that the 
small claims court here that we have in Saskatchewan, was the 
first of its kind in North America in the 1940s. 
 
But with respect to Bill No. 35, The Small Claims Act, I’ve 
mentioned a little bit about what’s in the Act, Mr. Speaker. But 
again, our critic responsible for this bill, when it gets to 
committee, will have many questions to follow up around why 
these changes were made, and who was consulted, and many 
questions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But with that, I would like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Riversdale has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 35, The Small Claims Act, 
2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 36 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 36 — The Small 
Claims Consequential Amendments Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
again to enter the discussion about Bill No. 36, The Small 
Claims Consequential Amendments Act, 2016, Mr. Speaker. 
This is a companion bill to Bill No. 35, the bill to which I just 
spoke, Mr. Speaker, and you can just look at the minister’s 
second reading comments. It’s a brief bill: 
 

The purpose of this bill is to make consequential 



1350 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2016 

amendments to non-bilingual legislation to accompany The 
Small Claims Act, 2016. In particular, references to the 
current small claims Act, 1997 will be updated to refer to 
the new Act. These changes are entirely housekeeping in 
nature and will not have a substantive impact on the 
legislation that’s being amended [Mr. Speaker]. 

 
So the Minister of Justice pointed out, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So again this will accompany Bill 35. Bill No. 36, the 
companion Act, will accompany Bill 35 in committee, and any 
necessary questions will be asked at that time. But with that I 
would like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Riversdale has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 36, The Small Claims 
Consequential Amendments Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 4 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 4 — The Queen’s 
Bench Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur la 
Cour du Banc de la Reine be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure and 
honour to rise and speak to Bill 4 as critic for this bill. I’ve had 
the opportunity to review the comments from my colleagues as 
well as the minister’s remarks. And I actually consulted with 
quite a few lawyers with respect to the changes on this because 
after perusing through the changes, Mr. Speaker, I had some 
pretty significant concerns with respect to some of the changes 
and I wanted to see if they mirrored some of the concerns that I 
thought other lawyers would also have concerns about. 
 
And I was proven right in terms of some of those concerns, so I 
want to make that sure I get some of them on the record. I know 
I’ll have the opportunity to speak about this bill at committee 
with the minister, and I do hope that we’ll have the opportunity 
to create some changes or at least implement some sort of 
changes or amendments on this bill that can help to alleviate 
some of the real substantive concerns that I have with Bill 4 and 
how it might serve to actually delay the court process and 
impede access to justice, Mr. Speaker. The bill really changes 
two main things, and I’m going to speak about the first one and 
then I’ll speak about the second one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the first one, the bill is expanding enforcement of awards, 
orders for costs, or monetary penalties issued via trade 
agreements. It essentially expands what the bill already 
provides for, to include, I believe, the northwest partnership 
agreement, Mr. Speaker, as the minister indicated in his 
remarks. However, from what I understand, the definition of 
trade agreements is going to be actually defined in the 
regulations. Therefore, we don’t actually know yet what trade 

agreements this is going to be pertinent to, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I’ve said time and time again, it’s a little bit hard for us to 
critique a bill when we don’t have a full understanding of what 
the scope of it is going to be because a lot of it’s laid out in the 
regulations. So that would be one of my first main concerns is 
that we don’t actually know how large the scope is actually 
being increased, Mr. Speaker. So as I said, it’s quite unclear. 
 
In a word, under one of these trade agreements through this 
provision will then be able to be filed in the court and then 
enforced as if it was a regular Queen’s Bench judgment, Mr. 
Speaker, which allows for an enforcement mechanism that’s a 
bit more stringent, a bit tougher than just a judgment that isn’t 
actually recognized through Queen’s Bench, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It also creates an expansion, not just against the definition of 
trade agreement, but also the definition of who these judgments 
can be enforced against. It used to be just against the Crown, 
Mr. Speaker, but it’s going to be changed to a definition of any 
person. I’m assuming that’s going to mean potentially not just 
the Crown, but also Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker, also 
private businesses, Mr. Speaker. And I do hope members 
opposite are listening to this bill because there are actually a lot 
of concerns about this bill. And not only is it going to delay the 
court process, but it’s also going to create . . . It’s actually going 
to cost money when the court process is delayed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I said, for this specific part we’re not totally sure what trade 
agreements are going to fall under this, and we also have some 
concerns about how this new provision will affect private 
businesses as well as the public sector. So I’ll be interested to 
know what sort of consultation the minister’s done with respect 
to this part of the bill, whether or not he’s spoken with different 
business groups, those who perhaps would be getting trade 
enforcement issues with respect to the trade agreements that 
Saskatchewan is privy to, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The second provision is actually another one that’s quite 
alarming to me, and that’s the one that I had to . . . I consulted 
with several lawyers in the province, Mr. Speaker. It’s some 
changes that have been made to the court-appointed counsel 
process, Mr. Speaker, and it’s essentially taking it away from 
the way it’s working right now, where a judge can appoint or 
has discretion to appoint counsel from the bench when an 
individual comes to them who’s unrepresented, typically in 
criminal or child apprehension cases, and doesn’t qualify for 
legal aid, typically because either they’re working — they could 
be working 30 hours a week at Tim Hortons, Mr. Speaker — 
and not qualify for legal aid. 
 
The provisions . . . The financial screening provisions are 
actually incredibly low for legal aid. Or alternatively, they 
could have been fired from legal aid for whatever reason — 
issues with, disagreements with their lawyers, for example. 
Typically, I’ve heard if you miss one meeting with your lawyer, 
your legal aid lawyer, you’ll get fired from legal aid. 
 
All I’m trying to say, Mr. Speaker, is that’s a . . . It’s a pretty 
large group of people who don’t qualify for legal aid, and can’t 
afford private counsel. Therefore, they try to get or they 
hopefully successfully get counsel through the court-appointed 
counsel process, as is their right according to our Charter, Mr. 



November 15, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1351 

Speaker. 
 
[16:45] 
 
So essentially what this will do is it will create an 
administrative process, Mr. Speaker. And then it has certain 
provisions in terms of how this process is going to work and 
what this means for the unrepresented litigant, Mr. Speaker. 
Now I have a lot of concerns with respect to this. I know little, 
if any, consultation has been done with respect to this provision. 
I know for certain that the minister hasn’t consulted with the 
non-profit organizations in the province who work with 
unrepresented litigants, Mr. Speaker, because I was working for 
that non-profit, or one of the few non-profits that do that work 
for the last five years. And we sure as heck didn’t get consulted 
with respect to this provision, Mr. Speaker. So it’s a little 
alarming. 
 
And what I’ve also heard is that lawyers who are doing this 
court-appointed counsel work — good, hard-working lawyers 
who are doing this court-appointed counsel work — were also 
not consulted with respect to this change, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 
really going to create some very concerning issues. 
 
First of all, I have a concern about removing discretion away 
from the judiciary. So, Mr. Speaker, the judiciary has the 
ability, like I said, the discretion to appoint from the bench. 
This is sort of removing that discretion away from them and 
moving it to a more administrative process, which is always 
very concerning when the judiciary has to be able to make 
rulings from the bench and make appointments as they feel 
necessary for the expediency and for the proper functioning of 
their court, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Queen’s Bench Act changes will also create a requirement 
for a Charter notice. So the way the system works, for the most 
part, and there’s some variance in the province . . . And what I 
will concede is that because, not only have I heard from other 
lawyers, but we used to do work in terms of providing 
unrepresented litigants with information about how they can 
apply for court-appointed counsel, that it is a confusing process, 
Mr. Speaker, and there’s definitely some need for clarification, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the way it typically works now is there’s a list that’s run by 
court services of who in the community is willing to take on 
court-appointed counsel positions, and then individuals are 
incumbent on themselves to contact those lawyers. And if that 
lawyer is interested in taking on that individual’s case, they will 
help that, typically they’ll help that unrepresented litigant go 
through the court process in terms of filing the appropriate 
document or making the appropriate request to the judge to get 
that court-appointed counsel status. 
 
Now the way that the provision works in this bill is that it’s 
going to require the unrepresented litigant to do all of the work 
themselves. So the administrator will be managing the list. And 
after the self-represented litigant goes through the process and 
is successful in getting a court appointment, the administrator 
will then choose from the list the lawyer that will represent that 
individual. This is essentially removing the litigant’s right to be 
able to choose who their counsel is, which is flying in the face 
of over 30 years of precedents of how this has been working in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, with no consultation to those who 
are on the court-appointed list currently. 
 
And depending on what area of the province you’re practising 
in, Mr. Speaker, the court-appointed lists vary in terms of how 
many lawyers are practising on them or how many lawyers are 
on the list. I know from when I used to practise that, for 
example, the court-appointed counsel list for child apprehension 
cases in Regina is extremely, extremely thin. So there’s a bit of 
a recruitment problem in terms of getting lawyers who are 
willing to do this work. It’s very important work, Mr. Speaker. 
However it’s usually a lot of work for not as much pay as you 
could get through private clients, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’m not sure. And I’m quite concerned as to this process, if 
it’s going to discourage lawyers from joining the 
court-appointed counsel list when we already have I think, in 
some areas of the province, an issue with respect to making sure 
that we have a healthy roster of lawyers who are willing to take 
on this really, really important work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another thing that I found extremely alarming, Mr. Speaker — 
and this is how I know that there wasn’t any consultation with 
any, either organizations that work with unrepresented litigants 
or unrepresented litigants themselves — is that this Act will 
require if an individual wants to apply for court-appointed 
counsel, not just to fill out a form and file it with this 
administrator, but there’s also several other people that the 
unrepresented litigant is supposed to have to go through the 
process of serving, themselves. 
 
And I know from the work I used to do . . . I used to help 
unrepresented litigants, for example, file statements of claim 
and go through the service process for that, or file a judicial 
review application with Federal Court and go through the 
service process with respect to that. It’s a fairly onerous 
process, especially if you’re an unrepresented litigant who’s 
never gone through the court process before, who has no idea 
what’s going on, is confused, and who is scared. Sometimes 
there is literacy issues. Sometimes there’s access to computers, 
for example. Sometimes there is many other crises that this 
individual is facing as well. 
 
For example, if you think about child apprehension cases, for 
example. We often think about the criminal law clients, who are 
very important, but there’s also child apprehension cases that 
get court-appointed counsel as well. They’re going through a 
crisis in their family. Their children have been taken away. 
They’re dealing with Ministry of Social Services. They’re 
dealing with child and family services. They’re trying to go 
through all the steps that are being required through their 
section 9 agreement, Mr. Speaker, and now they’re also 
required to go through this process. 
 
If they’re, for example, working at Tim Hortons part-time, 
don’t qualify for legal aid, still have to maintain their 
employment so they can pay their rent, but then also have to go 
through the process of serving all these people before even 
being approved for a court-appointed counsel, it’s crazy to me 
that the minister would think that this is an appropriate process 
for an unrepresented litigant to have to go through. 
 
This is an access to legal services issue, Mr. Speaker. This is an 



1352 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2016 

access to justice issue, Mr. Speaker. The minister has an entire 
branch devoted to innovation in the justice system whose sole 
mandate is to improve access to legal services and access to 
justice in Saskatchewan. This provision is going to not only 
prevent individuals, make it more difficult for individuals to 
access legal services; it’s also going to delay the court process. 
Anyone who’s been in a courtroom in the last 10 years knows 
that unrepresented litigants delay a court process simply 
because they don’t know how the system works. 
 
So I don’t understand how this provision is supposed to 
improve access to legal services. I fear that it’s going to do the 
opposite, Mr. Speaker. So I hope at committee, Mr. Speaker, 
there’ll be the opportunity to propose some alternatives. Like I 
said, I think there’s a need for clarification, but we shouldn’t be 
doing it in a way that’s going to make it more difficult for 
unrepresented litigants. 
 
There’s also some concerns as to how the payment process is 
going to work for court-appointed counsel. As I said, it’s 
important for us to be able to recruit lawyers to do 
court-appointed counsel work. It’s really important work, Mr. 
Speaker, and we need to ensure that payment is adequate and in 
such a way that encourages lawyers to do this type of work. 
 
I’m also concerned about how this is going to apply to certain 
individuals, what the financial screening is going to be, and 
how that’s going to look in terms of individuals who qualify for 
court-appointed counsel, as well as the legal aid list, Mr. 
Speaker. These are very, very concerning things. 
 
I have several questions for the minister, Mr. Speaker, but I’m 
hoping that at committee I’ll have the opportunity to clarify 
some of these issues and hopefully work with him to change 
this process to hopefully make it a little bit more accessible. If I 
were to paraphrase my two main issues with respect to this 
specific area, it’s very important that the application process for 
court-appointed counsel is accessible and easy for 
unrepresented litigants to be able to follow. And I have strong 
concerns about removing the ability for an individual to choose 
their counsel. 
 
So in light of time, Mr. Speaker, and knowing that I’ll be able 
to speak to this at committee as well, I am prepared to conclude 
my remarks and allow this bill to be moved to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the member that Bill No. 4, The Queen’s Bench Amendment 
Act, 2016 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill 4 be designated to the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

The Speaker: — The bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
this House be now adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that this Assembly be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:56.] 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1321 
  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 1321, 1323 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1321 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1321 
  Parent ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1321 
  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1321 
  Rancourt ........................................................................................................................................................................ 1322, 1323 
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1322 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1322 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1322 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1322 
  Carr ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1323, 1324 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 1323 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1323 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1324 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1324 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1324 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1324 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1325 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1325 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1325 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1326 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1326 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1326 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1326 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Recognizing Olympic and Paralympic Participants 
  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1326 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1327 
 Adoption Awareness Month 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1327 
 Girl Guides of Canada Make a Difference 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1327 
 Stem Cell Donor Honoured 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1328 
 Inauguration of Regina Mosque 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1328 
 Fire Chief Presented With Protective Services Medal 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1328 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Auditor’s Report and Statements During Question Period 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1328 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1329 
 Support for School Boards 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1330 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1330 
 Workers’ Compensation Board Review 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1331 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1331 
 Support for Vulnerable Citizens 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1332 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 1332 
 Funding for Health Care Facilities 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1333 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1333 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1333 
 
 



 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 34 — The Provincial Lands Act, 2016  
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1333 
 Bill No. 26 — The Patient Choice Medical Imaging Act  
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1338 
 Bill No. 28 — The Extension of Compassionate Care Act, 2016  
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1340 
 Bill No. 1 — The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Amendment Act, 2016  
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1344 
 Bill No. 32 — The Automobile Accident Insurance (Benefits) Amendment Act, 2016  
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1346 
 Bill No. 33 — The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2016  
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1347 
 Bill No. 35 — The Small Claims Act, 2016/Loi de 2016 sur les petites créances  
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1348 
 Bill No. 36 — The Small Claims Consequential Amendments Act, 2016  
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1349 
 Bill No. 4 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2016 
 Loi modificative de 2016 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine  
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1350 
  Merriman (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) ...................................................................... 1352 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


