






















































Hansard: November 23, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 47A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 23, 2016, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (Ind.) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10; Independent (Ind.) — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1453 
 November 23, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would ask for leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thanks very much, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s an honour and a privilege to introduce some 
special guests that are seated in your gallery today. Mr. 
Speaker, it is the former premier of Yukon Territory, Darrell 
Pasloski, and his wife, Tammie, have joined us. 
 
Obviously there was just an election in Yukon and, well, the 
fact that he’s with us here today in his home province might 
indicate what happened there. But there’s more to the story, Mr. 
Speaker. I was honoured and privileged to serve as a fellow 
Premier of the Council of the Federation with Darrell. Darrell 
was a Co-Chair of a health innovation committee of premiers 
and led us down the road to great savings in the purchase of 
pharmaceuticals, saving literally hundreds of millions of dollars 
for the country. 
 
He has also presided over the Council of the Federation meeting 
this year in Yukon, the first time the summer premier’s meeting 
has ever been held in a territory, and he and his team did an 
outstanding job. 
 
And I can share with the members of the House that he also led 
us through the renegotiation, the renewal of the Agreement on 
Internal Trade within Canada, that we could knock down still 
more interprovincial trade barriers that exist. And at times we 
needed that deft leadership at the head of the table that he was 
able to provide. We will wish the incoming premier well, but 
we’re going to miss Darrell at that table. I’ll miss him as a 
friend and a fellow Riders fan; we were the only two of the 
premiers there. 
 
And I know I speak for Tami and I both say we’ll miss them as 
a couple. Tammie of course, Darrell’s wife, enabled, shared him 
with Yukon and with the country. And so we’re grateful to her 
as well for her leadership and service in Yukon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are accompanied today by the incoming 
president of the Canadian Pharmacists Association, Christine 
Hrudka. And they would have formed a friendship long ago 
because Darrell, before he got into politics, was a pharmacist, 
and so theirs is a long-standing friendship. And members of the 
House will also know Christine as the better half of the 
Attorney General for the province of Saskatchewan . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Mr. Speaker, much better, as the 
Minister of Finance has pointed out.  
 
I would just ask all members of the House to welcome this 
native son and his wife, Tammie, back to the province of 
Saskatchewan — former premier of Yukon, Darrell Pasloski. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
want to join the Premier in welcoming Darrell and Tammie to 
the legislature today. Darrell’s relationship and Tammie’s 
relationship with my wife Christine goes back to pharmacy 
school. They both graduated the same year, and I won’t tell you 
what year that is. 
 
So I do want to thank Darrell and Tammie very much for the 
friendship they’ve had with Christine over these many years. 
They share a great interest not only in pharmacy, Mr. Speaker, 
but they share a great interest in politics. And I know prior to 
the campaign up in the Yukon and during the election, Christine 
had many discussions with Darrell. So I want to thank Darrell 
and Tammie very much for that friendship. 
 
And then while I’m on my feet, I will welcome my wife to the 
legislature. The Premier’s already mentioned, Chris is the 
incoming president of the Canadian Pharmacists Association, 
something we’re very proud of, only the second person from 
Saskatchewan to hold that over the many, many years of that 
association. She’s very much committed to her profession, Mr. 
Speaker, both in Saskatchewan and nationally. I’d like to say 
she’s also an entrepreneur and has a number of businesses in 
Saskatoon that she operates. 
 
But her most compelling feature is her boundless patience 
because she’s married to me, Mr. Speaker. We all know that to 
be successful in this business, you need a very supportive and 
loving family at home, and Christine is that for me. And so I 
want to thank you very much, sweetie. I love you very much. 
Thanks very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — With leave for extended introductions. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to welcome the members that are here today, and to welcome 
former Premier Pasloski to the Saskatchewan Legislative 
Assembly, along with his wife, Tammie. It’s a remarkable 
service one takes on in taking on the office of premier. And we 
respect and thank you for that service to the people of Yukon, 
and we respect your presence here today as well. 
 
I have observed some of your activity over the years, and I’ve 



1454 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2016 

always appreciated a common sense approach, as well as that 
love as a full-fledged member of Rider nation as well, Mr. 
Speaker. That means a lot to all of us. So welcome to your 
Assembly. Thank you for your service. I ask all members to 
join with me in welcoming former Premier Pasloski to the 
Saskatchewan Assembly. 
 
My introduction of the Minister of Justice’s wife won’t be quite 
as sweet and affectionate as his, but I certainly welcome 
Christine to her Assembly. And I do thank her for her 
leadership within health care as the president of the pharmacists 
of Canada. So thank you so much, and we welcome Christine to 
her Assembly. 
 
I’m really proud to introduce some Martin Monarchs that are 
here with us today, some students from Martin Academy, 
Martin school. They’re looking good up in the Assembly. 
They’re wearing some of their new school bunny hugs and gear. 
I’ve got one of those myself. I wear it with pride. 
 
It’s an honour to welcome them here. This is a dynamic school. 
These are awesome students, awesome teachers. I want you to 
say hello to all your teachers and to Principal Allen, and I want 
to wish you well. And it’s a pleasure to have you here in this 
Assembly. It’s nice to see this high school continuing to grow 
and seeing things like the football team being back on the field 
here this year. And I think there’s a few players up there today 
as well. 
 
I want to welcome the great teachers that are here today, Ms. 
Ashley Maurer and Ms. Taylor Webb. And I thank them for 
their service, along with that great staff over at Martin. So I ask 
all members to join with me in welcoming this group from 
Martin high school, Martin Academy. 
 
I’m not going to introduce everybody here today, Mr. Speaker, 
but I do have two special people to me seated in your gallery. I 
have my mom and my dad, Faye and Craik Wotherspoon, that 
are here. It’s a pleasure to have them here. Thank them so much 
for all their help and all their care. Mom, you know, good looks 
and brains. Dad, well you see him. It’s a pleasure to welcome 
my parents to their Assembly. Thanks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
University. 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you and to all members of the Assembly, it is my honour to 
introduce Montana State Senator John Brenden and his wife, 
Carol, sitting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. Can you stand up, 
John and Carol. There you are. Give a wave. 
 
I met Senator Brenden in Calgary at the PNWER [Pacific 
NorthWest Economic Region] conference this last July. Senator 
Brenden was last elected to the Montana State Senate in 2015 
and has served in many roles, including being one of only 538 
presidential electors in 2004, ’08, and ’12, and has served in 
many roles, including with the Montana Fish, Wildlife and 
Parks commission from 2003 to 2007. He’s been involved in 
Republican politics for over 50 years, Mr. Speaker, and they 
live on their family farm by Scobey, Montana. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he’s come to our beautiful capital and Legislative 

Building to take a tour and to meet a few of our fine folks here 
and perhaps, he says, to take in a little bit of a celebration called 
Agribition, Mr. Speaker. I’d ask all members to welcome the 
senator and Mrs. Brenden to our Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 
the official opposition, I’d like to welcome State Senator 
Brenden to the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, and 
Mrs. Brenden. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, there’s always a lot of 
common issues, common ground, and certainly great skies. 
There’s a lot of things in common between Big Sky Country 
and the Land of the Living Skies here in Saskatchewan.  
 
So I wish them many successes at Agribition. Hope it’s a 
fruitful, productive, and enjoyable visit and again, welcoming 
them on behalf of the official opposition to the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave for 
an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, sitting in the west gallery, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce and welcome the Jamestown Jimmies women’s 
wrestling team from the University of Jamestown, North 
Dakota. Accompanying them today are coaches Tony DeAnda 
and Shane Tisdale and manager Rosalinda Guzman. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this team has produced a total of 16 
all-Americans, six academic all-Americans, and received the 
Team Scholar Award in 2016. There’s 17 athletes with us 
today, Mr. Speaker. In addition to these results at the college 
level, this women’s wrestling team has produced US [United 
States] national champions, won international world 
tournaments, and medalled at the Pan Am championships. 
 
The Jimmies team is currently in Regina and later in the week 
in Saskatoon for the purpose of promoting international 
friendship and sportsmanship while participating in competition 
with the University of Regina and the University Saskatchewan 
women’s wrestling teams. We wish you good luck, but not a 
lot. But a little bit, a little luck. 
 
A particular note, Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce 
Jessalyn Spooner. She’s a freshman this year at the University 
of Jamestown. Jessalyn was born and raised in Regina and is 
the first Canadian woman to be recruited to the University of 
Jamestown women’s wrestling team. She’s in a pre-med 
program and this is her first trip home since the start of the 
term, and what better way for a homecoming but to proudly 
bring her team to the legislature for an introduction. 



November 23, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1455 

Mr. Speaker, joining them today is my CA [constituency 
assistant], Jessalyn’s mom, Maggie Spooner. Maggie joined my 
office after retiring from a career working with young 
offenders. Please join me not only in wishing them a happy 
American Thanksgiving, which is tomorrow, but join me in 
welcoming Jessalyn, Maggie, Coach Tony DeAnda, the Jimmie 
women’s wrestling team to the Saskatchewan legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d just 
like to join briefly on behalf of the official opposition with the 
member from Regina Coronation Park in welcoming the 
University of Jamestown Jimmies from all the way from North 
Dakota here to the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, and 
to also tag myself alongside the . . . or tag in, I guess might be 
the more appropriate way to say it, Mr. Speaker, what the 
member had to say about we wish them luck in their 
competition with the University of Regina and University of 
Saskatchewan wrestling teams, but not too much. 
 
And certainly, Jessalyn, you know, come on home. It would be 
good to have you back but certainly it’s great to see you here 
for this excellent exchange of competition, sport, and the spirit 
that athletes bring to these kind of events. So, Mr. Speaker, on 
behalf of the official opposition, happy American Thanksgiving 
to our friends here from the University of Jamestown Jimmies. 
To the athletes, the coaches, and the managers, welcome to the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan on behalf of the official 
opposition. Thank you.  
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
Through you and to you, I’d like to introduce you to 23 grade 6 
and 7 students from École Massey School, which is in my 
constituency. They are accompanied by their teacher, Madame 
Clément. 
 
Earlier they got to spend some time with the member from 
Regina Pasqua. I’m sorry about that. But they do also have a 
very good guide with them today, Kingsley, who I had the 
opportunity to tour the legislature with this summer. And I just 
want to also thank the folks at visitor services for always doing 
such a great job in making our folks feel welcome. And so 
please join me in welcoming these grade 6 and 7 students and 
their teacher to our Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Along with my 
colleague, I also recognize and welcome the grade 6 and 7 class 
from Massey School, accompanied by Madame Clément. Most 
specifically, Mr. Speaker, there is my son in grade 6, Kashif. 
Wave, Kashif. And I would like to say welcome to this very 
busy boy and very intelligent boy. He plays street hockey, 
basketball, and biking, Mr. Speaker. Yes, and then the most 
important game is and the favourite game is golfing. And in his 
free time, Mr. Speaker, he goes to school. 
 
I would like to welcome them. I ask colleagues to welcome my 
son in his Legislative Building. 
 

[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 
and through you to all members of this Assembly, I would like 
to introduce, in the west gallery, Megan Griffith. Megan would 
be no stranger to this Assembly as she worked here with the 
Minister of Rural and Remote Health, I know with myself, as 
Minister of Environment, a couple of years ago, Mr. Speaker, as 
well as a number of other posts. 
 
And she hails from a farm southeast of Yorkton in what she 
calls the country of Bob Bjornerud, Mr. Speaker. Now Megan is 
employed with the University of Calgary, Mr. Speaker, and 
she’s in town visiting some old friends and whatnot. And it was 
a pleasure to see her last night, and I look forward to seeing her 
again before she returns back to Calgary. So if everyone would 
join me in welcoming Megan to her previous legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you and to all members of the legislature, I would like 
to introduce . . . well not really introduce but I would like to 
reintroduce, I guess, Yogi Huyghebaert, a well-known person in 
this legislature. And stand up, Yogi, and wave at everybody. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Yogi is well known not only in the legislature and 
the love that the opposition has for him, but he’s also known as 
a great cook. But, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that there’s some 
things that Yogi can’t do. We went fishing this year, and you 
know, I did get a picture of Yogi with a lot of fish, but I was the 
one that, you know, had to put them on the table and catch them 
for him. So anyway I’d like to ask everybody to welcome Yogi 
back to his legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and on 
behalf of the official opposition, we too would like to extend a 
warm welcome to Yogi Huyghebaert for returning to the 
Legislative Assembly. Having grown up in Wood River, I just 
wanted to pass along how happy everyone is about the highway 
between Lafleche and Gravelbourg. It was very well done and 
much appreciated. And certainly your service to our country is 
one that will be appreciated for many, many years by the 
citizens of Saskatchewan, and your service in this legislature. 
So welcome back, Mr. Huyghebaert. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition to reverse the cuts to the 
Lighthouse program. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that 
in April 2014, the then minister of Social Services said the 
Lighthouse in Saskatoon would “. . . take pressure off existing 
detox facilities, hospitals, and police cells while keeping people 



1456 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2016 

safe, especially in our brutally cold winters.” Mr. Speaker, the 
petitioners pointed out that on that very same day, the then 
minister of Health said, “We want to ensure that individuals 
with mental health and addictions issues have a safe place to 
stay,” Mr. Speaker. 
 
The petitioners point out that since that time, the government 
has repeatedly indicated that the Lighthouse stabilization unit 
keeps individuals out of hospital emergency rooms and jail 
cells. And, Mr. Speaker, we in the opposition could not agree 
more. We’d only need to look to the Saskatoon Health Region 
which has experienced record over capacity in the recent last 
couple of months, Mr. Speaker. And the Lighthouse clearly 
isn’t the whole issue there, but certainly this kind of cut does 
not help, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately reverse 
their recent cuts to funding that allows extremely 
vulnerable people to access the services of the Lighthouse 
stabilization unit in Saskatoon, and revisit their imposition 
of a strict and narrow definition of homelessness in 
November of 2015 which forced the Lighthouse to cut 
back its hours of essential services in February of 2016, 
and take immediate steps to ensure that homeless people in 
Saskatchewan have emergency shelter, clothing, and food 
available to them before more lives are lost. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens from 
Saskatoon and Dundurn. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. Now I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of Melfort, 
Gronlid, Watrous, Brooksby, Young, Tisdale, Naicam, 
Pleasantdale, Weldon, Saskatoon, Kinistino, Carrot River, St. 
Brieux, Ceylon, and Wadena. I do so present. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
proud to stand in my place once again to present a petition for a 
second bridge for Prince Albert. Whereas the Saskatchewan 
Party government refuses to stand up for Prince Albert and this 
critical infrastructure issue and that the need for a second bridge 
for Prince Albert has never been clearer than it is today, Prince 
Albert, communities north of Prince Albert, and the businesses 
that send people and products to the Prince Albert area require a 
solution. So, Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads as follows: 
 

That the people ask that the Saskatchewan Party 
government stop stalling, hiding behind rhetoric, and 
refusing to listen to the people calling for action, and begin 
immediately to plan and then quickly commence the 
construction of a second bridge for Prince Albert using 
federal and provincial dollars. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, as we’ve presented page after page after 
page in this Assembly calling for a second bridge for Prince 
Albert, on this particular page the people that have signed this 
are primarily from Prince Albert and the St. Louis area. And I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m rising to present 
a petition regarding The Surface Rights Acquisition and 
Compensation Act. It’s an old and outdated piece of legislation 
that remains largely unchanged, despite amendments over the 
years. It is in desperate need of modernization to reflect the 
current challenges that farmers and ranchers are facing today. 
Here’s the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the Government of Saskatchewan to introduce legislation 
that would modernize The Surface Rights Acquisition and 
Compensation Act, classify land valued as industrial rather 
than agricultural when oil and gas development takes 
place, remove pipelines and flow lines from the surface 
rights Act, and establish a new maximum in compensation 
to be paid for damages. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing this particular petition are 
from Saskatoon and Martensville. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition regarding child care in Saskatchewan. Those signing 
this petition wish to draw our attention to the following: across 
Saskatchewan, licensed non-profit child care centres are taxed 
inconsistently and many of our licensed non-profit child care 
centres pay commercial property taxes. This is not done in 
Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario, British Columbia, or New 
Brunswick. 
 
Child care is essential to the economy, yet most centres struggle 
to balance their budget and this issue threatens both the number 
of child care spaces as well as the quality of care. Child care has 
an enormous positive impact on a child’s future outcomes and 
yields high rates of economic return, and child care centres are 
institutions of early learning and childhood development. It is 
appropriate that they have the same tax treatment as schools. I 
will read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan recognize 
that licensed non-profit child care centres provide 
programs that are foundational to a healthy society by 
including them in The Education Act and exempt all 
licensed non-profit child care centres in Saskatchewan 



November 23, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1457 

from property tax through changes to the appropriate 
legislation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those signing the petition reside in Moosomin. I 
do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition yet again calling for a stop to the Sask Party 
sell-off of SaskTel. The petitioners point out that in the recent 
election campaign, the Sask Party promised that they would not 
privatize SaskTel, but the petitioners also point out that instead 
of looking at their own waste and scandal, the Sask Party is now 
talking about breaking their promise and looking to sell off 
SaskTel to make a quick dollar. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners also point out that once SaskTel is 
gone, there’s no getting it back and there’s no telling what else 
the Sask Party might sell. 
 

In the prayer that reads as follows, the petitioners 
respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan call on the Saskatchewan Party government 
to keep their promise, stop their plan to sell off SaskTel, 
and to keep our valued Crown corporation in the hands of 
the people of Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular batch of petitions is signed by 
citizens from Windthorst, Coronach, Fillmore, Odessa, Manor, 
Estevan, Weyburn, Saskatoon, and Regina. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I rise yet again in the 
House today to present a petition calling on the government to 
reverse the cuts to the Aboriginal court worker program. The 
Government of Saskatchewan cut the budget for the Aboriginal 
court worker program in the 2016-2017 provincial budget, 
resulting in layoffs of Aboriginal court workers throughout the 
province. Those on this side of the House know that Aboriginal 
court workers play an important role helping Aboriginal people 
in criminal and child apprehension cases. Aboriginal peoples 
are disproportionately represented in Saskatchewan’s 
correctional centres and Aboriginal court workers successfully 
help to make our communities safer through reduced recidivism 
rates. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan reverse its 
short-sighted and counterproductive cuts to the Aboriginal 
court worker program. 

 
The individuals signing the petition today come from Grenfell, 
Langham, Regina, and Moose Jaw. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present the 
petition to stop the redirection of funding of the Northern 
Teacher Education Program Council, Inc. A recent report shows 
that 94 per cent of NORTEP [northern teacher education 

program] grads found employment in the North. NORTEP has 
improved teacher retention rates in the North. NORTEP has a 
positive economic impact in northern Saskatchewan. NORTEP 
provides highly quality face-to-face instructional and services to 
students. The province’s financial deficit cannot be fixed by 
cutting indigenous education in the North and a program that 
has served the North for over 40 years. And the prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to immediately restore the 
five-year agreement to fund the Northern Teacher 
Education Program Council, Inc. and to continue to fund 
NORTEP-NORPAC programs in La Ronge. 
 

It is signed and supported by the leadership of the North and 
signed by hundreds and hundreds of residents of northern 
Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Saskatoon Sports Hall of Fame Inductees 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I recently had the 
pleasure of attending the Saskatoon Sports Hall of Fame 
induction ceremony and banquet. 
 
In the category of athletes: accomplished gymnast, track star, 
and bobsleigh racer Jaime Cruickshank; Huskies and CFL 
[Canadian Football League] football player Duane Dmytryshyn; 
Canadian record-breaking pole vaulter Kelsie Hendry; former 
Team Canada hockey player and coach Randy Smith; and 
Canadian standing volleyball champion Joey Stabner were all 
inducted. 
 
In the category of teams: world champion-winning baton 
twirling pair, Stephanie Hart and Casey Napper; along with 
their coach, Brenda Bennett; and the Marian Gymnastics Club 
were inducted. 
 
And in the category of builders: Rempel Brothers softball 
pitcher and coach Don Bates; multi-sport athlete and coach Bob 
Fawcett; and soccer athlete and coach Percy Hoff were all 
inducted into the Hall. 
 
Along with them was Ray Wight, of whom I can attest to his 
strengths as a builder. Ray was my first badminton coach in the 
1980s. He knew the sport, but more importantly he knew how 
to make playing fun. He fostered a love of the sport and built 
skills in a group of young athletes who went on to have success 
provincially and nationally. Ray is also an accomplished cyclist, 
and is one of the founding presidents of the Horizon 100 
Cycling Club. I heard that evening from his cycling colleagues 
that he carried that same ability to inspire and that desire to 
support into his time in that sport as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
these fine individuals who were inducted into the Saskatoon 
Sports Hall of Fame in 2016. Thank you. 
 



1458 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2016 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
North. 
 

25th Annual Moose Jaw Festival of Trees 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, last Saturday was 
the 25th anniversary of the Festival of Trees in Moose Jaw. The 
Festival of Trees could be considered the social event of the 
year, complete with a festively decorated venue, elaborate 
Christmas displays of trees and wreaths, and a variety of 
spectacular auction items. 
 
This year’s theme was Black/Gold and the evening was full of 
elegance. Approximately 300 people came out to enjoy a 
fun-filled evening of dining and dancing and fundraising, with a 
live and silent auction. Fundraising at this year’s event will be 
put toward the purchase of surgical equipment for the new Dr. 
F.H. Wigmore Regional Hospital. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the largest contribution of the night was a 
$100,000 donation from the Moose Jaw students’ association of 
Saskatchewan Polytechnic Moose Jaw Campus. The item that 
raised the most money during the live auction was the Yara’s 
All I Want for Christmas is You display purchased by Main 
Street Dental and then generously donated back to be auctioned 
a second time, raising a combined total of $7,300. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this event raised over $293,000 and is a perfect 
example of the generosity of the people of Moose Jaw. I ask all 
members to join me in congratulating the organizing committee, 
the dedicated volunteers, and the citizens of Moose Jaw in 
support of this year’s Festival of Trees. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Project Reflects Pride in Cathedral Area 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past weekend an 
“old new touch” was officially opened as an entryway to one of 
Regina’s most historic streetscapes. Regina designers Amanda 
Lang and Christine Bachinsky have transformed a corner of 
13th Avenue and Albert Street using century-old bricks and 
limestone salvaged by volunteers from the demolished historic 
Connaught School. Of their project, Amanda noted, “We 
envisioned creating a delightful, inviting place that encourages 
people to sit and meet with their neighbours.” 
 
Built with a small grant, help from local businesses, small 
donations, and a whole lot of community spirit and volunteer 
labour, the Rassembler project means “to gather.” The design 
plays on a frieze of stylized linked people by renowned 
Canadian architect Clifford Wiens, which once encircled 
Connaught’s distinctive round gym. “We chose to reference the 
‘stone people’ because we see this form as an expression of the 
strong sense of community and pride that is shared by residents 
of the Cathedral area.” 
 
As noted, the bricks and limestones were rescued from the city 
landfill by citizens last November. “The project models 

responsible recycling and shows respect for the true 
irreplaceable value of heritage materials,” said project 
coordinator Trish Elliott. Dr. Elliott was the driving force 
behind this project, coordinating and moving this project 
forward from the beginning, from paperwork to shovel work. 
 
In addition to local volunteers, the project was supported by the 
community association, Save Our Connaught Heritage, business 
operator Von Agioritis, Frontier Masonry, Botkin Historic 
Building Conservators, Cindercrete Concrete, MPM 
Construction, Groovy Mama, and the city of Regina landfill 
staff. 
 
I invite all members to join me in recognizing this incredible 
community project. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
University. 
 

New Downtown Development in Saskatoon a Success 
 

Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to bring 
attention of this Assembly to a good news story from the city of 
Saskatoon. Many of you have heard about the new No. 1 River 
Landing development downtown. This development will 
include a series of office buildings, a hotel, and a condo 
building with various sizes of suites. 
 
They held an open house where they were pre-selling condos to 
those that were interested this weekend, Mr. Speaker. One of 
the project developers, John Nasser, planned the open house 
and hoped that they would sell about 30 or so units over the first 
weekend. Much to his and everyone’s pleasant surprise, Mr. 
Speaker, the entire building — all 105 units — sold out in the 
first four days. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even in the midst of tough economic times, our 
province continues to grow. This condo development, with 
great views and access to downtown alongside local business 
innovation, shows that our province is moving in the right 
direction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in 
congratulating Kay and John Nasser, the development team, 
and everyone involved in making No. 1 River Landing a 
resounding success. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 

Doctor Recognized for 50 Years of Service 
 

Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with great pleasure 
that I rise today to recognize an individual from my 
constituency who has served this community with 
professionalism for many years. 
 
Dr. Donovan Brown was recently recognized at the 2016 
Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region’s long-service milestone 
award night. I had the privilege of attending the event. There 
were many remarkable achievements highlighted. However the 
only doctor to achieve this impressive 50-year service 
distinction this year was Dr. Brown. 
 



November 23, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1459 

He was born and educated in Ireland, where he began practising 
medicine, but in 1964 he moved to Regina where he began 
specializing in sports medicine in addition to still practising 
family medicine. Mr. Speaker, Dr. Brown distinguished himself 
as one of the best sports medicine physicians in the province, 
serving as the Thom Collegiate sports doctor and even 
eventually came to serve as the Roughriders’ team doctor from 
1982 to 2007, an impressive 25 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like all the members to join me in 
congratulating Dr. Donovan Brown for 50 years of service to 
our community. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 
 

Saskatchewan Stands Behind Oil and Gas Industry 
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in the 
midst of the bad news we are hearing about soft resource prices 
and government revenues, there are striking examples of how 
the resiliency of the people of this province are going to help 
Saskatchewan lead the way in recovery. 
 
According to the Canadian Association of Oilwell Drilling 
Contractors based out of Calgary, Saskatchewan is going to 
lead the way in oil development in 2017. Mr. Speaker, 
historically the majority of conventional oil drilling takes place 
in Alberta, but that is starting to change.  
 
According to John Bayko, VP [vice-president] of 
communications for CAODC [Canadian Association of Oilwell 
Drilling Contractors], government policy does matter. He 
recently had this to say in a Leader-Post article: “The fact that 
we’re actually swinging to Saskatchewan as being the leading 
producer in Canada is a testament to how much importance 
policy plays.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has been working hard to create 
an environment where business can thrive and people can 
prosper. Although we can’t control global commodity prices, 
we are making sure that Saskatchewan is one of the best places 
in the world to do business. John Bayko also said, 
“Saskatchewan is an oil and gas friendly province. Premier 
Brad Wall is seen as the only provincial or federal leader 
willing to unapologetically stand behind our industry.” Mr. 
Speaker, on this side of the House we are prepared to stand up 
for the oil industry and our oil field workers. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Martensville-Warman. 
 

Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority 
Request for Proposal Process 

 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The members 
opposite are at it again, making spectacular accusations without 
any facts to back up their claims. Yesterday in the Committee 
of the Whole, the member for Athabasca claimed that the 
SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority] RFP 
[request for proposal] process was rigged and said, and I quote, 
“They put a whole bunch of obstacles in front of them so they 
will never, or could never compete with those that they’ve 
already lined up to own these stores.” 

Mr. Speaker, we know that the members opposite like their 
smear campaigns and conspiracy theories, but this is 
outrageous. Here are the facts. Successful proponents for the 
province’s 50 available retail liquor stores were selected 
through a request for proposal process. That process was looked 
at by an independent third party, KPMG, one of the most 
respected firms in this province. Apparently they think they 
were part of this rigging process. 
 
Six stores went to SLGA employees or groups located across 
the province, Mr. Speaker. Does the member for Athabasca 
think those were rigged? Fourteen Co-op liquor stores will be 
available across the province. Were those rigged too? I wonder, 
Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite have the nerve to tell the 
Co-op that our government has apparently manipulated the 
system. I suggest that the members opposite take time to 
research facts and stop continuing to smear Saskatchewan 
businesses. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Auditor’s Report and Details of Land Transactions 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, when it comes to that 
government’s GTH [Global Transportation Hub] land scandal, 
they’ve woven quite the tangled web. But yesterday again, I 
asked a very simple, straightforward question to the Premier, 
and again that same simple, straightforward question, there was 
no answer from the Premier. It was the same old tired talking 
points we hear day in, day out. It’s a simple question about 
what the Premier knew and when. 
 
We know that in fall of 2012 the proposal to have the GTH pay 
way too much for land first came to cabinet. We know that 
some of the members of cabinet were concerned, like the 
Minister of Justice who flagged that there was a concealed 
identity and they didn’t know who owned this land. Today, of 
course, we know that identity. It was the landlord for the 
minister, then minister of the GTH, the Sask Party-supporting 
land baron from Alberta. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier, people deserve an answer to the 
straightforward question: at what point did he learn the identity 
of the seller? Was it before the deal was proposed? Was it 
before it was discussed in cabinet and pushed by the ministers? 
Or was it not until it was reported in the news? When did he 
learn this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
appreciate the question from the member opposite. I will just 
say again for the record that at the request of my office and the 
cabinet and the NDP [New Democratic Party] actually, the 
official opposition, the Provincial Auditor, who is an 
independent officer of this Assembly, was asked to do a review 
of this entire transaction. 
 
There were no limitations placed on that review; nor should 
there be, nor could there be. In fact when asked if cabinet 
documents would be available to the auditor — which doesn’t 



1460 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2016 

always happen in the case of reviews — the government said, 
absolutely. Those documents, the transaction itself would have 
canvassed all the issues raised in the member’s preamble. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the auditor’s work demonstrated and showed that 
there was communication issues between different arms of 
government, between Highways and GTH. There were 10 
recommendations in the report which we accept and we’re 
acting on. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there has been a constant inference now for 
days, from the Leader of the Opposition, about the conduct of 
members, Mr. Speaker. And I would read into the record one 
more time the quote from the Provincial Auditor that she 
attached to her press release, or that accompanied the report that 
was requested by members opposite and by members on this 
side. The quote is this: “The audit did not find evidence of 
conflicts of interest, or indications of fraud or wrongdoing by 
the GTH management or Board of Directors.” And the board of 
directors would have included the minister at the time and 
would have canvassed all of the issues that are being raised by 
the NDP again in question period today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this is troubling. Again we 
see a Premier unwilling to answer a very simple, 
straightforward question to the people of Saskatchewan. And he 
goes off on a tangent quoting a part of an auditor’s news 
release, not noting, of course, that this wasn’t a forensic audit, 
that the audit itself is scathing, that it doesn’t exonerate 
government, and that millions of dollars were wasted while 
nuns were ripped off, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is not complicated. This isn’t about the auditor. This is 
about what the Premier knew. Only he knew what he knew and 
when he knew it, and it’s a simple question that I’ll put back to 
him. If he truly has nothing to hide, it’s time for him to start 
answering questions like this. 
 
Why can’t he simply tell Saskatchewan people when he knew 
the true identity of that seller, the concealed identity? That’s all, 
Mr. Speaker. When did the Premier learn that the Sask Party 
was trying to buy land and pay way too much from the Sask 
Party-supporting land baron from Alberta, who also rents land 
to the former minister of the GTH? Or did he know this all the 
way along? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Of 
course we’ve responded to these questions day after day. You 
know who else responded to all of these questions and 
responded to these questions at the Public Accounts 
Committee? The Provincial Auditor responded to all of these 
questions. 
 
The Provincial Auditor and her team of experts had access to all 
of the documents to which she requested access, including 
cabinet documents. She had access to all of the individuals 
involved in the transaction. She did a very thorough audit, by 
her own admission. She actually said that in terms of the 

information presented in the audit, there was more information 
presented in that audit than there would have been if there had 
been even a forensic audit, Mr. Speaker. Her conclusion at the 
end of that process . . . 
 
And again we see members coming in smearing members, 
smearing citizens. We saw it again yesterday, frankly, in 
Committee of the Whole with the Deputy Leader of the 
Opposition smearing companies that had won bids for SLGA 
permits. It’s what they’re doing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What was the auditor’s conclusion? From her press release of 
June 30th, 2016, her conclusion, and I quote — these are the 
words of the auditor: “The audit did not find evidence of 
conflicts of interest, or indications of fraud or wrongdoing by 
the GTH management or Board of Directors.” 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

State of Provincial Finances 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — No answer, of course. The question was 
to the Premier. The response was pathetic, Mr. Speaker. That 
refusal to give simple answers to simple questions and the 
refusal to come clean is quickly becoming what that 
government is known for, Mr. Speaker. We see it with their 
growing scandal. We see it with their financial mismanagement. 
 
Let’s look at the facts. They drained the rainy day fund and 
didn’t save a dime during the best years. They’re adding $3.5 
billion of debt in just two years. Their GTH scandal cost 
taxpayers tens of millions. Their smart meters, millions more. 
Over 100 million health care dollars were spent for assembly 
line consultants. $1.5 billion was spent on their carbon capture 
debacle. And they even wastefully added three more MLAs 
[Member of Legislative Assembly]. And of course we have 
their mismanaged bypass that went from $400 million 
ballooning to over $2 billion and, Mr. Speaker, they didn’t even 
blink, didn’t even blink to sign taxpayers on to that massive 
overrun and to send the cheques to France. 
 
I could go on, Mr. Speaker. You can’t make this stuff up, and 
sadly it’s the Sask Party that’s making Saskatchewan people 
pay the price. To the Premier: how can he honestly defend his 
financial mismanagement, the mess that he’s created, and the 
damage that he’s causing? 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
in that preamble, which was so full of inaccuracies, the member 
opposite said, “You can’t make this stuff up.” But he’s given a 
good college try, I’d say, Mr. Speaker, because so much of what 
he had to say, including his depiction of the bypass, any number 
of things in his list were full of inaccuracies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen a downturn in commodity prices now 
lasting two years, and so it’s true that savings that government 
had set aside . . . which by the way are rendered moot now with 
summaries. And the member should know that; he called for 
summaries. 



November 23, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1461 

But even if we were on a GRF [General Revenue Fund] 
approach to budgeting and there was to be separate funds, there 
were funds in place. And two years later, after historic 
commodity prices and challenges with respect to fires and flood 
and other issues, Mr. Speaker, we do find ourselves in a 
challenge right now in terms of the fiscal position. 
 
However, this is the record of the government over nine years 
in terms of what has happened with the proceeds and the 
dividends of the unprecedented growth we’ve seen. Six billion 
dollars back in the pockets of Saskatchewan people. Six billion 
dollars in tax cuts provided by this government over the last 
eight years, Mr. Speaker. About a $9 billion increase in 
infrastructure investment after 16 years of neglect of 
infrastructure. Thirty-two per cent less operating debt in the 
province today than what we inherited from members opposite 
and the governments that preceded them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And all of that has been part of a growth plan that has led to 
what? That has led to a growth of 150,000 people in the 
population of the province and the second-best job creation 
record in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Pretty tired lines from our Premier, 
shouting about the $1 billion deficit and the mess that he’s 
created and basically shouting away that he couldn’t manage 
during the best years, leaving us vulnerable now. And really, 
it’s just not believable. 
 
All of that information was available to the Premier. Everyone 
knew that commodity prices were down. The Sask Party knew 
the reality, the true state of our finances, but they hid it 
shamefully from Saskatchewan people before the election. And 
when they brought in the budget, it simply wasn’t believable. 
Then they refused to come clean and hid their financial first 
quarter report. Now they come out and pretend that they’re 
shocked, pretend that they didn’t know what everyone else 
knew, pretend that they had no control over all of this, and 
pretend that they haven’t been government for almost a decade. 
Mr. Speaker, it’s just not believable. 
 
So will the Premier finally stand up and show the contrition that 
Saskatchewan people actually deserve, with the mess that he’s 
created, acknowledge the mismanagement, the scandal and 
waste, and for hiding this, and for hiding his disgraceful and 
damaging sell-offs and cuts, Mr. Speaker? People deserve the 
truth. Why did he work so hard to hide his financial mess from 
Saskatchewan people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, you’ve got to listen carefully 
to the preamble, not just to correct things that need to be 
corrected, Mr. Speaker. But you pick up interesting things 
because the member just said, and I think he said it yesterday as 
well, he noted that with respect to the numbers that we’re using, 
that the Finance ministry has provided, he said — his words — 
everybody knew those numbers were wrong, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s what he’s just declared. That’s what he just said. And 
he’s nodding his head. 
 

Do you know who used those numbers — the same numbers 
that he said that they knew were wrong — to develop their own 
campaign platform? That member, as the Finance critic, and the 
NDP. And you know what else, Mr. Speaker? He proposed to 
his leader at the time that if they were to win the election that 
there would be a deficit, Mr. Speaker. He went on to propose, 
he went on to . . . I’m not even sure what he’s saying from his 
seat. 
 
An Hon. Member: — He said you fight the last one. We’ll 
crush you in the next one. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well if he’s going to crush anyone in the 
next election, I would encourage him to deal, Mr. Speaker, in 
the fact of the debate because they used the numbers for their 
platform. They forecasted a deficit if they were to be elected 
government. And here’s something else, Mr. Speaker. They 
indicated that if they would have been elected, they would have 
also financed infrastructure, which is part of the reason for the 
fiscal and the financial statement that was released in the 
mid-term report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to have this debate. We’ll put our 
record of what we’ve done over the last eight years to invest in 
this province, to cut taxes and reduce debt, and grow this 
economy versus 16 years of decline from members opposite, 
any day of the week. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I honestly do not 
understand what possible explanation there is for the 
condescending tone coming from the other side. The last 
government that Finance minister worked for drove this 
province to the brink of bankruptcy and now it looks like he’s 
trying to do it again. In just two years, just two, Mr. Speaker, 
the Sask Party are jacking up the debt $3.5 billion. Mr. Speaker, 
their deficit this year is over $1 billion. That’s $600 million 
more than they claimed it would be just six months ago, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We told them their projections for commodity prices were off. 
We told them they weren’t allowing for the inevitable downturn 
in the rest of the economy. But they stubbornly stood by their 
projections and claims. Mr. Speaker, either the minister knew 
that his projections were more than a little optimistic or he 
simply doesn’t know what he’s doing. Which one is it? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
as I said yesterday, I welcome this debate in the Chamber, Mr. 
Speaker, with respect to the difference . . . We’re seeing now 
the fundamental difference of approach with respect to what the 
NDP would do, given the same fiscal circumstances that this 
government is faced with, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I have said over and over again . . . Now the members can 
dispute this. I think I heard the Leader of the Opposition 
actually agree with this, when the Premier was alluding to the 
fact that our resource revenues are down $1.2 billion over the 
course of the last 24 months, Mr. Speaker. And I don’t think 



1462 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2016 

anybody foresaw that coming, including the Finance critic, 
because they used the same numbers that the Ministry of 
Finance put out before the election, Mr. Speaker, as part of their 
campaign platform — the exact same numbers, Mr. Speaker. As 
well, as well what we’re seeing here now is income tax revenue 
down about $400 million in year, Mr. Speaker. We’re starting 
to see that lag effect come through the economy. 
 
We can shock the economy, Mr. Speaker. We can shock the 
economy by doing some of the things that the members of the 
opposition have proposed, like a carbon tax. The member from 
Nutana, the Finance critic, has gone on record as saying she 
supports a carbon tax, and the Leader of the Opposition has 
agreed with that, Mr. Speaker. We’re not going to take that 
approach. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I fail to see from where that 
minister gets his arrogance and his bluster. $3.5 billion in debt 
in two years and more than 1 billion in deficits this year, and 
they were off by 6 per cent for their income tax projections 
alone, Mr. Speaker. What does he say to the 11,000 more 
Saskatchewan people looking for work today than were a year 
ago, or the 140 workers who were told they lost their jobs 
today, Mr. Speaker? 
 
When the resource revenues were at record levels, the Sask 
Party took credit for everything: the world turning, and the sun 
— and the oil prices — rising. But they clearly misunderstood 
what the rainy day fund was for, Mr. Speaker. They blew 
through it when the money was raining down. They blew 
through the surplus, the resource revenue, Mr. Speaker. What 
does that minister have to say to the people of Saskatchewan 
who are now being forced to pay the price for Sask Party 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, in the NDP’s last 
campaign platform, they had an economist from Carleton 
University as part of the Broadbent Institute who advocated, 
you should take advantage of the AAA credit rating and record 
low interest rates and borrow money to invest in infrastructure. 
The Leader of the Opposition has dissociated himself from that 
statement now, from that campaign platform, by his comments 
yesterday. They don’t think you should borrow money right 
now to invest in infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the last 10 years in the province of 
Saskatchewan — we’re proud of this — there’s 150,000 new 
citizens calling Saskatchewan home today, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
the equivalent of a new Prince Albert, a new Moose Jaw, a new 
Yorkton, a new Swift Current, a new North Battleford, a new 
Lloydminster, a new Martensville, a new Humboldt, a new 
Melfort, and a new Meadow Lake, combined, over the last 10 
years, Mr. Speaker. We’re proud that these people have called 
Saskatchewan home. 
 
Do these people not deserve schools? Do they not deserve 
health care facilities? Do they not deserve to have their roads 
paved — which the opposition, when they were in government, 

said go pave your own roads, Mr. Speaker? 
 
We’re going to take a different approach to supporting 
infrastructure and these 150,000 new citizens in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

State of the Provincial Economy 
 
Mr. McCall: — Well I’ll tell you one thing that the people of 
Saskatchewan deserve, Mr. Speaker, is to be dealt with 
straightly and plainly by the Government of Saskatchewan. In 
addition to the $1 billion deficit we see announced yesterday, 
Mr. Speaker, there’s also an emerging — it’s plain — integrity 
deficit when it comes to the actions of this government. 
 
The Sask Party is making the people of Saskatchewan pay the 
price for Sask Party mismanagement scandal and waste. To 
make matters worse, this government has no plan to get 
Saskatchewan’s finances back on track in the short or long 
term. In fact, Mr. Speaker, they’re doing the opposite. 
 
The Sask Party is cutting education and job training programs. 
This in a province that has 11,000 more people looking for 
work today than last year. Today alone, we saw 140 layoffs at 
the PCS Cory mine outside of Saskatoon; 100 permanent jobs 
were lost. And people need help beyond the minister’s rapid 
response team revising their resumés. 
 
Working people need job training and job creation, Mr. 
Speaker. Job training contributes to the economic growth and a 
stronger tax base in the long term. Can the Minister of the 
Economy explain why the Sask Party government is choosing 
cuts instead of investing in jobs for Saskatchewan people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — The premise of the member’s question 
is just wrong. We have increased funding for adult basic 
education by 53 per cent since 2007. We’ve increased 
apprenticeship training, funding, by 76 per cent since 2007. 
And in terms of the potash issue, of course we have tremendous 
empathy for the workers impacted. We know that there have 
been very significant challenges in terms of commodity prices 
globally. 
 
In terms of the announcement, Randy Burton, who is a 
spokesman for PotashCorp said today, “Cory is a higher cost 
facility so we want to be producing more of that red potash at 
lower cost locations. Overall our employee count in 
Saskatchewan is higher . . . than two years ago.” That’s Potash 
Corporation. 
 
In terms of their approach, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance 
just alluded to it. What’s their approach? A massive new tax on 
everything. That’s what they are proposing. Their Finance critic 
went out and scrummed and said their approach would be a 
massive new tax on everything, first and foremost on potash 
mines, Mr. Speaker. So they want to talk about impacts on 
potash workers — their approach would have a massive impact 
on potash workers. 
 



November 23, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1463 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Funding for Provincial Parks 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, that arrogant dismissal of job 
losses does nothing to help the people of Saskatchewan. The 
Sask Party has a penchant for hacking and slashing through 
parks funding. They are desperate to fill their massive $1 billion 
budget hole they dug, and no ministry is safe. And parks are on 
the hit list again. 
 
Included in the Sask Party’s announced cuts yesterday was a 
$776,000 cut to Saskatchewan’s provincial parks. Mr. Speaker, 
there were no details as to who will be impacted by the Sask 
Party cut. 
 
Do they even know what this cut will mean, or is it just more 
random slashing? Mr. Speaker, can the Minister of Parks, 
Culture and Sport provide some detail on who will be directly 
impacted by this cut? Will this result in any job losses in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much for the 
question. It’s always a pleasure to answer questions in the 
Legislative Assembly. But it is kind of ironic on the day today 
that we announce that more people have attended Saskatchewan 
parks, more visitations than ever before — nearly 4 million 
people have taken advantage of Saskatchewan parks — today 
we get this question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re very proud of our parks in Saskatchewan. 
We market them in the province; we market them outside the 
province. But, Mr. Speaker, some difficult decisions had to be 
made. Certainly we have to control spending and we have to 
look at the current financial situation. So we asked 
Saskatchewan Parks to do what we’ve asked all ministries to 
do, to rationalize spending to ensure that we spend in the most 
appropriate manner, Mr. Speaker, and reductions were made but 
the service will continue. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
[14:30] 
 

Support for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, we saw yesterday the consequences 
of the Sask Party’s mismanagement, scandal, and waste. 
Massive deficits, cuts, and clawbacks, and softening the ground 
for tax hikes. And we know that even more cuts are coming to 
school divisions. 
 
Right now, the minister has a consultant on a whirlwind 
four-week lack-of-consultation tour. Mr. Speaker, the minister 
has been clear: he wants more cuts. This, despite the fact that 
boards dug deep and found $15 million in savings. Despite the 
fact that they’ve already laid off teachers, educational assistants, 
and support staff. Despite the fact they’ve been forced to dig 

into their savings to cover basic operations, and despite the fact 
that class sizes are growing and teachers are not getting the 
supports that they need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister has made cut after cut after cut to our 
classrooms, and even more cuts are coming. Will the minister 
finally take responsibility for his government’s terrible 
mismanagement of our province’s finances, or will he keep 
forcing our children to pay the price? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, there is nothing more 
important to this government than the children of our province. 
Mr. Speaker, we will do everything we can to ensure that we 
have the best possible education system in Canada. We have the 
best teachers; we have the best families. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
are going to continue to do that, unlike the members opposite 
who ran over 30,000 students out of the province. 
 
Since we have formed government, Mr. Speaker, we have 
increased funding to our schools. From 2007-2008, we have 
increased funding from $1.41 billion to now, $1.88 billion. Mr. 
Speaker, during that time, enrolment went up 9 per cent. We 
have increased funding by 33 per cent for operating alone. We 
have 754 more teachers, 53 per cent more child care spaces, 104 
per cent more pre-K [pre-kindergarten] spaces. We have had 
record reductions in education property tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe in the citizens of our province. We 
believe in the teachers of our province, and we’re going to 
continue to support them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Funding for Social Services 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, we see it in cuts to our schools 
and hospitals, and to supports for vulnerable people. These cuts 
are real, even if the Minister of Social Services says they aren’t. 
 
One month ago, I asked the minister to justify their cuts to 
Lighthouse in Saskatoon, and she said, “there have been no cuts 
to the Lighthouse. We continue to fund the Lighthouse the exact 
same funding as the previous year . . .” But an internal 
document from Social Services says, “Our analysis of the 
Lighthouse stabilization unit indicated that the work of the unit 
doesn’t fall within the ministry mandate. Support for this 
service will no longer be funded.” 
 
I know the Sask Party are desperate to hide their cuts but “same 
funding” and “will no longer be funded” are not the same thing. 
This is a cut, and it will ultimately cost the province more. 
When the finances are being squeezed by this government’s 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste, how can the minister 
justify a cut that will cost more by sending these people to 
hospitals, emergency rooms, and police cells? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Mr. Speaker, we fund the 
Lighthouse in the exact same way that we fund every other 



1464 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2016 

shelter in the province of Saskatchewan — on the basis of 
utilization. In fact we have also increased the per diem rates at 
all of our shelters by nine times over the last number of years. 
 
You know, I find it really interesting, Mr. Speaker. I sit in the 
House every day and listen very intently to what goes on. And 
I’ve been listening very carefully, particularly to this narrative 
around cuts and cold and heartless cuts, and I just want to, in 
very straight and plain language, talk about cuts. There are no 
cuts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In fact in particular respect to my ministry, which deals with 
people, Mr. Speaker, we have increased funding for medically 
fragile children to the tune of $7.9 million. We have increased 
funding for assisted adoption, $800,000, Mr. Speaker; child and 
welfare programs by 175 per cent; 311 per cent, Mr. Speaker, 
for First Nations agencies and CBOs [community-based 
organization] across the province. We’ve more than doubled the 
emergency child care spaces. We’ve tripled the SIP [seniors’ 
income plan] benefit. We’ve increased the shelter allowance 
nine times. SAID [Saskatchewan assured income for disability], 
increased benefits four times, Mr. Speaker; 3 billion across all 
the ministries for people with disabilities. And that’s not even 
touching housing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Funding for Health Care 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, ministers need to start taking 
responsibility for their cuts. The minister told health regions 
they needed to cut and they did. It meant job losses and it meant 
longer wait times. Now he wants them to cut even more: 22 
million from the workforce and another 22 million from 
programs. Mr. Speaker, we’ve already seen cuts in health 
regions, so how can the minister suggest that another $45 
million won’t impact care? Does the Minister of Health 
understand that health regions provide health care? 
 
When Sask Party mismanagement, scandal, and waste result in 
cuts to resources, there are consequences. With no minimum 
care standards, people are understandably concerned about what 
could happen to long-term care and what the consequences to 
our parents and grandparents will be. We know the answers are 
in the CEO [chief executive officer] tour reports that are sitting 
with that Minister of Health. Will he commit to releasing those 
reports today, or will he insist on hiding the consequences from 
the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The results of 
the CEO tour, as well as in past years, will be released in due 
course. Mr. Speaker, the entire premise of that question though, 
let’s put this in perspective. She talks about cuts to health care. 
The health care budget’s over $5 billion, Mr. Speaker, which is 
a 50 per cent increase over when we formed government. Mr. 
Speaker, in fiscally difficult times, if you’re going to look for 
cost reductions, clearly you have to look at the biggest 
ministries. It only makes sense. But what we will do, Mr. 
Speaker, we will always keep in mind patient care first. The 
situation that we’re looking at, the areas that we’re looking at 

cost reductions, Mr. Speaker, we will always keep patient care 
first in mind and that will continue to be our priority. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, that critic, frequently 
in House and media, she always, there’s always a demand for 
more resources, more spending, Mr. Speaker. She never 
explains where that should come from. And what she fails to 
always mention, Mr. Speaker, I mentioned earlier: 50 per cent 
increase in health care funding since we formed government, 
Mr. Speaker, 650 more doctors, thousands more nurses, 800 
more long-term care workers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve made health care a priority. It’s going to be 
fiscally difficult times, but we’ll continue to make health care a 
priority. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Appreciation 
 
The Speaker: — I’d like to make a quick statement, mostly 
thank yous for some of the members that have been able to help 
us out in the last few days with SSTI [Saskatchewan Social 
Sciences Teachers’ Institute on Parliamentary Democracy]. We 
had an opportunity bring teachers in from all over 
Saskatchewan to learn about how their democracy works, and 
I’m very grateful for everyone involved that have made time out 
of their busy schedules to help them, from ministers to media to 
the Clerks. It was a great opportunity. We had a mock 
parliament earlier today, and I would like to thank some of the 
teachers that stayed behind to witness question period today. 
 
I would like to also comment on today’s question period, where 
the decorum was much better. I think we had a very respectful 
exchange of questions and answers today, and I hope this 
continues for the remainder of the session. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed 
by the Standing Committee on Human Services to report Bill 
No. 16, The Adoption Amendment Act, 2016 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the Minister of 
Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 
the bill now be read for a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 16, The 
Adoption Amendment Act, 2016 and the bill be now read the 
third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



November 23, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1465 

The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed to move 
third reading. I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 16 — The Adoption Amendment Act, 2016 
Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’adoption 

 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — I move that the bill be now read 
the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 16, The Adoption Amendment Act, 2016 be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for 
the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 28, 
The Extension of Compassionate Care Act, 2016 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave 
to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill 
and the bill be now read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bills so that Bill 
No. 28, The Extension of Compassionate Care Act, 2016 and 
that this bill be now read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed to move 
third reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 28 — The Extension of Compassionate 
Care Act, 2016 

 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With the help 
and support of my colleagues, I move that the bill be now read 

the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 28, The Extension of Compassionate Care Act, 2016 be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly 
ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 33, 
The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2016 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in the 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the Minister of 
Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 
the bill be now read for a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration of the Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 33, 
The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2016 and the 
bill be read the third time. 
 
Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed to move 
third reading. I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 33 — The Child and Family Services 
Amendment Act, 2016 

 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — I move that the bill be now read 
the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 33, The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2016 
be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 



1466 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2016 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Gardiner 
Park. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by the 
Standing Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 34, The 
Provincial Lands Act, 2016 with amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this bill, and that the bill and its 
amendments be now read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in the Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 34, 
The Provincial Lands Act, 2016 and that the bill and its 
amendments be now read a third time. 
 
Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. When shall the amendments be read 
the first time? I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 

Bill No. 34 — The Provincial Lands Act, 2016 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — I move that the amendments be now 
read a first and second time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that the 
amendments be now read a first and second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — First and second reading of the 
amendments. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 34 — The Provincial Lands Act, 2016 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — I move that the bill be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 34, The Provincial Lands Act, 2016 be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — On division. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. On division. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Gardiner 
Park. 

 
Standing Committee on the Economy 

 
Mr. Makowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the 
Standing Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 14, The 
Horned Cattle Purchases Repeal Act, 2016 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill be now 
read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 14, The 
Horned Cattle Purchases Repeal Act, 2016 and that the bill be 
now read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed to move 
third reading. I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 14 — The Horned Cattle Purchases Repeal Act, 2016 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — I move that the bill be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that the Bill 
No. 14, The Horned Cattle Purchases Repeal Act, 2016 be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly 
ready for the question? 
 



November 23, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1467 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Gardiner 
Park. 

 
Standing Committee on the Economy 

 
Mr. Makowsky: — I’m instructed by the Standing Committee 
on the Economy to report Bill No. 10, The Forest Resources 
Management Amendment Act, 2016 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the Minister of 
the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill now be 
read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 10, The 
Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 2016 and that 
the bill be now read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed to move 
third reading. I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 10 — The Forest Resources Management 
Amendment Act, 2016 

 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — I move that the bill be now read a third time 
and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 10, The Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 
2016 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Gardiner 
Park. 

 
Standing Committee on the Economy 

 
Mr. Makowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the 
Standing Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 11, The 
Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2016 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the Minister of 
the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill be now 
read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 11, The 
Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2016, and that the bill be 
now read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed to move 
third reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 11 — The Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2016 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — I move that the bill be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 11, The Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2016 be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly 
ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to 



1468 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2016 

order the answer to question 215. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has ordered 
the responses to question 215. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to 
table the answers to questions 216 through 218. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has tabled the 
responses to questions 216 to 218. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 
facilitate the work of the committees, I move that this Assembly 
be adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adjourn 
today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — We stand adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:49.] 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1453 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1453 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1453 
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1454 
  McCall ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1454, 1455 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1454 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 1455 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1455 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1455 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1455 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1455 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1455 
  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1456 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1456 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1456 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1456 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1457 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1457 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1457 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatoon Sports Hall of Fame Inductees 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1457 
 25th Annual Moose Jaw Festival of Trees 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1458 
 Project Reflects Pride in Cathedral Area 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1458 
 New Downtown Development in Saskatoon a Success 
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1458 
 Doctor Recognized for 50 Years of Service 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1458 
 Saskatchewan Stands Behind Oil and Gas Industry 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1459 
 Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority Request for Proposal Process 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1459 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Auditor’s Report and Details of Land Transactions 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1459 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1459 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1460 
 State of Provincial Finances 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1460 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1460 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1461 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1461 
 State of the Provincial Economy 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1462 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1462 
 Funding for Provincial Parks 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1463 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1463 
 Support for Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1463 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1463 
 Funding for Social Services 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1463 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 1463 
 Funding for Health Care 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1464 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1464 
 



 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Appreciation 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1464 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Human Services 
  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1464 
 Standing Committee on the Economy 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 1466 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 16 — The Adoption Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’adoption 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 1465 
 Bill No. 28 — The Extension of Compassionate Care Act, 2016 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1465 
 Bill No. 33 — The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2016 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 1465 
 Bill No. 34 — The Provincial Lands Act, 2016 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1466 
 Bill No. 14 — The Horned Cattle Purchases Repeal Act, 2016 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1466 
 Bill No. 10 — The Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 2016 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1467 
 Bill No. 11 — The Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2016 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1467 
FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 Bill No. 34 — The Provincial Lands Act, 2016 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1466 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1467 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


