






















































Hansard: June 20, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 19A  MONDAY, JUNE 20, 2016, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Hon. Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Hon. Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Merriman, Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 51; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Maurice Riou http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 593 
 June 20, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education.  
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d ask for leave for a 
National Day of Mourning condolence statement. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of 
Education. 
 

COMMEMORATIVE STATEMENTS 
 

National Day of Mourning 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. April 28th was 
the annual National Day of Mourning for workers who were 
killed or injured on the job. On April 28th our Legislative 
Building had flags flying at half-mast in order to recognize 
these people. As we were not in session on April 28th, we are 
recognizing these individuals today. Across both Saskatchewan 
and Canada, groups gathered to remember those who have 
suffered tragedy and loss due to workplace incidents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Day of Mourning is a time to honour and 
mourn those who have suffered fatalities and injuries in the 
workplace. It is also an important opportunity for us to 
remember, reflect, and renew our commitment to eliminating 
workplace tragedies. It is everyone’s responsibility to ensure 
our workplaces are safe and healthy and that everyone makes it 
home alive. Nobody deserves the tragedy of losing a loved one 
due to preventable work-related injury. 
 
I once again ask my colleagues to renew their own personal 
commitments to safety. We must all be conscious of safety in 
everything we do if we wish to eliminate workplace accidents. I 
would also ask both employers and employees, small and large 
businesses, and those involved in all industries to consider the 
health and safety of everyone around them. We must all make it 
a priority. 
 
I would like to thank those workplaces in Saskatchewan who 
have achieved Mission: Zero and the leadership that they have 
shown. Saskatchewan has the fourth highest workplace injury 
rate in Canada. While work has been done to reduce this injury 
rate, we are still far from our goal of zero workplace incidents. 
Mr. Speaker, there is still more work to do. No job is worth 
someone’s life, and no job is worth injury. 
 
This past year in Saskatchewan, 32 workers lost their lives as a 
result of workplace injuries and illnesses. These are parents, 
children, friends, and loved ones. It cannot be understated, the 
financial and emotional turmoil that these deaths and injuries 
have had on those closest to them. We must all remember these 
individuals by ensuring that every worker returns home safe 
after their work is done. 
 

To honour those that we have lost, I will now read the names 
into the record. I would ask that all members rise, and the 
member for Saskatoon Centre will read the first list of names. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — 
 
Alfred Joseph Hazelwanter Dewaine Irwin 
Andrew Boa Duane Nelson 
August Martin Eugene Blocka 
Brian Zarowny George Gregg 
Cade Sprackman Ieuan Williams 
Catherine Parkinson James Rechenmacher 
Chad Johnstone Jonathan Jonasson 
Darren Pearson Joseph Vorachek 
Dean Gervais  
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: —  
 
Kevin Timmerman Rando Biasini 
Lah Wor Ron Vandeven 
Larry Chorneyko Tanner Graf 
Leo Hnatyshyn Travis Gordon 
Ludovick Geni Vanitha Mutukistna 
Murray Mann Wasim Hanif 
Nilo Sanchez William Davies 
Pah Day  
 
Not included in these names are the approximately 13 people 
who lose their lives working on Saskatchewan farms and 
ranches each year. Today is also to honour their lives as well. 
 
On behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, I’d like to offer 
our sincerest condolences to the families and friends of those 
who have passed away due to workplace incidents. I would now 
ask that we observe a moment of silence in honour of the 32 
people who have lost their lives. 
 
[The Assembly observed a moment of silence.] 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would ask you and colleagues to grant leave for an extended 
introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it is a great privilege to follow 
on a spring tradition that we’ve started a few years ago in the 
Legislative Assembly. That tradition would be to introduce the 
coaching staff for the Saskatchewan Roughriders and wish them 
well as the team embarks on a brand new season, Mr. Speaker. 



594 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2016 

And so it’s my privilege to introduce that group today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members of the House will know — it will cause 
us probably even pain again — that the last Grey Cup was won 
by the evil empire; I should say, the Edmonton Eskimos. So the 
Riders embarked on a great plan to go right into the evil empire 
and get their best, get their leaders and bring them back. I’m not 
sure if that makes Coach Jones a sort of a Darth Vader or not. I 
think that’s probably unfair. But boy, are we ever glad that he 
and so many of his colleagues and a number of players have 
joined us. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I do want to introduce each member of 
the coaching staff, if I may. And I would ask that they would 
maybe just stand and give members of the House a wave as we 
introduce them to the Assembly today. So, Mr. Speaker, we’ll 
start with the head coach and the general manager, 
vice-president of football operations, from Chattanooga, 
Tennessee, Coach Chris Jones. For those of us who’ve had the 
pleasure of talking to Coach Jones, he has a very, very thick 
accent, but I understand the Riders are putting out a 
Tennessee-English dictionary which we’ll all be able to use 
that’ll be . . . 
 
Craig Reynolds is the team president and CEO [chief executive 
officer]. We want to welcome Craig back to his Assembly. 
Jeremy O’Day, no stranger to the Assembly, assistant 
vice-president of football operations and administration and the 
keeper of stories on the member for Regina Gardiner Park. If 
you’re looking for some stories, talk to Jeremy O’Day. John 
Murphy is assistant vice president of football operations and 
player personnel. 
 
Stephen McAdoo is the offensive coordinator and the assistant 
coach. Craig Dickenson is back in Saskatchewan. We had a 
great special teams under his leadership; we’re going to have 
another great special teams year under Craig. He also coached 
with the Oakland Raiders, Mr. Speaker, the best team in the 
NFL [National Football League].  
 
Jarious Jackson is here. He is the quarterback coach for the 
Riders this year. Markus Howell, receivers coach; Mike 
Scheper, the offensive line coach; Craig Davoren, he’s the 
running backs coach; Phillip Lolley, the linebackers coach; 
Jason Shivers, defensive backs; Ed Philion, defensive line; Clint 
Spencer, strength and conditioning coordinator. Merritt 
Bowden, Cam Robinson, Kent Maugeri, and Tyron Robinson 
are the quality control coaches, and we want to welcome them 
as well. Scott Annand is the football operations coordinator. 
 
And also a guest coach for Rider camp this year is the long-time 
defensive coordinator for the U of S [University of 
Saskatchewan] Huskies. He’s been coaching defence there for 
93 years I think, about now. His name is Ed Carleton, and he’s 
joined the Rider coaching staff.  
 
Mr. Speaker, the Riders . . . There are many things that bring 
Saskatchewan people together that transcend all the divides in 
the province, but perhaps none with the consistency of the 
Saskatchewan Roughriders. They really do bring this entire 
province together, not just during the season but during the 
off-season. 
 

And so we want to wish these coaches and their charges all the 
best in the upcoming season. For those who are new to the 
province, we want to welcome them here. We hope they’ve 
enjoyed Saskatchewan hospitality and will continue to enjoy it. 
And I would just ask members of the House to join with me in 
welcoming the coaching staff to the Legislative Assembly 
today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour 
to join with the Premier here today and welcome these 
esteemed guests and leaders within our province to their 
Assembly. The Premier’s quite right: this is something that 
forges political divides, that usually in this Assembly we have 
fierce political debate. Here we have unanimous support for the 
legendary team that makes all of us proud. 
 
We’ve come through the period of spring in the province where 
that embodiment of hard work and optimism was on full display 
at, certainly Riders’ training camp and into the pre-season. And 
certainly on display as well, it’s small-town football camps and 
high school football camps all across our province. Spring 
seeding; it’s sort of a special time in Saskatchewan of hard 
work and of optimism. 
 
It’s a real honour to welcome all of these coaches here today. I 
won’t introduce and welcome all of them specifically, but it is a 
pleasure to welcome, and I don’t think I would have said this a 
year ago, but Mr. Chris Jones. Coach, thank you so much for 
your leadership you’ll provide to the team. Yes, hailing from 
the evil empire of most recent, but thank you for your 
leadership here in the province. Thank you as well to Craig 
Reynolds, CEO and president, native of Foam Lake, 
Saskatchewan, a great business mind and a real leader on that 
team. And of course, Jeremy O’Day, someone who patrolled 
that O-line [offensive line] with force and was a fierce 
competitor who’s still continuing to provide leadership to this 
organization. 
 
We know that sometimes we talk about there’s a level of 
scrutiny on us as public officials. Certainly there is for the 
Premier. I think that the level of scrutiny that falls onto the 
shoulders of Mr. Jones, Coach Jones, exceeds that of the 
Premier, and we wish him well in the time ahead. This team is 
beloved by Saskatchewan people with the exception of the odd 
call-in show to Rod and Carm, at, you know, on Rider Radio 
after the odd game. But we want to wish you well. Thank you 
for continuing this proud legacy. We wish you nothing but the 
best in 2016. We stand here in unanimous support as full 
members of Rider nation. Green is the colour. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
introduce to you and through you and to all members of the 
Assembly, Mr. Mike Ellis, Progressive Conservative MLA for 
Calgary-West. And accompanying him today is Yonathan 
Sumamo. He’s with communications of the Progressive 
Conservative caucus in Alberta. Thank you very much for 
joining us here today. 
 



June 20, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 595 

I had the pleasure of meeting with Mike today to discuss a very 
important issue in community safety: the increase of fentanyl in 
the Western provinces and of course throughout Canada. There 
will be more information in an upcoming member’s statement, 
Mr. Speaker, but I would like all members to welcome Mike to 
his Legislative Assembly. Thanks, Mike. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you and to all members of this Assembly, I’d like to join with 
the minister in welcoming Mr. Ellis and Mr. Sumamo to this 
Legislative Assembly. I’ve heard a little bit about your new bill 
with respect to pill presses, and I’m looking forward to learning 
a bit more about that today. Thank you so much for joining us. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to you and through you to all members of the Legislative 
Assembly, I’m pleased to introduce two guests from my 
constituency that are joining us in your gallery. First of all, we 
have Gwen Wright. Gwen is a retired schoolteacher, although I 
know she enjoys substitute teaching, especially at the bridge 
program. She’s very involved with the local Rotary as well as 
her church, the Free Methodist Church in Weyburn. And seated 
beside her is a very special guest for me, and that’s my 
constituency assistant, Marcie Swedburg. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Marcie became the constituency assistant for the 
MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy on October 25th, 1999. And, Mr. Speaker, we surprised 
her with your help this morning in recognizing her 16 years as a 
constituency assistant to the people of Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a part of the certificate, the citation reads in part 
that the work of a constituency assistant is instrumental in the 
work of an MLA, and it notes the loyalty and commitment that 
is required of a constituency assistant. And, Mr. Speaker, to me 
Marcie Swedburg exemplifies all that and much more. And so I 
want to ask all members to join with me in welcoming Gwen, as 
well as Marcie to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 
and through you to all members of the House, I’d like to 
introduce someone sitting in your gallery. Terry Parker is up 
there, from the Saskatchewan building trades. And he happens 
to be in the House today, and he’s no stranger to the House. He 
watches very carefully about the legislation and how we can 
make sure we do the best for people, especially those 
tradespeople here in the province. So I’d ask all members to 
join us in welcoming him to his legislature. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I’d like to join with the member 
opposite in welcoming Mr. Parker to the Assembly today. He is 
here for the Day of Mourning for reading the names into the 
record. 

He has been, as people are aware, business manager for the 
Building Trades Council, a strong advocate for workplace 
safety, and their agency has provided any number of training 
courses. He also serves on the board of the Sask Polytechnic 
and the minister’s advisory committee for the Ministry of 
Labour. So he’s been very competent and professional and very 
supportive in making sure that we do the best we possibly can 
for the workers in our province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from P.A. [Prince 
Albert] Carlton. 
 
Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you and to all the members of the Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce my beautiful wife, Fran, who is seated in your gallery 
and has just signed a contract to help coach the Roughriders, 
apparently. She was looking for additional work, so glad she 
found it today. 
 
Fran is my partner and my best friend and the love of my life. 
Yes, we’re still like that after many, many years. One day, Mr. 
Speaker, many years ago while hanging some wallpaper, we 
realized that we actually work very well together. And since 
then we’ve worked side by side for many, many years in our 
businesses and enjoyed every minute of it. There’s a lot of 
people that tell me they could never work with their spouse, but 
I can’t think of anyone I’d rather work with. 
 
The people around Prince Albert know it’s rare that you see one 
of us at an event without the other, and that’s the way we like it. 
Fran wholeheartedly supported my decision to run for political 
office. In fact she always said, I knew you would do it one day. 
 
She helped out in every way possible, from selling 
memberships for my nomination to door knocking, organizing 
fundraisers. Whatever was needed, she did it. I owe her much of 
my success. I ask all members to join me in welcoming her to 
her Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Bonk: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to all 
members of this Assembly, I’d like to welcome here a grade 6 
class, 17 of them, from Rocanville School. Give a wave to us. 
So I was able to meet with them a little bit earlier today, and 
they are a very inquisitive bunch. And I hope that they’re 
enjoying the trip to their Legislative Assembly, so I’d ask all 
members to help me welcome them here. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you and to all members of this Assembly, I’d like to introduce 
an individual that’s seated in your gallery, Mr. Benoit 
Hardy-Chartrand who is a senior research associate with the 
Centre for International Governance Innovation.  
 
The Leader of the Opposition and I, along with some other 
folks attended a breakfast discussion this morning hosted by the 
Canadian International Council where Mr. Hardy-Chartrand 



596 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2016 

along with Mr. Leonard Edwards discussed with us the 
importance of the Canadian . . . the relationship between the 
Canadian, Indonesian countries. So thank you so much for your 
discussion, and please help me welcome them. Mr. Edwards is 
not here in the gallery right now, but I believe he is around the 
House somewhere, but please help me welcome them to this 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, I would like to introduce 
Terry Quinn. Terry, can you give us a wave? He’s in the 
Speaker’s Gallery. He will be our new Sergeant-at-Arms on 
July 1st when the acting Sergeant-of-Arms retires. I was lucky 
enough to meet Terry earlier on today. I told him or I informed 
him that he is required to grow a moustache, and he will be 
working on that over the summer months. 
 
Terry retired from the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] 
in 2015. After a long career with the force, he worked in Nova 
Scotia as well as overseas in Sri Lanka and Hong Kong. Most 
recently he had been with the Ministry of Justice as the program 
manager in policy and governance. Please join me in 
welcoming Terry Quinn, the new Sergeant-at-Arms to the 
Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition to improve PTSD 
[post-traumatic stress disorder] coverage for Saskatchewan 
workers. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that PTSD can 
severely impact the lives of Saskatchewan workers, and that 
delaying diagnosis and treatment for PTSD can be detrimental 
to recovery, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Saskatchewan government to 
make the necessary changes to ensure that if Saskatchewan 
workers are exposed to traumatic events on the job and are 
then diagnosed with PTSD, it is presumed to be caused by 
the worker’s employment, and the worker will 
subsequently be covered under workers’ compensation and 
receive the same benefits as others with work-related 
injuries. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens from 
Moose Jaw, Allan, and Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition from 
individuals from Earl Grey and Regina. They wish to bring to 
our attention the following: wetlands serve a very vital function 
in our ecosystem. They take the form of marshes, bogs, fens, 
swamps, and open water. Wetlands are home to wildlife, 
including waterfowl. They clean the water running off of 
agricultural fields. They protect us from flooding and drought. 
And they are a playground where families can explore and play. 
 

In the worst cases, such as some areas on the Prairies, as much 
as 90 per cent of our wetlands have disappeared. As they 
continue to disappear, so too do the many benefits they provide. 
Sound wetland policy will allow Saskatchewan to provide 
sustainable development for all sectors of business in the 
province. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the Government of Saskatchewan to: 
 
Increase funding to do the proper inventory work, putting 
Saskatchewan in a better position to manage the water 
resource. 
 
Speed up the evaluation of high-risk watersheds where 
there is significant damage annually from flooding. This 
evaluation must include a recognition of draining works 
that could be closed or restored that will alleviate some of 
the issues downstream with respect to flooding and nutrient 
loading. 
 
Create a sound and transparent mitigation process that 
adequately addresses sustainable development. The 
sequence should focus first on avoiding environmental 
harm wherever possible before a secondary focus on 
minimizing the harm, with compensation being sought 
only when the development is deemed essential and the 
first two stages cannot be met. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition in support of funding heritage languages in 
Saskatchewan. And we know that after 25 years, the 
Government of Saskatchewan is discontinuing all support for 
heritage language learning in Saskatchewan. Since 1991 
heritage language schools have depended on this modest 
funding from the Ministry of Education to help sustain their 
programs, but as a result of the announcement by the Ministry 
of Education, many of these non-profit heritage language 
schools will be faced with the difficult decision of whether or 
not they can continue to operate.  
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to reconsider this decision and restore funding for heritage 
language education in Saskatchewan heritage language 
schools. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition today are from the 
city of Regina. I do so present. 
 



June 20, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 597 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

National Day of Mourning 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Every year 
on April 28th, we recognize National Day of Mourning to 
commemorate workers who’ve lost their lives on the job. 
Normally Day of Mourning falls within the sitting of the 
Assembly and I, along with the Minister of Labour, read the 
names of those who’ve died on the job. With this year’s spring 
election, we’ve delayed that tradition to today. 
 
Last year 32 workers died because of injuries that happened at 
work. Thirty-two families said goodbye to a loved one who 
never came home. It’s for those 32 families that we have to do 
so much more to reduce workplace injuries in every part of our 
province. It shouldn’t matter if a worker carries a tool box or a 
briefcase to a job site, whether they wear coveralls or scrubs, or 
whether they work high in an office tower or hundreds of 
metres below ground. Every Saskatchewan worker has the right 
to a safe workplace. We still see an unacceptable number of 
injuries and deaths in the workplace, particularly when it comes 
to young and inexperienced workers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to consider what they can do to 
support workers’ rights and workplace safety as well as keeping 
the families of the workers killed and injured in their minds 
today and every day. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Opening of Kelvington and Area Hospital 
 
Mr. Nerlien: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past Friday I 
had the opportunity to celebrate the opening of a new hospital 
in my constituency of Kelvington-Wadena. Mr. Speaker, not 
only does the new Kelvington and Area Hospital allow for 
improved access to health care services for residents. It also 
provides a modern work environment in which health care 
professionals are able to deliver high-quality, patient-centred 
care. 
 
While the opening of this hospital is an exciting achievement, it 
is just the beginning of what will soon be an innovative 
integrated health facility. Mr. Speaker, renovations are under 
way at Kelvindell Lodge, the community’s long-term care 
facility that now lies adjacent to the new hospital. Once 
completed, the residents of my constituency will be able to 
access a range of health services all under one roof: acute and 
primary care, emergency services, and long-term care. I would 
like to acknowledge all of the dedicated individuals from 
Kelsey Trail Health Region, partners from the municipality, and 
staff in the hospital who worked hard to make this project a 
reality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I saw first-hand how a 3P [production preparation 
process] approach involving the community, staff, and patients 
in the design stages creates an environment of collaborative 
health care that is positive for all involved. 

Mr. Speaker, I would like everyone to join me in celebrating the 
completion of this new hospital. Our government is proud to 
support worthy projects like this and deliver on our promise to 
put patients first. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

World Refugee Day 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, June 20th is World Refugee 
Day. Marked every year since 2000 by the United Nations High 
Commission for Refugees, it is a day to recognize that so much 
more work needs to be done to help refugees around the world. 
 
In many ways, we are lucky in Canada. In response to the 
Syrian refugee crisis over the last few years, Canadians have 
opened their hearts and their wallets to offer their support. And 
the discussions in our country revolve around questions like, 
what can we do to help, rather than, what can we do to keep 
them out. The fractious debates fuelled by fear and insecurity 
that we see in the United States, the UK [United Kingdom], and 
parts of Europe just don’t resonate here, and that speaks 
volumes about our country’s values and the importance we 
place on multiculturalism and tolerance. 
 
One organization in Regina that helps refugees around the 
world is the Saskatchewan Council for International 
Cooperation. They do great work fostering international 
development and building capacity in developing countries. 
Unfortunately this year’s budget saw their provincial funding 
removed, and that’s going to have a serious impact on the work 
they’re able to do here in Saskatchewan and around the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing World 
Refugee Day and in committing to do our part to address the 
global refugee crisis. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Esterhazy Potash Mine Receives Safety Award 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
my pleasure to stand in this Assembly and boast a little about a 
little potash mine that recently received the prestigious John T. 
Ryan Trophy for Select Mines safety award. The K1 Mosaic 
mine, just outside of Esterhazy, is an important part of the local 
community, and this award shows the professionalism that they 
conduct themselves with in this important industry. 
 
The award was handed out to five mines across Canada that 
have shown exemplary safety performance. The K1 mine went 
an astounding 431 days in 2015-2016 without an occupational 
health and safety administration recordable incident. General 
manager of the K1 mine, Paul Gill, had this to say: “To be 
recognized as one of the five safest mines in Canada in 2015 is 
a remarkable accomplishment for the Esterhazy K1 mine site.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government acknowledges the importance of 
the mining industry to the Saskatchewan way of life. For a 
generation, Saskatchewan has been a leader in mining 
innovation and has become the leading jurisdiction in this 



598 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2016 

country for attracting mining investment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
Mosaic and the K1 Esterhazy mine of this accomplishment. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 

Combatting Opiate Use 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Fentanyl and 
other opiates are a growing problem in Western provinces. 
Fifty-six per cent of overdose deaths in BC [British Columbia] 
this year are attributed to fentanyl. Over 270 Albertans and 17 
people here in Saskatchewan have died due to overdosing on 
fentanyl in 2015. This is why today the Minister for Corrections 
and Policing, along with her ministry officials, met with Mr. 
Mike Ellis, Progressive Conservative MLA for Calgary-West 
and former Calgary police officer, to discuss this community 
safety issue. 
 
Mr. Ellis proposed a private member’s bill which involves 
restricting access to the pill presses used in the production of 
drugs like fentanyl and W-18. These presses as well as 
pharmaceutical mixers and capsule filling machines will only 
be available to people with the necessary permits. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan will study this bill as well as 
reach out to partners across the country to see if these measures 
fit into the Saskatchewan context. Our government has made 
investments in municipal policing that has provided funding to 
key initiatives such as the combined forces special enforcement 
unit. This unit is mandated to detect, disrupt, and dismantle 
criminal organizations in Saskatchewan. Our government will 
continue to take the necessary steps to ensure Saskatchewan 
citizens are safe. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
University. 
 

Saskatoon Diocese Partners With Indigenous Peoples 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week I 
attended a plaque unveiling ceremony at the Cathedral of the 
Holy Family in Saskatoon. This plaque signifies the partnership 
between the Roman Catholic Church and indigenous peoples, 
and our continued path towards reconciliation. It also 
recognizes the shared history between indigenous peoples and 
the rest of us who are newcomers to this country. As the seat of 
the Diocese of Saskatoon, it is fitting that we recognize this 
history and move forward in solidarity with indigenous peoples. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the plaque was unveiled by Harry Lafond from the 
Office of the Treaty Commissioner, Bishop Donald Bolen, 
Father David Tumback, and First Nations leader Dianne 
Anderson, and it will reside in the welcome area of the 
cathedral in Saskatoon. The plaque is a symbol of the 
partnerships that will be strengthened between the diocese and 
our First Nations brothers and sisters. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was proud and honoured to be present and 
represent the Government of Saskatchewan and our Premier, 

Brad Wall, at this historic occasion. I have attended this parish 
my entire life and I am proud of this important initiative. I ask 
all members to join me in congratulating this important step 
towards reconciliation. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 
 

Carbon Capture and Storage Initiatives 
 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thanks to SaskPower’s 
initiative at Boundary dam 3 in Estevan, Saskatchewan, it is 
capturing both carbon and the world’s attention. Just last week 
the province of Quebec recognized the world-leading expertise 
that Saskatchewan has developed in carbon capture and storage 
technology. Mr. Speaker, last Thursday our Premier and the 
Premier of Quebec announced that Saskatchewan and Quebec 
are entering into a new collaborative relationship to further 
develop knowledge and the best practices in the use of CCS 
[carbon capture and storage] technologies. This collaboration 
will see our provinces work to accelerate the development and 
deployment of CCS technologies and exchange information on 
CCS projects. This announcement comes on the heels of the 
establishment of the BHP Billiton SaskPower CCS knowledge 
centre in Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on a yearly basis, China’s fleet of coal-fired power 
plants emits more than 20 times as much CO2 as Canada’s 
entire energy sector. As the federal Environment minister noted 
during a recent visit to BD3 [Boundary dam 3], there is an 
opportunity for 50 trillion worth of technology transfer to China 
alone. By leading the world in the development of 
commercial-scale CCS technology, Saskatchewan is helping to 
create a solution for global problem of climate change. 
 
I ask all members to join me in thanking Quebec for joining 
Saskatchewan in our work to further develop and expand CCS 
technology. Thank you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Provincial Economy and Climate Change 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, allow me to start with a 
quote. “We just think because of the advancements in 
renewable technologies, the mix towards renewables can be 
much greater.” Mr. Speaker, here’s another one: “We want it to 
be greater. We need it to be greater because, as you know, we 
have high emissions per capita in this province.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, do you know who said those things? It was the 
Premier, of course. He was talking about getting half of the 
power, the province’s power, to come from renewable energy 
by 2030. Yes, the goal was ambitious. We supported it. In fact, 
we proposed it, Mr. Speaker. And it puts Saskatchewan in line 
with the rest of the country and the rest of the world. So the 
question is, why did the Premier walk — well in fact, more run 
— away from these ambitious but science—based goals? Going 
back to inflaming divisions, making lots of noise on Twitter, 
and calling climate change a misguided dogma that has no basis 
in reality. 
 



June 20, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 599 

Mr. Speaker, he’s putting politics ahead of people. He’s wall 
building instead of bridge building, and headlines ahead of 
pipelines. Why is the Premier putting Saskatchewan back on the 
defence instead of offensive inaction when it comes to climate 
change? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of good lines in 
that question. He shouldn’t use them all on the first one, I’d 
suggest to him. Unfortunately they’re not based on reality, Mr. 
Speaker. The misguided dogma that was referenced in the 
Speech from the Throne was the Leap Manifesto. That’s the 
NDP [New Democratic Party] document that would destroy 
Saskatchewan’s economy if it ever saw the light of day, a Leap 
Manifesto that his Finance critic actually supports in principle 
and that the renewal, the Chair for the renewal of his party 
signed on to, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The premise of his question around renewables is wrong. Our 
goal is to get to 50 per cent renewables by 2030. That process is 
under way, working with First Nations, working on flare gas, 
utility—scale solar and wind power to complement the other 
sources of energy that we have, Mr. Speaker. So the bottom line 
is this: we think you can do both. We can have more renewables 
in this province and we can clean up coal so we can keep that 
industry viable, not just here in this province but perhaps in 
other places around the world. Today there are 2,400 coal plants 
being built in Asia. On our side of the House, we think we need 
to do better by emissions, but Canada can help the world in 
terms of advancing leading CCS technology right here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier knows full 
well that no one here supported that document. It’s simply not 
on for Saskatchewan. He can try to distract all he wants but I 
urge him to start to get the job done for Saskatchewan people, 
Mr. Speaker, because as they laugh and guffaw, Mr. Speaker, 
9,500 Saskatchewan people have lost their jobs over the last 
year, over a thousand alone in the resource sector. 
Saskatchewan people, our economy need this government to 
make a change and develop a plan. Doing the same thing over 
and over again and expecting a different result just isn’t 
working. 
 
Of course we need to get our resources to market, but for all his 
huffing and puffing and Twitter noise, Mr. Speaker, the Premier 
has not built a single kilometre of pipeline to tidewater. We saw 
with Keystone and now we’re seeing with global and national 
pressures, Saskatchewan needs to be seen as a leader on 
responsible resource development so that people will . . . or 
otherwise people will not be trusting us when we come to make 
our pitch. So why is the Premier ignoring that reality? Why is 
he refusing to put Saskatchewan people ahead of his personal 
headlines? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Once again, there’s just so much wrong 
with that long preamble I don’t really know where to start, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re advocating for pipelines across this country in 

the interest of our industry, the energy sector. We advocated a 
few months ago for a program to help with well completions 
that would put people in the energy sector back to work today 
— opposed by the Finance critic, opposed by the leader of the 
NDP, Mr. Speaker. They’ve opposed every single idea that this 
side of the House has had, whether it’s new growth tax cuts or 
support for the energy sector or supporting pipelines in the 
general sense. Every time it’s been proposed on this side it’s 
been opposed on that side. In part it’s because some members 
of their party over there just don’t like the energy sector. They 
don’t like what we do well in the province of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me just say very clearly that one of the elements of his 
preamble was to say, doing the same thing over and over again 
will get you the same results. For the last eight years here’s 
what’s been happening in the province of Saskatchewan in part 
because of the economic plan of the government: record job 
creation, Mr. Speaker — we still have the second-lowest 
unemployment rate in the country, Mr. Speaker. Population 
growth the likes of which we haven’t seen in a hundred years, 
and this population is still growing, Mr. Speaker. Record 
investments into this province, Mr. Speaker, a AAA credit 
rating; more competitive taxes. Mr. Speaker, we’re going to 
compete and we’re going to continue to repeat those things in 
the interest of Saskatchewan’s leadership nationwide. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Talk about wind power, Mr. Speaker, 
talk about wind power . . . A Premier who again isn’t letting the 
facts stand in the way of, you know, I guess a good narrative for 
him. Attacking us, picking fights with other premiers, 
dismissing climate change, the Twitter noise — it may all get 
the Premier to the top of the news but it’s leaving Saskatchewan 
people behind. Us versus them hasn’t worked, doesn’t work, 
won’t work. The Premier admits himself it’s not working: 
“Frankly, we haven’t been winning very many battles.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, he’s fighting on the wrong field. The only way to 
get pipelines built is if we build together. Saskatchewan people 
are innovative, resourceful, and creative. The Sask Party’s 
carbon capture scheme has been a costly boondoggle plagued 
by cost overruns, delays, inefficiencies. But instead of touting 
the success stories like . . . He touts that instead of success 
stories like wind and solar power, Mr. Speaker. Despite not 
having the support it needs by this government, wind and solar 
power is getting less expensive and more efficient. It creates 
jobs and in fact makes our resources more marketable. 
 
So will the Premier change his failed approach, start standing 
up for Saskatchewan workers and resources in a smart and 
constructive way, one that actually delivers for Saskatchewan 
people well into the future? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, again the premise of the 
member’s question is just wrong. Just a few days ago we signed 
an agreement with the Premier of Quebec. Premier Philippe 
Couillard and I signed an agreement that we would move 
forward together in terms of carbon capture and sequestration 
research. And you know, Mr. Speaker, part of the reason for 



600 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2016 

Quebec’s interest in working with us in this regard was 
embodied in their own climate change document tabled in the 
Quebec National Assembly. When they cited carbon capture 
and sequestration leadership . . .  
 
Well the Finance critic’s shaking her head. I invite her to listen 
to the answer to the question that her leader’s asked. Because 
Quebec has acknowledged that in this country there is 
leadership in CCS from Alberta and from the province of 
Saskatchewan. That leadership, because of Boundary dam, has 
been acknowledged by the International Energy Agency. That 
leadership has been acknowledged by the federal Liberal 
government, who recently just toured that particular facility. 
 
We believe in an all-of-the-above approach. We believe we 
have to have more renewables in the mix in this province, and 
so we’ve set our goal. But we also think that we can help with 
the global challenge of coal-burning plants by our investment, 
our R & D [research and development] at Boundary dam 3 in 
Estevan because we like the thought that those jobs could 
continue in mining, coal, and in that research and technology in 
the development of coal-fired power. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s up to the NDP to explain why the Finance 
critic approved in principle further consideration of the Leap 
Manifesto as she did. It’s up to the Leader of the Opposition to 
explain how the head of the person on their renewal process 
signed the Leap Manifesto that would shut down coal, shut 
down oil, shut down any pipelines, shut down potash, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s why there’s that number over there, in part, and 
that’s why there’s more over on this side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — This is coming from, Mr. Speaker, this is 
coming from a Premier who uses unicorns and pixie dust to 
raise the level of debate. I don’t know, Mr. Speaker. He should 
check his facts too because the premise of everything he just 
said is wrong. But last week I asked the Minister of the 
Environment about this very topic. I asked him to describe their 
climate change plan. He said, “the plan is there. It’s under 
review and it’s constantly under review and is I guess . . . Call it 
a living document. Call it whatever you would like . . . ” 
 
So I tried a simpler question. Is there a plan written down or is 
it just in the minister’s head? He said, as I said, it’s there but it’s 
constantly under review. Mr. Speaker, eventually the minister 
said, “We’ve got a long ways to go. But until we can formulate 
some of this stuff, I don’t think we can know how we’re going 
to get there.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, this has been the so-called plan for several years. 
Can the minister explain why, even after consulting at length 
with his officials, he was unable to provide me with anything? 
Nothing in writing, nothing on paper. One of the key actions in 
the ministry’s ’15-16 plan is to advance their “climate change 
strategy.” Mr. Speaker, how can you advance something that 
doesn’t exist? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the government took over 
from an NDP government that truly had no plans for climate 
change. Mr. Speaker, our emissions were increasing 
exponentially. Moreover, moreover, Mr. Speaker, they refused 
to make the required investments in technology to keep coal as 
part of the picture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since the election in 2007, members on this side of 
the House have made the largest per capita public sector 
investment in fighting climate change in Canada. Mr. Speaker, 
that sounds like it might be part of a plan to me. Sounds like it 
might be part of a long-term plan to actually deal with the fact 
that as we’re sitting here now, 4000 megatonnes of CO2 will be 
burned in China. We on this side of the House for a number of 
years have said, we need to fix our own problem but also 
contribute to the global problem.  
 
In addition to that, we’ve already announced — and we 
announced it ahead of the election — that we’re going to move 
to 50 per cent renewables by 2030. Sounds like it’s part of the 
plan, Mr. Speaker. I think you’re also going to see this 
government and this minister is going to move more directly 
with respect to other issues facing the country, like a carbon tax. 
 
But I would just close with this. That member still has not 
explained why in Edmonton at a convention of the NDP, she 
voted for this: “Therefore be it resolved that the NDP 
recognizes and supports the Leap Manifesto as a high-level 
statement of principles . . .” She supported that, supported its 
further discussion and exploration, notwithstanding the fact that 
it would ruin Saskatchewan’s economy. She needs to explain 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think the Premier 
better check his facts. He’s got the wrong resolution. We’ve 
told them over and over and he’s still reading the wrong 
resolution, so maybe he should check his own facts. Also, allow 
me to remind the Premier that their target is a 20 per cent 
reduction by 2020. But what the minister told me at committee 
was this: this is something that we have just started on in the 
last couple months. Now this was an ambitious goal in the first 
place, but now we find out that after announcing it in 2009, 
they’ve only worked on it in the last couple of months. It’s 
strains credulity, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:15] 
 
How can other provinces and the rest of the world take 
Saskatchewan seriously if he can’t even tell us — either one of 
them — where the plan is? In fact in the last seven years, the 
Sask Party has used climate change as a place to hide money, 
$20 million in fact unused in the last seven years on what has 
been budgeted for climate change. This is one of the only 
programs where money is consistently returned back to the Sask 
Party government coffers. Will the minister or the Premier 
admit there’s no plan and that you know you’ll fail miserably 
on reducing greenhouse gasses by 20 per cent by 2020? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Environment. 
 



June 20, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 601 

Hon. Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We certainly do 
have a climate change plan here in this province and we are 
seeing results from it. We’re seeing a decrease . . . The intensity 
of greenhouse gasses has only risen by 12 per cent, but at the 
same time our GDP [gross domestic product] has risen by 24 
per cent, a very substantial raise, contrasted sharply to what it 
was before under that NDP government — 70 per cent increase 
while the economy was stagnating and people where leaving 
this province. 
 
We are building the world’s first and largest commercial carbon 
capture plant in Boundary dam 3. We’ve talked about that 
before. We are focused on technological solutions that can have 
an effect, not only here in Saskatchewan, not only in Canada, 
but globally with 2,400 coal-fired plants being built over the 
next several years. And, Mr. Speaker, I believe that this type of 
technology can do a lot more to curb GHG [greenhouse gas] 
gases than can a carbon tax. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Changes to Canada Pension Plan 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party’s refusal to 
co-operate with others and to build consensus is causing 
problems and hurting Saskatchewan people beyond climate 
change and pipelines. Every time the federal government talks 
about expanding the Canadian pension plan, or Canada Pension 
Plan, this government digs in its heels. They opposed an 
expansion in 2013; they opposed it again last winter, and 
they’re opposing it again today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that some can save on their own, but 
especially in these challenging economic times, more and more 
Saskatchewan families are counting on CPP [Canada Pension 
Plan] being there. And we all know, it just isn’t enough. A 
stronger CPP is better for everyone. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, why? Why does the Premier refuse to work 
with other provinces and not even discuss ways to work 
together to help Saskatchewan workers retire with dignity? 
Why is this Premier so opposed to finding a way to get more 
money into the pockets of seniors? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve had a 
concern for some time since these discussions were being held, 
when the previous federal government was in power, about the 
nature of the impact of a change to CPP on those who create 
and sustain jobs in our economy, because effectively this is an 
additional cost to payroll. So small businesses, entrepreneurs 
would have to be able to find additional dollars to maintain the 
jobs they have for the payroll that they have. But also it would 
be more expensive for people to create new jobs in our 
economy. And we think the timing of, effectively, a payroll tax 
right now, given where our economy is, even in Saskatchewan, 
is just not right. And it’s in our interest then to make that case 
nationally when there’s talk of a CPP change. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, again the preamble of the hon. member’s 
question is not correct. There are other provinces that are 

concerned as well. We’re joined by Manitoba with concerns. 
We’re joined by Quebec with concerns. I had a chance to speak 
to Atlantic Canadian premiers over the weekend, and they’re 
concerned. They agree in principle with a lift, an enhancement 
in CPP. But they’re worried about that the current proposal 
doesn’t actually help low-income earners to save more, which 
should be entirely the point, I would expect, for those who 
support a CPP enhancement. They’re also concerned, and some 
are, about the complexities that are inherent in the new 
proposal. We also know that some provinces have said, look 
this is a take-it-or-leave-it proposal, or we’re going to walk 
away and build our own plan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And our view is that we need to take the time to get this right, 
understand the economic impact, and make sure that if there 
ever is an enhancement to CPP, that it’s helping low-income 
people save. They’re the group that needs the most support and 
help in this regard, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, would the Premier be willing to 
give that answer to seniors in my constituency who don’t have 
any money left after their entire pension cheque has gone 
towards rent, Mr. Speaker? The Sask Party’s approach also does 
nothing to help the young people in my riding who know they 
can’t count on a workplace pension and can’t afford to start 
their own. 
 
Does the Sask Party understand that money collected through 
CPP just doesn’t disappear? It gets invested in the economy, 
Mr. Speaker. This money doesn’t go into some CPP black hole 
in Ottawa. It earns good interest rates and goes back into the 
pockets of seniors, and ultimately back into the economy that 
way too. Why can’t the Premier see reason on this? Why is he 
sending his Finance minister to pick fights with other provinces 
that undermine the interest of Saskatchewan families? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister is in 
Vancouver today working constructively, both with those who 
propose the enhancement as it exists . . . And I encourage the 
member to look at the proposal today because it would not help 
low-income . . . lots are worried that it would not help future 
low-income pensioners. Mr. Speaker, he’s working with other 
provinces who have concerns. 
 
And I want to be very clear in the House because the member 
did not represent the facts accurately with respect to this CPP 
proposal, and this is very important that we get it right. Seniors 
need to know this enhancement proposal would not affect 
seniors today at all. Nobody that’s currently receiving pension 
benefits are affected by this at all. This is for future retirees. So 
let’s be very clear. Let’s not scare seniors and let’s not scare 
any pension recipients today. It has nothing to do with existing 
recipients of CPP. 
 
Moreover, Mr. Speaker, this government will continue to fight 
for seniors. We dropped 114,000 low-income people off the tax 
rolls completely. Many of those were seniors. We increased the 
seniors’ assistance program three times, by threefold, three 



602 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2016 

times increase in the seniors’ assistance plan after it was 
ignored for 16 long years by the members opposite. 
 
We’ve introduced a personal home care benefit, Mr. Speaker. 
The welfare of seniors in this province . . . In fact in the last 
election we have offered a proposal to help seniors with their 
property tax as well, if they choose. 
 
Seniors remain a priority of the government but so too do the 
job creators in our economy, and so we need to separate both 
because the seniors aren’t affected by this proposal. We need to 
have an assurance about the impact on the economy of this 
plan. And we’ll be constructive in that process. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, for weeks I’ve stood in this House 
and reminded the Minister of Education that people responsible 
for educating our children have concerns with his government’s 
budget. And time and time again he dismisses those concerns, 
dismisses them and often mocks them, Mr. Speaker. This 
despite the fact that school divisions are being forced to make 
deep cuts and that those cuts will affect our kids. 
 
Well we have more evidence about how school boards feel 
about his budget. When asked about their opinion on the budget 
in a survey conducted by the Saskatchewan School Boards 
Association, most school boards gave the Sask Party two out of 
five as a rating, “not good,” Mr. Speaker, a fail. 
 
School divisions and teachers are obviously concerned about 
the effects this budget will have in the classroom and on our 
kids. So instead of proudly walking away from his signature 
and commitments, why won’t this minister start taking these 
concerns seriously? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of things in 
the preamble to that question that we’ll probably have to deal 
with on another day, because the members opposite have a 
consistent program and a consistent plan of making things up, 
exaggerating, and taking things out of context. But, Mr. 
Speaker, I will say this. Last week the member for Regina 
Lakeview said, and I quote, “Education arguably shouldn’t be 
one of the first places you look to cut.” Global Saskatoon, June 
17th. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I couldn’t agree more with that member. That’s 
why we have increased the K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] 
operating grant in this year’s budget, unlike what the NDP did 
in difficult financial times: 1992, reduction of the K to 12 
operating grant, 2 per cent; 1993, a year later, reduction, 1.5 per 
cent; 1994, zero per cent; 1995, zero per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s not the road we’re going down. We’re going 
to do the things that are right for the students in our province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 

Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, people in this province have 
concerns about the road that this ministry and this government 
are going down with regard to education. He can boast about 
his government’s record all he wants, but the fact of the matter 
is, is this is a minister who promised school divisions that he 
would fully fund a 1.9 per cent increase in salary, and he 
walked away from that commitment. And now school divisions 
are on the hook. They’re forced to put projects on hold, make 
cuts, and dig deep into their reserves to find the cash. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, my phone did not stop ringing all weekend 
with people willing and wanting to tell me about those 
problems. The SSBA [Saskatchewan School Boards 
Association] and school boards are very concerned about this. 
The survey noted, by the SSBA, that the minister’s refusal to 
keep his promise negotiated in the collective bargaining 
agreement was a major concern. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask again: how can school divisions trust that 
this minister won’t walk away from other commitments now or 
in the future? Will the minister at least admit that he bargained 
in bad faith and apologize to our school divisions and teachers 
for breaking that commitment? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve increased teachers’ 
salaries by 1.9 per cent, 2015; 1.9 per cent in 2016. You know 
what the NDP did in some difficult times? 1992, this is what 
they said to the teachers: zero; 1993, zero for the teachers; 
1995, zero for the teachers. That’s the respect that they gave to 
the teachers in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re a group of people that closed 176 schools. 
They neglected the schools they didn’t close. We’ve invested 
four times what the NDP did into schools across the province. 
They drove over 35,000 students out of the province. Mr. 
Speaker, they underfunded school divisions to the point where 
there was actually tax revolts in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have increased funding by 33 per cent. We’ve 
increased capital spending $265 million. Do you know what the 
NDP spent on capital their last year in government? $1.36 
million. Mr. Speaker, they should be ashamed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Funding for International Development 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, last week we saw another 
example of some of the hidden cuts not mentioned in this 
government’s budget document. The Saskatchewan Council for 
International Cooperation is a non-profit organization that 
works with a coalition of global development and anti-poverty 
agencies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for 42 years, through all sorts of economic up and 
downs, SCIC [Saskatchewan Council for International 
Cooperation] received stable funding from the Government of 
Saskatchewan for the matching grants in aid program. Now the 
funding for the program was suddenly cut in this year’s budget. 
 



June 20, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 603 

People from across Saskatchewan have taken advantage of the 
matching grants in aid program to double their money to 
support dozens of organizations to help people all over the 
world. Many international agencies counted on this fund for 
development projects like teacher training, maternal health, and 
food security. It helped to improve Saskatchewan’s place in the 
world. It showed the planet the generosity and kindness of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, why after 42 years of sustained funding by 
multiple governments has the Sask Party now decided to 
secretly cut SCIC’s funding? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Immigration, Jobs, 
Skills and Training. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker, and of course the issue was addressed directly in the 
budget document. And I would say, Mr. Speaker, as other 
ministers have said that we had to make some very difficult 
decisions with regard to our budget. We had to balance 
priorities where our precious tax dollars could be used most 
effectively. 
 
We know right now, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan taxpayers 
contribute through their taxes to, as an example, the Canadian 
International Development Agency, which has a mandate at the 
national level to do development work around the world. We 
know that they contribute through their tax dollars to Global 
Affairs Canada, which also contributes to development work 
around the world. 
 
You know, one of the examples cited, and I want to, you know, 
not minimize the value of the work that’s being done by 
organizations around the world, but it was a water project in Sri 
Lanka, Mr. Speaker. You know, we, again balancing priorities, 
we’re going to be funding water projects, but they’re going to 
be in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And I think that that would 
be, I think that that would be the priority of your, of taxpayers 
in this province, that their tax dollars that are put towards 
provincial priorities would be used here in the province. Their 
tax dollars that would be put towards national priorities could 
be used in development work across the country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we’re going to continue to move forward in that fashion. We 
know that individuals who wish to contribute can continue to do 
so through church organizations and other third parties. 
 
The government will continue to fund disaster assistance. We 
did that in Fort McMurray. We’ve done that in many other 
areas. But development assistance is best done through other 
parties. 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River and 
ask him why he’s on his feet. 
 
Mr. Marit: — Mr. Speaker, I ask for leave for an extended 
introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from Wood 
River. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, I’d like to introduce a class in the west gallery. It is the 43 
students, grade 4 students, from the Assiniboia Seventh Avenue 
School from Assiniboia that are here. And I ask all members to 
welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. And I will be 
meeting them afterwards, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answers to questions 77 through 90. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered questions 
77 to 99. 
 
An. Hon. Member: — 90. 
 
The Speaker: — 90 — nine zero. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 37 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2016 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today to move second reading of 
The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2016. The first amendment 
centres on the cancellation of certain Auto Fund administrative 
products such as driver’s licences, vehicle registrations, and 
permits. This change will allow SGI [Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance] to cancel these if a customer has 
outstanding debt owing on their account and they are not 
working with SGI to establish a payment plan. SGI does help 
customers with payment, with plans to pay off that debt, Mr. 
Speaker; however sometimes there are still problems in 
collecting amounts owing. 
 
The second amendment, Mr. Speaker, focuses on vehicle 
impoundment. Currently when an unregistered vehicle is 
impounded and then abandoned, it is difficult to determine who 
is responsible for paying the impoundment fees. This change 
will enable vehicle impoundment fees to be recovered from the 
person operating the vehicle at the time it was impounded. This 
way, Mr. Speaker, the person caught driving the vehicle will be 
penalized, rather than the last known owner of the vehicle. 
 
The third key amendment, Mr. Speaker, deals with 
three-wheeled vehicles and the transport of children. This 
change applies to small children under seven years of age. 



604 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2016 

These children will be prohibited from being transported in a 
three-wheeled vehicle. 
 
There is also a housekeeping amendment, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
regarding rules for operation of motorcycles that apply to driver 
position and carrying passengers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Traffic Safety 
Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the Deputy Premier that Bill No. 37, The Traffic Safety 
Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Very 
quickly I just looked at the bill and certainly the comments 
made by the Deputy Premier in relation to The Traffic Safety 
Amendment Act. And from what I can gather, and I want to 
share a bit with the people that are listening, that all that this bill 
allows SGI to do is cancel the licence or registration renewal of 
someone who has large amounts of unpaid debt to SGI and that 
they have not created a plan to pay off that debt. 
 
The bill also makes it clear that SGI may collect money from 
impoundment fees from the owner of an impounded vehicle, or 
the driver, if the owner cannot be determined. And, Mr. 
Speaker, there’s a bit of confusion on that part obviously as to 
who is to be held liable for that. Is it the driver or the last 
known owner? And this would certainly correct some of the 
confusion. 
 
And as well, Mr. Speaker, we all know the challenges around, 
the safety challenges attached to three-wheeled vehicles. And 
having small passengers and children under seven prohibited 
from being on three-wheeled vehicles may save a lot of 
problems in the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And finally the bill also allows new rules for passengers on 
motorcycles, stating that they must wear a helmet and eye 
protection, have their own footrest, and cannot sit in front of the 
driver. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are all basic, straightforward amendments, 
and we obviously are going to take our time to read through 
them as quickly as we can. And if this is all in the interests of 
good safety and good driving, Mr. Speaker, then certainly we 
will have the opportunity to look at that and make further 
comments if necessary. 
 
So on that note, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 37, The 
Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has adjourned 
debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. To facilitate the work of committees later this day, I 
move that this Assembly do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has adjourned 
the Assembly for today. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:36.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

COMMEMORATIVE STATEMENTS 
 National Day of Mourning 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 593 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 593 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 593 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 594 
  Tell ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 594 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 595 
  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 595 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 595 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 595 
  Hargrave ....................................................................................................................................................................................595  
  Bonk ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 595 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 596 
  Marit .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 603 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 596 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 596 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 596 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 National Day of Mourning 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 597 
 Opening of Kelvington and Area Hospital 
  Nerlien ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 597 
 World Refugee Day 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 597 
 Esterhazy Potash Mine Receives Safety Award 
  Kaeding ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 597 
 Combatting Opiate Use 
  Wilson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 598 
 Saskatoon Diocese Partners With Indigenous Peoples 
  Olauson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 598 
 Carbon Capture and Storage Initiatives 
  Carr ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 598 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Provincial Economy and Climate Change 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 598 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 599 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 600 
  Cox ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 601 
 Changes to Canada Pension Plan 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 601 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 601 
 Funding for Education 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 602 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 602 
 Funding for International Development 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 602 
  Harrison ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 603 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Merriman .................................................................................................................................................................................. 603 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 37 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2016 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 603 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 604 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


