






















































Hansard: June 28, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 24A  TUESDAY, JUNE 28, 2016, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Hon. Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Hon. Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Merriman, Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 51; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Maurice Riou http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 669 
 June 28, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d ask for leave 
for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all members of the Assembly, I have the honour of 
introducing today an important guest that has joined us here in 
the Legislative Assembly. That’s Ms. Kaleigh Maguire. Kaleigh 
is one of the first 230 successful program applicants of the 
graduate retention program first home plan. Kaleigh hails from 
Melville and has moved to Regina in 2007 to pursue her 
education at the University of Regina, and in 2012 she received 
her Bachelor of Arts in history and a Bachelor of Education in 
2015. She currently teaches grade 2 and 3 at the Rosemont 
Community School in Regina. And Kaleigh is very excited 
about the opportunity to purchase her own home under this 
plan, which I understand she’s taken possession of as of 10 
o’clock this morning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Kaleigh highly recommends the program to all 
post-secondary graduates who are able to access a portion of 
their graduate retention program funds to purchase their own 
home. We’re excited for Kaleigh, and we wish her every 
success as a teacher and as a new homeowner right here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members 
of this Legislative Assembly to join me in welcoming Kaleigh 
Maguire to her Assembly here today. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I have the honour to 
introduce a number of members from the University of 
Regina’s agricultural robotics club, along with their professor, 
Dr. Mehran Mehrandezh in the west gallery here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With us here today we have Joshua Friedrick. We have Caleb 
Friedrick, and we have Samuel Dietrich, all from the College of 
Engineering at the University of Regina, engineering students at 
that institution. These gentlemen are the founders of the 
University of Regina agBOT Club and recently competed in the 
2016 agBOT challenge in Rockville, Indiana. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they were the only team representing a Canadian 
university, and they competed against 10 teams from across 
North America. And with the 26-horsepower tractor that they 
built, they placed first, winning $64,795 at this competition. Mr. 
Speaker, these individuals were able to place Saskatchewan, 
Innovation Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan agriculture, and the 

University of Regina on full display. Mr. Speaker, I want all 
members to join me in welcoming this group of innovators to 
their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to just to join 
with the minister briefly in welcoming Ms. Kaleigh Maguire to 
her Legislative Assembly. And certainly the good work at 
Rosemont Community School is something that has not escaped 
the member from Rosemont’s attention, so we’ll see how that 
gets followed up. But congratulations on graduating, and 
certainly may this government program be of good use to you 
and your family. 
 
And certainly more on that I’m sure, in the ministerial 
statements, Mr. Speaker, but also to bring word of 
congratulations and welcome to the folks from the AgBOT 
Club and Dr. Mehrandezh with the University of Regina. Way 
to represent Saskatchewan and Canada and bring home the cash 
again. Times being what they are, don’t talk about that too 
much around the Finance minister would be my urging to them. 
But certainly congratulations on your victory and representing 
Saskatchewan and Canada in this fine style. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 
leave for extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, it’s my pleasure to introduce some special guests 
sitting in your gallery here. Seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, 
are some of the Regina Canada Day committee volunteers, and 
they are — just give a wave when I say your name — Elizabeth 
Strom who is the chairperson, Barry Gaber, Randy Jeworski, 
Susan Fedyck, Rebekah Corpuz, Karalyn Picard, and Stacy 
Muller. There are a number of committee members who were 
unable to attend today as well. 
 
Also in the gallery today is Nancy Cherney, Gwen Jacobson, 
Donna Cuddington from the Provincial Capital Commission 
who are responsible for organizing the opening ceremonies for 
Canada Day and the living flag event that takes place on the 
grounds of the Legislative Building. They are also joined by 
Dena Wagner, a dedicated volunteer assisting with the living 
flag event. Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in 
welcoming these guests to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, to you and through you, it’s 
my pleasure to introduce two special guests to the legislature 
today sitting in your gallery again. Seated in the gallery are Ten 
Tree founders Derrick Emsley and Dave Luba. Ten Tree is an 
eco-friendly clothing company that’s headquartered right here 



670 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2016 

in Regina. 
 
After being approached by Ten Tree, our ministry announced 
that it would partner with the company to take part in a project 
involving one of Saskatchewan’s largest parks. There will be a 
member’s statement that will talk about this in a little more 
detail, Mr. Speaker, but I ask all members to join me in 
welcoming our Ten Tree representatives to their Legislative 
Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As Parks 
critic and as the Culture critic for the official opposition, on 
behalf of the official opposition, I’d certainly like to welcome 
Elizabeth Strom and the committee here for the great work that 
they’re doing around Flag Day and the Canada Day celebrations 
in the beautiful Wascana Park, Mr. Speaker. Always a highlight 
of the year’s calendar, and may this one be the best yet. 
 
And certainly I want to say a word of congratulations to the 
folks from Ten Tree. You know, it’s let a thousand flowers 
bloom or a thousand trees or more to be planted. Certainly this 
is a great endeavour, and this is an exciting company in the 
province of Saskatchewan — some great young entrepreneurs 
giving back, not just to the broader community but to mother 
nature as well. This is to be commended, and certainly we 
welcome these important people to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you and to all members of this Assembly, I’d like 
introduce to you, sitting in the west gallery, 38 grade 8 students 
from École White City School in of course White City, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
With them today, their teachers Wendy Ashton and Fran 
Morphy. The chaperones are Tracy Carnahan, Carmen 
Sasyniuk, Branden Sasyniuk, Lori Radmacher, Lorraine Kosar, 
and Amy Hoffart. Thanks so much for joining us here today, 
and we’ll have a chance to finish or to speak later on after 
question period. Thank you very much. I’ll ask all members to 
join me in welcoming them to their Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
University. 
 
Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you and to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce you to Rachel Klink. Can you wave from way up in 
the west gallery, Rachel? 
 
Rachel is a young student from the Campbell Business Club. 
She’s going into grade 12 at Campbell Collegiate, and she is 
working on a casual basis in our constituency office, learning 
more about politics and political life. She’s a bright young star. 
She recently finished an Encounters with Canada trip, and she’s 
going to Washington, DC with her family just shortly here. And 
I’m really fortunate to have the opportunity to work with such 
bright young stars on my team. And I’d just like you all to help 
me welcome her to her Legislative Assembly. 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — There you go. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a 
pleasure today to rise and present a petition in support of 
funding for heritage languages here in Saskatchewan. And we 
know that after 25 years, the Government of Saskatchewan is 
discontinuing all support for heritage language learning in 
Saskatchewan. And since 1991, heritage language schools have 
depended on this modest funding from the Ministry of 
Education to help sustain their programs. As a result of the 
announcement made by the Ministry of Education, many of 
these non-profit, heritage language schools will be faced with 
the difficult decision of whether or not they can continue to 
operate. 
 
In addition to providing language and cultural classes, these 
schools offer a welcoming environment and crucial support for 
newcomers who are searching for a way to feel at home in their 
new surroundings. Mr. Speaker, I would like to read the prayer. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

We respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan take the following action: 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to reconsider this decision and restore funding for heritage 
language education in Saskatchewan heritage language 
schools. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition today are from 
Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to present a petition 
regarding wetlands and water bodies. The people who signed 
this petition wish to bring to your attention the following. 
Wetlands serve a very vital function in our ecosystem. They 
take the form of marshes, bogs, fens, swamps, and open water. 
Wetlands are home to wildlife, including waterfowl, and they 
clean the water running off of agricultural fields. They protect 
us from flooding and drought, and they are a playground where 
families can explore and play. Here is the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the Government of Saskatchewan to: 
 
Increase funding to do the proper inventory work, putting 
Saskatchewan in a better position to manage the water 
resource. 
 
Speed up the evaluation of high-risk watersheds where 
there is a significant damage annually from flooding. This 
evaluation must include a recognition of drainage works 
that could be closed or restored that will alleviate some of 
the issues downstream with respect to flooding and nutrient 



June 28, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 671 

loading. And, 
 
Create a sound and transparent mitigation process that 
adequately addresses sustainable development. 
 
The sequence should first focus on avoiding environmental 
harm whenever possible before a secondary focus on 
minimizing the harm with compensation being sought only 
when the development is deemed essential and the first two 
stages cannot be met. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from 
Regina. I so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 
 

Junior Citizen of the Year Award 
 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I, along with 
the member for Carrot River Valley and the member for Regina 
Rochdale, attended the Junior Citizen of the Year Award 
ceremony at the Government House. 
 
This award has honoured Saskatchewan youth for the past 39 
years. It is sponsored by the Saskatchewan Weekly Newspaper 
Association in partnership with SaskPower and the Lieutenant 
Governor of Saskatchewan. Award recipients are between the 
ages of 8 and 18 and demonstrate a positive lifestyle, are 
dedicated to their communities and schools, have a strong sense 
of caring and responsibility, have the ability to overcome life’s 
challenges and, of course, inspire others. 
 
Four youths are chosen each year to receive a $3,000 bursary 
from SaskPower for their post-secondary education. This year a 
total of 123 nominations were received and Gillesa Bolton of 
Macklin, Kalicia Chorney of Nipawin, and Rebecca Duncan 
and Jordan Howie, both of Estevan, were the well-deserving 
recipients of this award. 
 
All four recipients demonstrate leadership in their communities, 
their schools, and their personal lives. At such young ages, they 
have shown a commitment to their communities and we can all 
learn from their example. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating these four young 
leaders and thank them for their hard work. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Letters from Buffalo Narrows 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s been 
nearly a month since the Sask Party cut funding to the Buffalo 
Narrows Correctional Centre and threw 17 employees out of 
work. I, along with the Premier, recently received many letters 
from people affected by the Sask Party cut and I’d like to read a 
few passages into the record. 
 
Bonnie Aubichon, the manager of Buffalo Narrows Economic 
Development Corporation, says, and I quote, “This does not just 

put a financial hardship on the 17 employees who have families 
to support, mortgages, bank loans, etc. It is also a loss of 
revenue for the local businesses.” 
 
Business owner Claude Hansen says, and I quote: 
 

It is very sad this centre has to close because they helped 
many people in Buffalo Narrows in so many ways. For 
example, they helped the fishermen, elders, small 
organizations, and whomever else needed them. We as the 
Buffalo Narrows small-business owners hope that this is all 
taken into consideration as this closure also hurts many 
families. 

 
Business owner Harley Hudson: “The spinoff from these 
employees spending money locally will hurt the local business 
community.” And finally, Mr. Speaker, small-business owner 
Gary Laprise: “My mother is 86 years old and has needed the 
help of the inmates for various outdoor chores. She was 
devastated and cried when she heard the facility was closing.” 
 
Just a few quotes, Mr. Speaker, from the hundreds of families 
affected by this government’s callous decision to cut the 
Buffalo Narrows Correctional Centre. The North will 
remember. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
University. 
 

Graduate Retention Program First Home Plan 
 
Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise in 
the House to update members on the graduate retention program 
first home plan, which was launched on May 26th. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Through the first home plan, individuals in the graduate 
retention program may be eligible for an interest-free loan of up 
to $10,000 to use towards the down payment on the first home 
they purchase in Saskatchewan. The size of the loan depends on 
the amount of GRP [graduate retention program] tax credits 
available. Individuals pay back this loan with GRP tax credits 
received each year. 
 
I’m proud that this initiative is a tremendous success. Since the 
program began just last month, Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation has received 276 applications, of which 230 have 
been approved for $2.1 million in total. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the 
first application was received just 17 minutes after the initiative 
was launched. 
 
First home plan payments of over $450,000 have been issued 
for 49 first home purchases, with the average loan of 
approximately $9,184. Mr. Speaker, this plan is proving to be a 
solid investment in recent graduates who are trying to make 
their home ownership dreams come true, and make them true 
here in Saskatchewan. It’s part of our government’s goal to 
encourage and support those who want to live and work here. 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 



672 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2016 

Gay-Straight Alliance Summit Held in Saskatoon 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
would like to recognize and congratulate the organizers, 
volunteers, and the over 100 students who took part in 
Saskatchewan’s first ever Gay-Straight Alliance Summit on 
April 16th at Walter Murray Collegiate in Saskatoon. I was 
honoured to be invited to be part of such an important event, 
with members and allies of the queer youth community in 
Saskatchewan coming together to brainstorm and develop new 
initiatives to deal with the issues that face them. With such 
important topics on the table as bullying, equal rights, and GSA 
[gender and sexuality alliance] legislation, participants were 
hard at work doing their part to create an environment where 
everyone can feel safe and accepted. 
 
It is sad to say, but 64 per cent of LGBTQ [lesbian, gay, 
bisexual, transgender, queer and/or questioning] students still 
feel unsafe at their school and 80 per cent of LGBTQ youth 
report being bullied and 50 per cent of LGBTQ students have 
had thoughts about suicide. These alarming stats show us just 
how important this summit is for our kids. 
 
A big congratulations goes out to everyone who attended the 
GSA [gay-straight alliance] Summit, and a special thank you to 
Amanda Guthrie and Suzy Yim, the coordinators of this first of 
its kind event in Saskatchewan. As well a big thank you goes 
out to OUTSaskatoon and Camp fYrefly who sponsored the 
summit and made it all possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I call on all members to recognize the great work 
done at this year’s GSA Summit and all the GSAs in all our 
schools. And here’s to a great camp at Camp fYrefly this 
summer. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Clothing Company Supports Reforestation and Relief 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In May, Ten Tree 
unveiled the design and details of their wildfire capsule on the 
runway of Saskatchewan Fashion Week. In partnership with 
Sask Parks, the wildfire capsule ensured that 10 trees were 
planted for every item sold. Using pieces of burned trees 
recovered from Lac La Ronge Provincial Park, Ten Tree created 
a total of 600 T-shirts and 100 prints. Trees were planted in 
Nemeiben campground in Lac La Ronge Provincial Park where 
the fire damage was extensive. 
 
This limited run of merchandise was met with great demand. 
All women’s T-shirts have since sold out, and only a handful of 
men’s shirts are still available. All proceeds from the project 
were in support of the reforestation of Lac La Ronge Provincial 
Park and immediate relief for Fort McMurray. This project was 
a great innovative partnership to support the reforestation of the 
park. 
 
The effort of everyone involved in this project is worth 
commendation and has given a head start to the reforestation of 
Lac La Ronge Provincial Park. I ask members to join me in 
thanking everyone involved for their work on this project from 
start to finish, design to planning. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Agricultural Robotics Team First in North America 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past May, 
Samuel Dietrich, Joshua Friedrick, and Caleb Friedrick traveled 
to Gerrish Farms in Rockville, Indiana for the 2016 agBot 
Challenge. They competed against 10 teams from across North 
America which included Purdue, Ohio State, and Virginia Tech. 
And they were the only team to represent a Canadian university. 
 
Samuel, Joshua, and Caleb — founders of the University of 
Regina’s agricultural robotics team — used their backgrounds 
in engineering and their exposure to Saskatchewan’s rich 
agricultural community to create a 26-horsepower robotic 
tractor and seed planter. This entire unit is controlled by a 
laptop computer and can fertilize and seed a field. It plants in 
half-mile long rows with no use of a physical driver. Mr. 
Speaker, this tractor represents the future of farming 
technology. 
 
The agBot Challenge consisted of two different hackathons 
where competitors had to develop different software and data 
management solutions. The main event was where teams 
showcased and demonstrated their unmanned tractor seeding 
capability. Mr. Speaker, their tractor can plant seed within a 
centimetre accuracy. With accuracy like that, it was no surprise 
that the U of R [University of Regina] agBot team placed first, 
winning the grand prize of $64,795. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in 
congratulating these fine innovators in their victory and wish 
them luck in their bright futures. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I’ll recognize our Provincial Secretary. 
 

Tribute to La Ronge Fire Chief on Retirement 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With the fires 
that forced mass evacuations in our North last year, we have 
seen the men and women who are bravely on the front lines 
protecting us from the dangers of fire. It is my privilege to 
honour one of Saskatchewan’s best. Fire Chief Ron Pratt has 
selflessly led the La Ronge Fire Department for 18 years and is 
now retiring. 
 
When Ron Pratt had been the fire chief in La Ronge for a mere 
seven months, he was faced with a terrifying situation. A 
wildfire was bearing down on the northern community with 
great intensity. Pratt and his team, assisted by the provincial fire 
service, fought for three days straight, only sustaining minimal 
loss in the community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Pratt showed leadership then and has continued 
that trend over his 18 years. He has built the fire service in La 
Ronge and encouraged women to join the force. Today, 10 
women of the now 30-member department are female. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to thank Chief 
Pratt for his service, his bravery, and his leadership. We wish 
him the best in retirement. Thank you. 
 



June 28, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 673 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Government’s Fiscal Management and Credit-Rating 
Agency Report 

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the 
government again today about Standard & Poor’s decision to 
downgrade Saskatchewan’s credit rating. Now I know the 
government, the Premier will probably want to distract with a 
couple more encouraging quotes in the report, or they’ll try to 
claim that the $7 billion they’ve added to debt is somehow a 
reduction, Mr. Speaker. But Saskatchewan people know that 
debt is debt is debt. 
 
And the truth, the truth is that Standard & Poor’s lowered 
Saskatchewan’s credit rating for the first time in more than two 
decades. That concerns me and it should concern the Premier 
and everyone in this Assembly, in part because the Sask Party 
and the Premier are concerning S & P [Standard & Poor’s]. 
They’re concerned with the Sask Party’s deficits, their 
projections, and the fact that the government has too little in 
reserves. The fact that the Sask Party drained the entire rainy 
day fund during the best days likely didn’t help. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they failed to get the job done during the best 
times, so now that times are tight, what’s their plan to get our 
finances on track and stop the damage to our future? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
think it’s important for all of us to recognize that this province 
has gone through some difficult challenges over the course of 
the last 18 months or so. S & P has recognized that, Mr. 
Speaker. They have laid the problems that we’re faced with 
today squarely at the foot of resource revenues: $1 billion in 
resource revenues over the course of the last year, Mr. Speaker, 
budget to budget. 
 
It’s interesting that the Leader of the Opposition doesn’t 
reference what the S & P report actually says. He does quote a 
couple of things out of the S & P report, but what else does the 
report say, Mr. Speaker? The report goes on to say: 
 

The downgrade reflects our view of Saskatchewan’s 
projected resource price-driven average budgetary 
performance [price-drive average budgetary performance 
reflected with the resource revenue situation over the 
course of the last 18 months], moderate debt, strong 
financial management and budgetary flexibility, and very 
strong economy. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House believe in the 
people of this province, believe in the economic 
circumstances in this province, and believe in our economic 
future in this province, Mr. Speaker, unlike the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
 

Effectiveness of Carbon Capture and Storage 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, you know, the Finance 
minister and the government can act like it’s not their fault, but 
it’s the Sask Party that jacked up expenses and spending and 
debt on wasteful, mismanaged project after project. They’re the 
ones who couldn’t get their projections right, and they’re the 
ones, they’re the ones who drained the rainy day fund when 
times were good. They didn’t save a dime during the best years, 
Mr. Speaker, and that’s why Saskatchewan’s credit rating has 
been downgraded. Memo to the Finance minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even more troubling, they have no plan, at least 
not one that’s grounded in reality. Yesterday both the Premier 
and the minister referenced an imminent $50 trillion as they 
said — that’s with a “t,” Mr. Speaker — $50 trillion windfall 
from CCS [carbon capture and storage]. But they seem to be 
confused with the 1.5 billion — with a “b,” Mr. Speaker — that 
they’ve blown through on their CCS project. Or maybe they’re 
confused by the zero — that’s with a “z,” Mr. Speaker — which 
is actually how much Saskatchewan taxpayers will get back 
from all the money they spent since the Sask Party gave this 
technology away. Nothing to be brought back to us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will the Deputy Premier or that government 
come clean on the real costs and how badly they’ve 
mismanaged the carbon capture scheme? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the carbon capture facility 
down at Boundary dam 3 has been recognized by people around 
the world as leading technology to advance the cause around 
carbon capture and storage, Mr. Speaker. The province of 
Saskatchewan has had delegations from around the world to 
tour the facility. Mr. Speaker, most recently we’ve had a group 
out of the United States tour the facility down there at Boundary 
dam. We’ve also had the federal Environment minister, Mr. 
Speaker, that has toured the facility down there and has 
referenced it as a leading facility that is capturing carbon at a 
very, very impressive rate, Mr. Speaker. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 
they have captured about 890 000 tonnes, the equivalent of 
removing 220,000 cars from the roads of our province, Mr. 
Speaker. This is an impressive record for a facility that is 
working well down at Boundary dam now. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that scandal-plagued 
minister should have been punted a long time ago and is a direct 
reason why we have billions of dollars of new debt, Mr. 
Speaker. You know, that government likes to spin a tale, but 
they forget that their damaging decisions have actual 
consequences. Every day there’s a new story about how this 
government’s underfunding is hurting our students, and still the 
minister and the Premier responsible don’t seem to care, or they 
just don’t get it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Today we learned while Saskatoon Catholic schools were able 
to balance their budget, they barely did. They were short $3.5 
million because of “. . . unfunded enrolment growth, partial 



674 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2016 

government funding for teacher wages, and a lack of funding 
for operations.” Mr. Speaker, that means the responsibility for 
that shortfall lies directly at the hands of that government, the 
Sask Party, Mr. Speaker. They made cuts that will impact 
students, our kids, in the classrooms. One trustee said, “When 
we look through the budget, we are affecting the classroom.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, what will it take for that government to take 
responsibility for their cuts to our children’s classrooms 
because of their broken promise to our teachers and their failure 
to properly fund classrooms all across Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we know that this is a 
difficult budget. We’ve asked school divisions to find ways to 
reduce expenses. We thank them for the work that they’re doing 
to make our budget work and to find areas to save costs. Now 
some of the savings that Saskatoon Catholic has done is they’ve 
delayed laptop replacements, memory upgrades. They’re 
leaving vacancies unfilled. They’re double-looping buses. 
They’re moving supports from the board office to the 
classroom. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ll never apologize for asking for economy. 
We’ll never apologize for asking people to remember that there 
is only one taxpayer in this province. We will never apologize 
for thrift so that we can keep resources in the classroom where 
they belong. We’re not taking lessons from the people on the 
other side of the House, Mr. Speaker. We’re looking out for the 
students of this province. We’re looking after the future of this 
province, because under them, under them, the future was in 
Calgary. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Every time, Mr. Speaker. Every time we ask this 
government about cuts to education, they dismiss them. They 
deny reality. Mr. Speaker, the reality is that my phone won’t 
stop ringing with calls from parents and educators worried 
about what this government’s cuts mean for the future of this 
province. 
 
The latest, Mr. Speaker, was about cuts that Regina Public 
School Board has been forced by the Sask Party to make. 
Currently three occupational therapists have heavy caseloads of 
close to 20 schools. Now, due to funding cuts from this 
government, one of the three will be gone. The other two are 
being asked . . . will be tasked with closer to 30 schools each. 
The minister says that this is a school board decision, but he 
knows that this is on him — on him and the Sask Party cuts. 
Mr. Speaker, how does the minister possibly expect these 
people to do their jobs in a way that actually helps kids 
succeed? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this budget represented a 
7.6 increase in our expenditures. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to go back and ask the members opposite 
to have a look back at what happened under their term in office. 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote from the March 18th, 1993 
Hansard: 
 

Today I am . . . announcing the following reduction in 
funding levels for 1994-95: 8 per cent in urban and rural 
revenue sharing grants [gone down]; 2.8 per cent 
[reduction] in operating funds for hospitals; 4 per cent [in 
reduction] in operating grants for local school boards, 
universities, regional and federated colleges, and 
SIAST . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, do you know who said that? Janice MacKinnon, 
their Finance minister. That’s the legacy that they left. That’s 
not ours. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, once again that answer defies the 
reality today. The truth is that this cut will affect not only the 
class, the children who benefit from these services, but all kids 
in the classroom, and the minister knows it. 
 
The occupational therapists were challenged enough with their 
previous caseload, Mr. Speaker. We are talking about people 
who love their jobs. They love making a difference in the lives 
of children, but the caseload next year will be unmanageable. It 
couldn’t be any more clear: this government’s cuts are having a 
negative impact on our schools, today. 
 
We all know that the real cause of this is the minister’s decision 
to bargain in bad faith and walk away from his commitment to 
pay what he promised he would. Mr. Speaker, education should 
be the last place that governments look for cuts during tough 
economic times. Will the minister do the right thing and finally 
admit that his government’s wasteful spending and 
short-sighted cuts are failing our students, the future of this 
province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll quote further from 
Janice MacKinnon one last time. 
 
Today . . . I am calling on our partners to share further in the 
burden of reducing the deficit so that they can soon share in the 
benefits of balancing the budget. [Janice MacKinnon, March 
18th, 1993.] 
 
Mr. Speaker, we had some times in positive revenue, and do 
you know what we did with those times? We put money back in 
the school divisions. We put more money in capital. We put 
more money in operating funding, more than they’ve ever done.  
 
And, Mr. Speaker, some of it went right into the constituencies 
where those members came from. Mr. Speaker, the constituency 
of Athabasca, $4 million towards a brand new school in Turnor 
Lake; Cumberland, $33 million renovations at Churchill High 
School in La Ronge; Saskatoon Nutana, $14 million 
renovations to Nutana Collegiate; Regina Elphinstone, $20 
million for Seven Stones Community School; $31 million for 
Scott Collegiate; Sacred Heart, still under progress. And, Mr. 



June 28, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 675 

Speaker, if they ask another question, I’ve got another half page 
to read to them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Inmate Fatalities While in Custody 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, since that minister refuses to 
take the consequences of his cuts seriously, let me try to see if 
another minister will take responsibility for her file. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after going into medical distress in her cell at Pine 
Grove Correctional Centre on December 27th, Shauna Wolf 
passed away. Shauna was on remand and had only been at the 
centre for 10 days. Her father has said that he wants answers 
and will keep going until he gets them. In January this family 
was told that they would have answers in four to six months, 
but still he waits. 
 
This is not the first time we’ve seen families fighting for 
answers without help from the minister. Since 2009, 22 people 
have died while incarcerated. Surely the minister can keep track 
of 22 people and remain accountable to their families. To the 
Minister of Corrections: when will this family get the answers 
they deserve? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One death in 
custody is one too many, for sure, Mr. Speaker. We have . . . 
and my sympathies go out to the families of those who have 
passed away in our facilities. 
 
We have a protocol in each facility to ensure that when an 
offender enters a facility with an addiction, that they are 
monitored by the staff. They can be and will be transferred to an 
emergency . . . hospital emergency room when necessary. 
Usually, often within 24 hours of an inmate entering a facility, 
they fill out a standard medical form, and this is done with a 
medical practitioner professional and the offender. Our staff are 
trained so they are able to look for indications of conditions. 
Nurses are on site seven days a week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we take these issues very, very seriously. Albeit I 
cannot speak directly to this one incident that the member 
opposite refers to, you can be assured we are undertaking our 
own investigation. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, Shauna Wolf did not get the 
medical attention she needed and she died while in the care of 
the province. We know others haven’t gotten medical 
assessments on arrival even though, as the minister indicated, 
the province requires that it must be done in 24 hours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the child and youth advocate said that this 
government wasn’t fulfilling its responsibilities when it comes 
to providing medical services. A federal corrections investigator 
said that correction was “. . . the most secretive of all public 

services. There’s very little in government services that actually 
operates behind a thicker, darker curtain than corrections.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, with this secretive Sask Party, that’s saying a lot. 
No matter how slow the minister wants to talk or what tone she 
wants to take in responding, the minister is still responsible. 
When will the true answers about what is happening in 
Corrections be provided to Saskatchewan people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said earlier, 
these matters are still under investigation, so therefore I will not 
comment on the specifics. We have a protocol in each facility. 
Our protocols are reviewed and are being reviewed on a regular 
basis, Mr. Speaker. Medical help, medical assistance is 
available to those who require it. The assessment is done on a 
. . . very close to being when the offender arrives at our facility, 
Mr. Speaker. Again my sympathies go out to the members of 
the families and friends of those who have passed away in our 
facilities. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Grain Transportation Issues 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the spring seeding session has 
gotten farmers off to a good start. An early melt had seeding 
ahead of schedule, and we’ve had just the right amount of rain. 
So far it’s looking like it will be good news come harvest. But 
even that good news has some farmers concerned about their 
ability to get that crop to market. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan farmers ran into 
some trouble with this three years ago. A lack of available 
railcars led to a massive backlog of farmers waiting to get their 
grain to market, and that logistical nightmare cost producers in 
the Prairies billions of dollars in lost revenues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government cannot allow that to happen again. 
To the Minister of Agriculture: has the province started work 
with the federal government and the rail companies to ensure 
that there are sufficient resources for producers to get their 
crops to market this fall? And can he please outline exactly 
what those plans are? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
member for that question. Yes, we’ve been engaged in this 
issue since the winter of 2013-14 for sure and before that. We 
made a submission to the CTA [Canada Transportation Act] 
review. We are not particularly happy with the preliminary 
results of that review. We’ve made that known as well and been 
in contact with the railways since. We’ve put out the, you 
know, heads-up that this does look like a good crop and that the 
railways should be gearing up for a very busy year ahead in 
moving grain and that we expect no less. We’ve been 
guaranteed by the federal government that we’ll have additional 
opportunities to consult on the CTA review before the final 
recommendations are made. 



676 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2016 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, after seeing the results of the 
Canada Transportation Act review panel, producers have 
reason to be concerned. Many producer groups made bona fide 
suggestions to the review, and they were flatly ignored. 
 
The panel is calling for a third of grain cars to be allocated to a 
premium bid. Service will be even worse for smaller producers, 
or they’ll be forced to pay the higher rate. And it recommends 
that any complaints about poor service not be judged on how 
well the individual customer is being served, but rather on how 
well the railway is serving the system as a whole. Farmers will 
have their hands tied with no recourse. 
 
So will the minister join me in calling for what the farmers are 
calling for and desperately need — a full costing review of the 
railways, the sharing of efficiency gains to accrue to farmers by 
adjusting the revenue cap downward, and the strengthening and 
not weakening of common carrier obligations? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A 
costing review is surely part of any review of rail transportation. 
We expect that as a matter of course, and I think, I’m sure that 
has happened. If it hasn’t, it certainly needs to. You know, a 
dispute settlement mechanism is badly in need of repair, and 
that’s one of the things that we called for in our submission to 
the CTA review that was also ignored, evidently. But we will, 
in our further consultations with the review committee, we’ll be 
continuing to make those cases. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Closure of Correctional Facility 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, earlier this month the Premier 
and this government coldly and callously told 17 workers that 
after years of hard work their services were no longer needed. 
Mr. Speaker, the closure of the Buffalo Narrows Correctional 
Centre has been devastating to the community. Not only was it 
an important employer, but it also played an important role in 
the community’s economy as well. Families would come to 
town to visit, and the community organizations would benefit 
from the work of the inmates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of this community are still very upset. 
They don’t understand why the Saskatchewan Party continues 
to not listen to the needs of northern communities. They want 
answers, Mr. Speaker, and they want answers from the people 
who made those decisions. So I’m going to ask the minister, 
very slowly, will the Premier and the minister at the very least 
have the decency to agree to meet with the members of the 
community of Buffalo Narrows to explain to them why they 
made this short-sighted decision to close that much needed 
correctional facility. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. These were not 

easy decisions. All of my colleagues on this side had to make 
these very, very tough decisions, Mr. Speaker. This is not to say 
of course that the employees that worked at Buffalo Narrows 
were not and are not valued. That is not the case, Mr. Speaker. 
We closed the facility to figure out the best way to achieve our 
results in service delivery and the most efficient use of our 
existing correctional facilities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These were not easy decisions, and if the members from 
Buffalo Narrows and area wish to meet with us, absolutely my 
door is always open. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

Funding for Meewasin Valley Authority 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In this 
year’s budget, mere weeks after the provincial election, this 
Sask Party government unilaterally cut the funding of city 
parks, cutting Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, the Battlefords, 
Weyburn, and Swift Current. Now, Mr. Speaker, of course 
other cities are worried that their parks are on review and next 
to face the Sask Party axe. In fact, funding for both Wascana 
Park, the very park this building sits in, and Meewasin Valley in 
Saskatoon are up for review, and the minister has said the 
option of cutting funding for these parks has not been taken off 
the table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday Saskatoon City Council approved a 
motion to send a message to the Sask Party government about 
the effect that cutting funding for Meewasin Valley would have 
on the city. It says in part, “We urge the provincial government 
to continue its crucial financial support for Meewasin and 
remain a key governance partner of the MVA.” Will the 
minister commit to doing just that? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank the 
member opposite for the question. Mr. Speaker, we’re going to 
continue to work and engage with our partners, including the 
Meewasin Valley Authority, the University of Saskatchewan, 
the city of Saskatoon.  
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s no debate that this is a beautiful iconic 
park, Mr. Speaker, but I believe that we’re debating the budget 
of 2016-17. Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to report that the budget 
for Meewasin Valley Authority is $909,000, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s exactly the same as it was in 2015-16, Mr. Speaker, so 
this is a stable budget for Meewasin. I look forward to talking 
and engaging with our partners. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if the minister 
understands just how important Meewasin is to the city of 
Saskatoon. It’s one of Saskatoon’s main attractions. It draws 
thousands of tourists each year who in turn contribute to the city 
and the province’s economy. Cutting funding to this park, Mr. 
Speaker, would have, in the words of one city councillor, 



June 28, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 677 

devastating impacts.  
 
Meewasin has counted on provincial support since 1979, and 
cutting it would see a full third of the park’s funding disappear. 
The city of Saskatoon has said that they wouldn’t be able to 
make up the funding shortfall, with one city councillor saying, 
“There’s just no way for the city to backfill that level of 
funding.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, cutting funding for this park would clearly have a 
negative impact on the city of Saskatoon and indeed on the 
province of Saskatchewan. So I’ll ask again, will the minister 
commit, as council is asking to continue its crucial financial 
support for Meewasin and remain a key governance partner of 
the MVA [Meewasin Valley Authority]? Yes or no, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can be 
happy to report — maybe the member opposite isn’t quite 
listening to what I’m saying — but, Mr. Speaker, the funding 
for Meewasin Valley Authority for ’16-17 is stable. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s exactly that. 
 
We don’t prepare budgets well in advance, Mr. Speaker. These 
are year by year, Mr. Speaker. We will look forward to 
engaging with our partners, Meewasin Valley Authority, and 
we will chat with them and figure out next steps moving 
forward, Mr. Speaker. But right now, happy to report that the 
Meewasin Valley Authority budget for 2016-17, Mr. Speaker, is 
$909,000, which is exactly the same as it was last year. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, the level of commitment from 
this government has been so overwhelming for the Meewasin 
Valley Authority that on July 1st, the same day we’ll be 
celebrating flag day in this park, Mr. Speaker, Meewasin Valley 
Authority will be closing its interpretive centre. Such has been 
the financial pressure for that institution for a number of years 
now. 
 
The thing is, Mr. Speaker, the city council in Saskatoon is 
looking for a commitment. They’re looking for a commitment 
to the partnership that has endured between the university, the 
province, and the city for the past . . . since 1979, Mr. Speaker. 
They’re not looking for bafflegab in terms of what happened in 
this year’s flatline budget. They’re looking for a partnership and 
a commitment that goes forward, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So again to the minister: he has a chance to clear this up, to put 
some minds at ease, and to respond in the affirmative whether 
or not this government will continue on its partnership with the 
Meewasin Valley Authority. Yes or no, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
This government will continue its partnership with the 

Meewasin Valley Authority for 2016-17, Mr. Speaker. We’ll go 
from there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m fascinated by the platform document that the 
members opposite produced, and all of the extra money that 
they put into their urban parks. Urban parks apparently aren’t 
that important to the members opposite because they actually 
added zero onto, in terms of the platform. So how important are 
they? So exact it is. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the budget for Meewasin Valley Authority 
for 2016-17 is exactly stable, as it was last year, Mr. Speaker. I 
look forward to engaging with our partners in steps moving 
forward. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 

Graduate Retention Program First Home Plan 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to rise in the House to update members on the 
graduate retention program first home plan. This was an 
election promise that was made. It was an election promise that 
was kept by this government to make sure that our young 
people have every opportunity to succeed right here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Through the first home plan, individuals in the graduate 
retention program, or the GRP, will be eligible for an 
interest-free loan of up to $10,000 to use towards the down 
payment of the first home that they purchase in the province of 
Saskatchewan. The size of the loan varies on the amount of 
graduate retention program tax credits that graduates have 
available. Individuals pay back this loan with their graduate 
retention program tax credits that they receive each year. 
 
I’m proud that this initiative is a tremendous success. Since the 
program began last month, we’ve received 276 applications, of 
which 230 have been approved for $2.1 million in total. This 
$2.1 million will be directly invested into our housing market 
and encourage additional graduates to make their home right 
here in communities across our province of Saskatchewan. In 
fact, Mr. Speaker, the first application was received just 17 
minutes after the initiative was launched. 
 
As of today, there have been 49 payments issued to applicants 
with a total of $450,000. The average loan amount is 
approximately $9,184. And I was fortunate enough to meet one 
of these applicants in the Saskatchewan Gallery this afternoon, 
Ms. Kaleigh Maguire, who is a soon-to-be resident of the 
Minister of Finance’s constituency, in the constituency of 
Regina Northeast. As a recent University of Regina graduate, 
Kaleigh is a prime example of an individual to whom this 
program is targeted to, and I’m excited for her. And she’ll be 
moving into her new home shortly as she took possession this 
morning, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this plan is proving to be a solid investment in 
recent graduates who are trying to make their home ownership 
dreams come true. This initiative is a key part of our 



678 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2016 

government’s goal to encourage and support those who want to 
live and work here in communities across the province of 
Saskatchewan. It’s giving our young people a hand up, and it’s 
encouraging more grads to put down roots, to earn a living, to 
raise a family, and to make a life for themselves in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This is something that we can be very proud of. The first home 
plan is a prime example of a program that this government has 
pioneered that continues to make our best and our brightest 
minds succeed here in Saskatchewan and to keep our 
communities strong. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And off 
the top I’d like to thank the minister and certainly the 
Government House Leader for ensuring that we had a copy of 
the minister’s remarks in advance of the ministerial statement. 
 
In terms of the program itself, Mr. Speaker, this is, you know, 
in and of itself it’s a fine measure. Anything you can do to help 
young grads trade in the mortgage that they’ve amassed in 
terms of student loans and the debt that accrues, Mr. Speaker, 
and, you know, provide a bit of help in terms of working to 
afford that first mortgage we think is a fine thing. 
 
It misses some of the bigger picture pieces, Mr. Speaker, in 
terms of what’s going on in post-secondary education with 
tuition continuing to rise and with the funding flat lines for the 
main, or decreased in certain places, and transformational 
change about to work its way through the sector as a whole, Mr. 
Speaker. But for this measure in and of itself, it’s a fine thing. 
But is it going to be able to compensate for the way that 
students and families are going to be paying on the other hand? 
That certainly remains to be seen. 
 
But if the recent history is any indication, Mr. Speaker, watch 
out for the gains on the one hand being taken by the other from 
this government. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Request leave to introduce a guest. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Seated in the 
west gallery it’s a real pleasure for me to introduce an 
incredible gentleman that’s well known to many in this 
Assembly and to many across the province, former MLA 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly] Dale Flavel: the pride of 
Strasbourg; who served as the MLA for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood from 1991 to 1999; somebody who still 
takes a very active interest in matters across Saskatchewan, 
across that riding itself as well; and somebody who certainly I 

value the friendship of as well; and stays active with his wife, 
Georgina. So it’s my pleasure to welcome Mr. Flavel to this 
Assembly, and I ask all members to join me in welcoming him. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
join with the Leader of the Opposition in welcoming a former 
member that represented Last Mountain-Touchwood, Dale 
Flavel. Dale and myself, our paths cross occasionally and we 
share notes. I should mention, Mr. Speaker, that in his last term, 
he was the Deputy Speaker also of the Assembly. So Last 
Mountain-Touchwood has a bit of a history. In fact his 
predecessor was the Speaker from 1986 to ’91, so it seems to be 
something in the air, I think, around Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. But it’s an occupation that we are drawn 
to. And I would certainly welcome Dale to his Assembly. 
Thank you. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

Standing Committee on House Services 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
instructed by the Standing Committee on House Services to 
report that it has considered certain estimates and to present its 
second report. I move: 
 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 
House Services be now concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — The Deputy Chair for House Services has 
moved: 
 

That the second report on the Standing Committee on 
House Services be now concurred in. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Mr. Parent: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Human Services to report that it has 
considered certain estimates and to present its first report. I 
move: 
 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on Human 
Services be now concurred in. 



June 28, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 679 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Saskatoon Meewasin, member of the Human Services: 
 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on Human 
Services be now concurred in. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. In order to facilitate the work of committees later this 
day, I move that this Assembly do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
the adjournment of the Assembly for today. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly stands adjourned 
until 1:30 tomorrow afternoon. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:28.] 
 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Moe ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 669 
  McCall ............................................................................................................................................................................... 669, 670 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 669 
  Tell ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 670 
  Beaudry-Mellor ......................................................................................................................................................................... 670 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 678 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 678 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 670 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 670 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Junior Citizen of the Year Award 
  Carr ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 671 
 Letters from Buffalo Narrows 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 671 
 Graduate Retention Program First Home Plan 
  Beaudry-Mellor ......................................................................................................................................................................... 671 
 Gay-Straight Alliance Summit Held in Saskatoon 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 672 
 Clothing Company Supports Reforestation and Relief 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................... 672 
 Agricultural Robotics Team First in North America 
  Kaeding ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 672 
 Tribute to La Ronge Fire Chief on Retirement 
  Wilson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 672 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Government’s Fiscal Management and Credit-Rating Agency Report 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 673 
  Doherty ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 673 
 Effectiveness of Carbon Capture and Storage  
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 673 
  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 673 
 Funding for Education 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 673 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 674 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 674 
 Inmate Fatalities While in Custody 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 675 
  Tell ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 675 
 Grain Transportation Issues 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 675 
  Stewart ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 675 
 Closure of Correctional Facility 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 676 
  Tell ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 676 
 Funding for Meewasin Valley Authority 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 676 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 676 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Graduate Retention Program First Home Plan 
  Moe ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 677 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 678 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on House Services 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 678 
 Standing Committee on Human Services 
  Parent ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 678 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


