






















































Hansard: October 27, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 32A  THURSDAY, OCTOBER 27, 2016, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (Ind.) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10; Independent (Ind.) — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 935 
 October 27, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Point of Order 
 
The Speaker: — Members, I would like to make a ruling on a 
point of order raised yesterday by the Opposition House Leader 
concerning a statement made by the Minister of Energy and 
Resources in exchange with the member from Nutana during 
question period on October 26th, 2016. 
 
The Opposition House Leader stated that the minister had 
contravened rule No. 51(f) by using the phrase “false 
information that was provided by the member from Nutana” 
and suggested the minister withdraw the comments and 
apologize. The Government House Leader responded that the 
minister did not disregard the rule and requested that I review 
the minister’s comments. 
 
I reviewed Hansard and I am prepared to rule on the matter. 
The minister said, and I quote from page 909 of Hansard, “I’m 
not sure where to start in my response to all the false 
information that was provided by the member from Nutana.” 
 
Beauchesne’s, 6th Edition, paragraph 494 says: 
 

It is not unparliamentary temperately to criticize statements 
made by Members as being contrary to the facts; but no 
imputation of intentional falsehood is permissible. On rare 
occasions this may result in the House having to accept 
two contradictory accounts of the same incident. 

 
This was supported by the Speaker Kowalsky on March 8th, 
2007 when he stated that the test is whether the words “. . . 
imply direct intent to falsify.” 
 
I find that minister’s statement did not imply that the member 
was intentionally falsifying information, but that the 
information stated by the member was, in his opinion, false. 
Therefore I find the point of order not well taken. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I ask 
for leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a great pleasure today to 
introduce some very special people that have joined us. They’re 
seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. I’ll ask them each perhaps 

to give us a wave as I introduce them as I mention their name. 
We’ll begin with His Excellency Dr. Teuku Faizasyah, the 
Ambassador of Indonesia to Canada. He is joined by his wife 
Andis. Also, Christophorus Barutu is the trade attaché of the 
Indonesian embassy and is here with us this morning. Mr. 
Yusuf Wiharsoyo is the assistant to the trade attaché. They’re 
joined in our gallery by someone who is no stranger to this 
Assembly, Rob Norris. The former Saskatoon member has 
joined us here this morning. Rob is here today in his role as 
Chair of the Canada World Youth organization. I’m wondering 
if soon he won’t be age-disqualified from serving in that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to say that Saskatchewan enjoys a great and 
mutually beneficial relationship with Indonesia would be an 
understatement, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan in fact of all of the 
Canadian provinces is the leading exporter to Indonesia; in fact 
42 per cent of all of the exports from our country, from Canada 
to Indonesia, come from the province of Saskatchewan. And so 
it’s important for us on occasions like this to say to the 
ambassador and through him to his people, thank you very, very 
much. 
 
There are literally thousands of Saskatchewan families that are 
gainfully employed, that benefit directly from the fact that our 
exports in 2015 to Indonesia were $760 million. They included 
wheat and potash, wood pulp, and canary seed. So again it’s 
very important for us to say thank you. I think the partnership 
will grow. Part of the government’s efforts to diversify our 
export markets has been to really focus on the ASEAN 
[Association of Southeast Asian Nations] regions, to focus on 
countries like Indonesia. And so we’re going to continue to 
work to develop the partnership and ensure that it’s mutually 
beneficial because we know that’s very much the point of a 
trade relationship the likes of which we want to have with that 
region and with Indonesia. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the official motto of Indonesia is “unity in 
diversity,” similar to Saskatchewan’s “from many peoples, 
strength.” And we have much in common beyond commerce, 
and we want to again further the relationship. Mr. Speaker, I 
would ask that all members of this Assembly take the 
opportunity now to welcome and thank His Excellency the 
Ambassador of Indonesia to Canada and his wife and officials 
from the embassy. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, it’s my honour to join with the Premier and 
welcome this esteemed delegation, this Indonesian delegation 
here today to the Saskatchewan Assembly. 
 
The relationship that Saskatchewan has with Indonesia is an 
incredibly important relationship highlighted in the words 
certainly by the Premier, exemplified in our very important 
trade relationship, but one that extends much further through to 
values that we espouse and live by as well. So it’s my honour to 
welcome His Excellency, along with his wife; as well as the 
representative, the ambassador from the embassy; and someone 
who’s a good friend to many in this Assembly, Rob Norris. 
 
It’s a pleasure to welcome Mr. Norris back to his Assembly. I’d 



936 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2016 

be interested in fact in what some of his views are on some of 
the debates that are in front of us here today. But I value his 
participation here today. I wish him well with his work with 
both the University of Saskatchewan as well with Canada 
World Youth. And I just join the Premier here today to 
welcome not just Mr. Norris but, most importantly, this very 
important Indonesian delegation to Saskatchewan’s Legislative 
Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I’ll take this opportunity to introduce a guest 
in our Assembly today. On August 3rd, 2016 the Board of 
Internal Economy recommended to the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan that Mr. Corey O’Soup be appointed to a 
five-year term in the role of Advocate for Children and Youth 
for the province of Saskatchewan effective November 1st, 
2016. Joining us today in the Speaker’s gallery are Mr. O’Soup 
and his wife, Jacinda, and the members of his family and 
friends. Corey, if you would give us a quick wave up there. 
 
All members are welcome to join me at a come-and-go 
welcome reception for Mr. O’Soup this afternoon in room 218 
from 12:30 until 2. Please join me in welcoming Mr. O’Soup to 
his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To 
you and through you, I would also like to extend a warm 
welcome and introduction to Corey O’Soup. Corey is 
Saskatchewan’s first Children’s Advocate who is First Nations 
and was the unanimous choice of the Board of Internal 
Economy for this position. 
 
He’s a former teacher, executive director for education, 
post-secondary ed, and training for the FSIN [Federation of 
Sovereign Indigenous Nations] and, most recently, the First 
Nations and Métis adviser for the Ministry of Education. 
 
After the tragic events in La Loche earlier this year, Corey led 
the government’s response and worked tirelessly with the 
community in the days and weeks following the shootings. I’ve 
been told by many people that Corey is positive and passionate 
for community building and improving the lives of all children. 
And he and I have already had an opportunity to speak and I 
can certainly attest to that. 
 
As the Speaker noted, he’s married to Jacinda and they have 
five children. So he’s well versed for this position, obviously. 
He recently said that he hopes his appointment to this role will 
tell his kids that they can be anything they want to be, which is 
fantastic. 
 
Joining Corey today, and this list is quite long so forgive me for 
this. Jacinda O’Soup, Corey’s lovely wife; Kayla O’Soup; Rhys 
O’Soup; Mia O’Soup; Enoch O’Soup; Sophy O’Soup; Allan 
O’Soup; Carole O’Soup — you guys have your own football 
team. Eileen Christopherson, Penny Rockthunder, David 
O’Soup, Grace Beck, Richard Beck, Chief Rodney Brass are 
here with you. Leah Brass, Greg Miller, Julie MacRae, Chuck 
Armstrong, and Holly Armstrong are all here to support you, 
Corey. Welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the loyal 
opposition and as a member of the board that went through the 
hiring process, I wanted to say welcome Corey O’Soup to his 
new role as Children’s Advocate. He’s going to provide I think 
excellent leadership in this role. It’s a hugely important one. 
And I know our critic here as well is going to be looking 
forward to working with Corey. But being young and fresh eyes 
and First Nations, this is going to be really exciting to see his 
approach to making sure all children in this province have a 
strong advocate in that office. 
 
And so I also want to welcome your family. This is an exciting 
day. And also the staff of the Children’s Advocate’s office, 
because I know they do outstanding work, thank you so much. 
And I welcome them to their legislature. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to join 
with you and the Minister of Social Services and the member 
across to introduce, welcome obviously, the Children’s 
Advocate, a man I’ve known for a long time and come to really 
know and love and respect. But to focus on the ones behind 
him, namely his mother and father, Pastor Allan and Carole 
O’Soup from the Key First Nation, Mr. Speaker. Had the 
opportunity to spend last Friday night with them, and we talked 
a lot about Corey and his family and how very proud they are of 
them and how proud all of us are of Corey as well. 
 
But to mention that, you know, Carole and Allan are here today, 
and to focus on the work that they’ve done in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, and outside the province, their ministry, their 
evangelical work that they’ve done around the world in fact, it’s 
hard to mention the impact that they’ve had. And they are truly 
amazing people. They’re mentors and great examples to me as 
well. And I just want to make mention of them in this 
Assembly, make sure everybody welcomes them as well. And 
also mention Allan said it was over 30 years since he’s been in 
this building. So welcome back to the building, Allan. Carole, 
welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join with the members in welcoming Mr. Corey O’Soup to his 
Legislative Assembly. And just to say ahneen sikwa, and to say 
with all these Brasses and O’Soups here, I don’t know if a Key 
First Nation band council meeting is going to break out or 
something like that, but it’s good to see you here and welcome 
to your Legislative Assembly. 
 
I also, while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I want to draw 
attention to folks seated in predominantly the western gallery 
but some in the eastern gallery as well. These are members of 
Unifor and in the main, Mr. Speaker, they represent workers 
from SaskTel. And these are workers that are concerned about 
the future of that organization which they play a tremendous 
part in building an institution that has innovation, good service, 
and good value for the people of Saskatchewan. And these are 
workers that take a great deal of pride in that work, Mr. 



October 27, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 937 

Speaker, so it’s a great thing to see them here today at their 
Legislative Assembly. If all members could join me in 
welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
welcome these people from Unifor to the Assembly today. I 
want to thank them for their hard work, the commitment 
they’ve made not just to SaskTel but to our province. The one 
thing that we share with them is a desire and a commitment to 
keep those jobs well and alive in our province of Saskatchewan, 
something that is incredibly important to all of the citizens of 
this province. And we thank them for the great work that they 
do. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 
and through you to all members of this Legislative Assembly, I 
want to introduce a couple of individuals in the west gallery, 
Mr. Speaker. We have Mr. Kris Jones and Cally Stephanow 
there. Mr. Speaker, Kris was a previous constituent of 
Rosthern-Shellbrook, growing up in the Medstead area with his 
parents there, Randy and Audrey Jones, on a farm just to the 
southwest of Medstead. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he had the opportunity to work in this building, in 
the minister’s office of Advanced Education, for a couple of 
years. I had the opportunity to work with Kris, and we’d sit in 
there and long about being back home in the Medstead, 
Shellbrook, and in the constituency of Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
But he has since left and he is off to Queen’s University to 
further his studies, Mr. Speaker, and we hope to have him back 
here in the province before too long. So to all members, I ask 
you to join me in welcoming Kris and Cally to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I’d like to welcome all guests to the Assembly 
today, but I would like to also remind them that they’re not to 
take part in the debate, which includes applause. 
 
With that, we’ll move on to presenting petitions. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition to stop the redirection of funding of 
the Northern Teacher Education Program Council Inc., 
NORTEP [northern teacher education program]. 
 
As a recent report shows that 94 per cent of the NORTEP grads 
found employment in the North, and the North has improved 
teacher retention rates in northern Saskatchewan overall. 
NORTEP has had a very positive economic impact in northern 
Saskatchewan, and it provides high-quality, face-to-face 
instruction and services to the students. 
 
[10:15] 
 

Mr. Speaker, the province’s financial deficit cannot be fixed by 
cutting indigenous education in the North and a program that 
has served the North for over 40 years. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

We, in the prayer, respectfully request that the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the Saskatchewan Party 
government to immediately restore their five-year 
agreement to fund the NORTEP program, and to continue 
funding NORTEP-NORPAC programs in La Ronge. 

 
And we have many petitions signed throughout the province, 
Mr. Speaker, and the three pages of petition that I’m going to 
present today have been signed by people from Air Ronge, La 
Ronge, from Regina, from Fond-du-Lac. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from the citizens who are opposed to 
the federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they, like those of us in this House and indeed I 
think everyone across this province, were shocked and appalled 
when Prime Minister Trudeau unilaterally announced his 
national carbon tax, and at a terrible timing, right when our 
provincial and territorial Environment ministers were meeting 
and working hard to find a solution to our carbon emissions in 
this country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people who signed these petitions agree — 
and I talked to a lot of them as they were signing — with the 
innovation and technology such as our investment in Boundary 
dam 3 and the vast investment that we have made, we’ll do far 
more to solve the problems of carbon CO2 emissions than will 
any carbon tax. A view, Mr. Speaker, that was also shared by 
the UN [United Nations] secretary at a COP [Conference of the 
Parties] 21 last December when they outlined in their report the 
good work that’s being done here in Saskatchewan, and is 
certainly highlighted in that report the work that Saskatchewan 
is doing to reduce CO2 emissions. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read 
the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that as follows, we respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to ensure the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by the good citizens of 
Battlefords, North Battleford, Prince Albert, Shellbrook, Speers, 
Parkside, Leask, Marcelin, Holbein, Cameo, Canwood, 
Mayfair, Wild Rose, Leoville and Victoire. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition regarding the protection of wetlands in our 
system. They serve a very vital function in our ecosystem, and 
they take the form of marshes, bogs, fens, swamps, and open 



938 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2016 

water. They’re home to wildlife including waterfowl, and they 
clean the water running off of agricultural fields. In some parts 
of the prairies, as much as 90 per cent of our wetlands have 
disappeared, and as they disappear so too do the many benefits 
that they provide. Sound wetland policy will allow 
Saskatchewan to provide sustainable development for all 
sectors of business in the province. I’d like to read to prayer: 
 

We, in the petition that reads as follows, respectfully 
request the Government of Saskatchewan to: 
 
Increase funding to do the proper inventory work, putting 
Saskatchewan in a better position to manage the water 
resource; 
 
Speed up the evaluation of high-risk watersheds where 
there is significant damage annually from flooding; and 
 
Create a sound and transparent mitigation process that 
adequately addresses sustainable development. The 
sequence should first focus on avoiding the environmental 
harm whenever possible before a secondary focus on 
minimizing the harm, with compensation being sought 
only when the development is deemed essential and the 
first two stages cannot be met. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitions I present today are signed by citizens 
from Saskatoon and Delisle. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition in support of Wakamow Valley 
Authority. And we know that as a result of the passage of The 
Wakamow Valley Authority Amendment Act, 2016 on June 30th, 
the Wakamow Valley Authority lost statutory funding of 
$127,000 from the Saskatchewan government, in addition to 
$30,000 supplementary funding. And this loss of annual 
funding negatively affects the ability of Wakamow to maintain 
its lands and repair its facilities and provide services to Moose 
Jaw. This funding cut resulted in a layoff of one-third of the 
park staff, which included two summer students and two regular 
employees. But, Mr. Speaker, on June 21st, 2016 the provincial 
government, including the members from Moose Jaw, voted in 
favour of this bill resulting in cuts to Wakamow and subsequent 
job losses. I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to immediately repeal The Wakamow Valley Authority 
Amendment Act, 2016 and reinstate statutory funding to the 
Wakamow Valley Authority. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present to you a petition condemning the Saskatchewan Party’s 
cuts to the SAID [Saskatchewan assured income for disability] 
program. After nearly a decade of wasting the economic boom 
and blowing through the savings, the government is now 
forcing the province’s most vulnerable people to pay for the 
Sask Party mismanagement. The Sask Party’s latest 
cold-hearted cut will take money away from people who are 
unable to work due to a disability. The many people who are 
being hurt by the Sask Party cuts live with serious illnesses such 
as multiple sclerosis, cancer, autism, and many other illnesses. 
And contrary to the Minister of Social Services’s claims, the 
government underfunds clients in regards to shelter allowance, 
and shelter allowance should be reflective of the current rental 
costs. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to stop their plan to cut 
the SAID funding and immediately restore funding for 
those living with a disability; that shelter allowance is 
reflective of the current rental costs; and that the 
Saskatchewan Party government implement the 
recommendations of the advisory group on poverty 
reduction. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions were signed by people living in the 
communities of Prince Albert, Hagen, St. Louis, and North 
Battleford. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition in 
support of sexual abuse prevention curriculum in 
Saskatchewan. The undersigned of this petition wish to draw 
our attention to the following: the fact that Saskatchewan has 
the second-highest rate of child sexual abuse in Canada; that 
Stats Canada data shows that 55 per cent of all victims of sexual 
offences were children under the age of 18. 
 
Child sexual abuse has lasting impact throughout the child’s 
lifetime, including PTSD [post-traumatic stress disorder], 
depression, anxiety, and low self-esteem. Those impacts also 
include decreased school attendance and achievement, 
decreased productivity throughout the lifespan. Victims of 
sexual child abuse are four times more likely to commit suicide, 
and currently there is no comprehensive elementary or 
secondary curriculum regarding prevention and reporting of 
sexual child abuse in Saskatchewan. As a province, it is our 
shared responsibility to protect children and youth, to educate 
them, as every child has the right to be protected and safe. I’ll 
read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan take immediate 
concrete action to develop and implement Erin’s law, and 
that such legislation would ensure that a comprehensive 
health education program be developed and implemented, 
which would require age-appropriate sexual abuse and 
assault awareness and prevention education in grades 



October 27, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 939 

pre-K through grade 12, along with training school staff on 
the prevention of child abuse. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those signing this petition today are from Regina. 
I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
another batch of petitions calling for a stop to the Sask Party 
plan to sell off SaskTel. The petitioners point out that after 
nearly a decade of wasting the economic boom and blowing 
through the savings, the government is now forcing 
Saskatchewan people to pay for Sask Party mismanagement. 
 
They point out that in the recent campaign, Brad Wall . . . 
Pardon me, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party government promised 
they would not privatize SaskTel. They point out that instead of 
looking at their own waste and scandal, the Sask Party is now 
talking about breaking their promise and looking to sell off 
SaskTel to make a quick dollar. And we know they’re looking 
at a few different ways to do that, Mr. Speaker. And in the 
prayer that reads as follows: 
 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the Saskatchewan Party 
government to keep their promise, stop their plan to sell off 
SaskTel, and keep our valued Crown corporation in the 
hands of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular batch of petitions is signed by 
individuals from Harris, Esterhazy, Rocanville, Drake, 
Bredenbury, Saskatoon, Grandora, and Swift Current, Mr. 
Speaker. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition calling on the government to reverse the cuts 
to the Aboriginal court worker program. The Government of 
Saskatchewan cut the budget for the Aboriginal court worker 
program in the 2016-2017 provincial budget. And as we know 
on this side, the Aboriginal court workers play an important role 
helping Aboriginal people in criminal and child apprehension 
cases, that Aboriginal peoples are disproportionately 
represented in Saskatchewan’s correctional centres, and 
Aboriginal court workers successfully help to make our 
communities safer through reduced recidivism rates. I’d like to 
read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan reverse its 
short-sighted and counterproductive cuts to the Aboriginal 
court worker program. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those who signed this petition today come from 
the Regina area, and I do so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH [Global Transportation Hub]. 

Remembering Jim Prentice  
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — On October 14th, I lost a friend. 
Canada lost a statesman, and a family lost a husband and father. 
On that day the Hon. Jim Prentice, former MP [Member of 
Parliament], federal cabinet minister, and Premier of Alberta 
was tragically killed. Jim was a true public servant in every 
sense of the term. He was there to serve. He was a gentleman, 
and he was a leader. 
 
I knew Jim from my time in PC [Progressive Conservative] 
youth politics in Alberta nearly 20 years ago. We were rookie 
members of parliament together. We shared a critic portfolio in 
opposition. After we formed government in 2006, Jim was 
tasked to chair the operations committee of the cabinet, which 
in essence made him the deputy prime minister. 
 
I had the privilege to work with him daily during this time. 
What I saw was a man of truly monumental talents, able to 
manage the most complex and difficult issues imaginable with 
dexterity and compassion, a work ethic that drove him to master 
details and understand nuance, and judgment that allowed him 
over and over again to make the right decision for the right 
reasons. 
 
Jim was respected by all those he interacted with in public life, 
which speaks volumes to his character. He will be deeply 
missed as a public figure, and Canada will be the lesser for his 
absence. I will miss the private man I knew: a great person, a 
dedicated family man, a valued source of advice, and a dear 
friend. Tomorrow Jim will be laid to rest. We will miss him. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Violence Prevention Week in Saskatchewan  
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, this week is Violence Prevention 
Week in Saskatchewan, as has been noted. Among the 
provinces, Saskatchewan holds the shameful distinction of 
having some of the worst rates of violence in the country, two 
times the national rate. But there are many groups here in 
Regina and across this province that are doing great work to 
close that gap and to save lives. 
 
The Provincial Association of Transition Houses Saskatchewan, 
or PATHS for short, does great work in this province, 
coordinating and advocating for women’s shelters and services 
across Saskatchewan. They do work to provide training for the 
workers in women’s shelters so they can give the best possible 
care and support for women who are facing violence. 
 
Saskatchewan Towards Offering Partnership Solutions to 
Violence, or STOPS to Violence, is working hard to make sure 
that everyone in our province is able to be safe and free from 
violence. With specific programs and resources to help women, 
new Canadians, LGBTQ [lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, 
queer and/or questioning] folks, indigenous peoples, seniors, 
and people with disabilities, STOPS to Violence focuses on the 
people in our province who are at most risk for violence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all need to do so much more to address 
violence in our province, but I ask all members to join me today 



940 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2016 

in recognizing Violence Prevention Week and by thanking 
PATHS and STOPS for the great work that they do to make 
Saskatchewan a safer place for everyone. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Regina Pulse Week 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Pulse crops are 
important for Saskatchewan’s agriculture industry and are a 
major source of our province’s global exports. They’re not only 
good for the economy but also for our health and the 
environment. Pulses are packed with nutrients. Pulses are one of 
the best sources of fibre on earth. They contain vitamins and 
minerals, including iron, potassium, and folate. Pulses can help 
prevent type 2 diabetes, reduce bad cholesterol levels, and 
lower the risk of heart attack and stroke. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this week has been designated Regina Pulse 
Week. It was created by Economic Development Regina and 
Tourism Regina to bring awareness about the impact of the 
pulse industry in our local community, province, and the world. 
It also coincides with the United Nations declaring 2016 the 
Year of Pulses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, events have taken place all week, and it will 
culminate with a restaurant contest, media tour, and power 
lunch and reception, VIP [very important person] dinner 
tomorrow. As one would expect, pulse crops will be featured in 
the menu, and I hope all members can check out these local 
dishes. 
 
[10:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in 
acknowledging the global value of pulse crops, our local 
producers who grow them, as well as sponsors and volunteers 
of the week who are bringing awareness to this amazing crop. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Pelagie Maurice Celebrates 102nd Birthday 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
recognize a constituent of mine who just turned 102 years old. 
 
Pelagie Maurice was born in Ile-a-la-Crosse, Saskatchewan on 
October 24, 1914 to Daniel Malboeuf and Marie Jourdain. Her 
mother died in the spring during the 1918 worldwide flu 
pandemic. Her father died the following fall. Pelagie’s 
grandmother, Anne Bekkattla, took care of her, and with the 
help of people like George and Germaine Murray, who 
provided fresh game from the forest, they never went hungry 
with their help. 
 
Her grandmother sent Pelagie to a nearby Beauval Indian 
residential school at a very young age, where she lived until she 
was married. She married Jacob Maurice, a man that she had 
not met until she was at the altar on July 12th, 1932. A priest at 
the boarding school had arranged their marriage. 
 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 
 
In Cree, Mr. Speaker, I asked how did she feel about meeting 
her husband on the day of her wedding because it was an 
arranged marriage. And she said, well when he walked in the 
church, I found him very handsome, she said. 
 
Pelagie and Jacob went on to raise 12 children and 2 
grandchildren. She always loved to knit and sew throughout her 
life. Pelagie celebrated her 102nd birthday with her family early 
this week in Beauval, and her memory is incredible. She is 
continually consulted about many past events in northwestern 
Saskatchewan. She is a living encyclopedia of historical facts, 
family trees, and stories, and speaks Cree, Michif, French, 
English, and some Dene. 
 
I ask all members to join me in recognizing the remarkable life 
of a very fine lady from northwestern Saskatchewan, Mrs. 
Pelagie Maurice, and wish her a very happy birthday. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 

Reopening of Choiceland Museum 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was pleased to 
be invited to join with the community of Choiceland on August 
20th to celebrate the grand reopening of the Choiceland 
museum. A dedicated group of volunteers and board members 
all worked together to make sure that the museum’s new 
location was ready at the former St. Mark’s Lutheran Church. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the master of ceremonies was treasurer Jan 
Misselbrook who guided us through the event where the history 
of the region and the museum was showcased. It was great to 
see so many of the original founding members present at the 
grand reopening of the museum, first founded in 1995. 
 
President Thelma Kelsey cut the ribbon to mark the official 
opening. In addition to the ribbon cutting, there was live music, 
local art displays, friendly community leaders, and of course, 
Choiceland and district’s rich history on display. The whole 
community supported this many months of work to get to this 
celebration, which I can personally attest to as I walked through 
the museum, visited with young and old, and thoroughly 
enjoyed the numerous homemade pies on hand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many small towns across Canada have amazing 
local museums like the one in Choiceland that are key to 
preserving our rural heritage. I would like to ask all members to 
join with me in congratulating the museum association, their 
volunteers, and community of Choiceland on the grand 
reopening of their museum. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 

Local Entrepreneur Named to Coaches Council  
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — One of the great things about 
my job is getting to learn about all the amazing things that 
people are doing across the province of Saskatchewan. And as 
Minister Responsible for the Status of Women, it is my pleasure 
to recognize an outstanding accomplishment of a local Regina 
business leader. 



October 27, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 941 

Many of us are familiar with Forbes, the Forbes company, 
which is a financial and economic leader. Mr. Speaker, earlier 
this month Heather Pinay, a business consultant and owner of 
Authentically: Business & Life Solutions, was invited to 
become a member of the prestigious Forbes Coaches Council. 
The honour of joining this invitation-only organization is 
extended to a select number of business, career, and 
professional coaches. 
 
At the time Heather was welcomed into the council, its 
exclusive membership was comprised of just 300 members 
from North America, including just five from Canada. I think it 
is just tremendous that a woman and an entrepreneur from 
Saskatchewan is now on that panel. Mr. Speaker, Heather is the 
first member of the council from Saskatchewan. 
 
As a member of the Forbes Coaches Council, she and her 
business will be able to take advantage of exclusive benefits 
and resources, including having the opportunity to have articles 
regularly published on the Forbes web page, which has nearly 
38 million monthly readers. 
 
Heather started her business, Authentically, in February of this 
year and it has already achieved tremendous success, making an 
impact on nearly 35 Saskatchewan-based businesses. I’ve had 
the opportunity to work with Heather and her team, and I ask all 
members of this Assembly to join me in congratulating Heather 
Pinay on being named to the Forbes Coaches Council, and in 
wishing her continued success. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 

Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres 
Banquet 

 
Mr. Fiaz: — Mr. Speaker, last night the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rehabilitation Centres hosted their Celebrate 
Success Banquet. This banquet is hosted by SARC 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres] each year 
to recognize the achievements of some extraordinary 
Saskatchewan residents who have done important work 
improving the lives of individuals experiencing disabilities. 
 
Dutch Industries was honoured with the Employer of 
Excellence Award, and Ethos Salon was presented the 
Volunteer of Distinction Award. 
 
Additionally, Greg Sommerfeldt, Aaron Magnus, Ryan Bender, 
and Trudy Linka received Al McGuire Awards in recognition of 
enhancements they made to their own lives in life skills, 
employment, community involvement, and independent living. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SARC does outstanding work furthering 
employment opportunities for individuals experiencing 
disabilities and also works collaboratively with the Ministry of 
Social Services on a variety of projects that benefit 
community-based organizations, individuals, and families 
across Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government-wide investment to support 
people with disabilities is over $3 billion since 2008. 
Organizations like SARC and individuals like award winners 
supporting our vision . . . Mr. Speaker, please join me in 

congratulating the winners. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Privatization of Crown Corporations 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Betrayal. Desperate. Unacceptable. A 
desperate, damaging sell-off. These are just some of the words 
that I’ve been hearing from people all across Saskatchewan 
since the announcement yesterday that the Sask Party 
government is moving forward with massive privatization of 
our Crown corporations. 
 
Our Crowns were built by and for Saskatchewan people. They 
deliver a massive economic and public benefit. The Premier, the 
Premier promised not to privatize them. Hand over heart, he 
took the pledge to Saskatchewan people. Now he’s throwing it 
all away just to make a quick buck. 
 
Why does he think, why does he think he can break that 
promise and betray Saskatchewan people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank my 
honourable friend for the question. I want to say to members of 
this House and through this House to anybody observing the 
proceedings that we intend to keep the promises that we made 
in the election with respect to the Crown corporation. We are 
going to keep the promises that we’ve made with respect to the 
Crown corporation protection Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The bill that was introduced yesterday by the Attorney General 
does not amend the Crown protection Act. It does provide an 
amendment in the miscellaneous . . . in The Interpretation Act 
of the province of Saskatchewan, and it seeks to simply define 
privatization. We have this legislation in front of us that 
prescribes for the protection of Crown corporations from 
privatization, but the definition is never offered of privatization. 
 
So the definition that we are adopting as a government is the 
definition used by the World Bank, and that definition is that if 
you privatize an organization, it means you lose control of it. 
You lose more than 50 per cent of that company. We’re not 
prepared to allow that to happen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We want to ensure that Crown corporations continue in the 
province of Saskatchewan, that they’re protected in the 
province of Saskatchewan, that a majority ownership of all of 
those assets remains in the province of Saskatchewan. We’re 
committed to the Crown corporation protection Act. We’ve 
campaigned on it in three elections. That promise remains, Mr. 
Speaker, and we will keep that promise. 
 
The Speaker: — I caution the opposition. If you ask the 
question, please respect the member that is answering it and 
limit your heckling, please. I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — That Premier’s word should matter. This 
is a complete betrayal of Saskatchewan people. It was this 



942 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2016 

Premier and it was that Sask Party that made a mess of our 
finances through scandal and mismanagement. They continue to 
refuse to come clean on the real size of the deficit, their record 
debt. They deny their cuts. And day after day they won’t come 
clean on their GTH scandal. 
 
And now they’re looking to do an end run, an end run on our 
Crown corporations with privatization, a massive privatization, 
just looking to make a quick buck. Let me be clear. New 
Democrats along with Saskatchewan New Democrats will fight 
this every step of the way. How does this Premier, how does 
this Premier think it’s right to make people pay for the Sask 
Party’s mismanagement and scandal through this short-sighted 
and damaging privatization? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition’s 
debating a privatization initiative that doesn’t exist. What 
privatization? To which privatization is he referring? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — A bunch of goofy wordplay and a word 
that’s not being honoured by this Premier, and a change that 
allows massive privatization — our province deserves much 
better than that from this Premier. He should be ashamed of 
himself, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me be clear. This is an end run on privatization of our 
Crown corporations built by and for Saskatchewan people. The 
Premier’s breaking a clear promise, going back on his own 
word. And he’s shutting out the owners of our Crown 
corporations — the people of Saskatchewan, the shareholders of 
our Crown corporations. They’re the shareholders. They’re the 
owners, not him, Mr. Speaker. 
 
To the Premier: why doesn’t he have the backbone and the 
decency to go to the people of Saskatchewan on something as 
big as the privatization of our Crown corporations? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the emotions of 
the Leader of the Opposition. I want to be very clear for the 
Assembly that what the . . . The change to The Interpretation 
Act actually prevents privatization in the Crown corporations. 
The definition that has been proposed to this Assembly is a 
World Bank definition, and it means precisely that the 
government, this one or a future government, cannot privatize 
the Crown corporations. 
 
What it might allow for though . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
Well if members are interested in the answer, I would share 
with them what the definition might allow for. Today, today we 
have a couple of major government . . . Today we have . . . Well 
the member from Athabasca might be interested in this. Today 
in Saskatchewan we have a couple of major government 
investment funds: the Sask Auto Fund and the Workers’ 
Compensation Board. Those funds make major investments on 
Bay Street. They make major investments in Canadian 
corporations. Those funds, those Saskatchewan public 
investment funds cannot make an investment in their own 

companies. They couldn’t make an investment in SaskTel in 
this province. They couldn’t make an investment in any of the 
Crowns. 
 
This legislation would allow, would allow for pension funds, 
public pension funds in this province; it would allow for 
Workers’ Compensation Board in this province, for the 
Saskatchewan Auto Fund to make an investment in those 
Crown corporations rather than investing in Bay Street in 
Toronto, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What it will not allow, what this change will not allow, is the 
privatization of Crown corporations. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Auditor’s Report and Details of Land Transaction 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Privatization is privatization is 
privatization, and that Premier is selling out Saskatchewan 
people, Mr. Speaker. And the people have a tough time 
matching the Premier’s words with his actions lately. 
 
They have a lot of questions about the Sask Party’s refusal to 
stand up and own up when it comes to the Sask Party’s GTH 
land scandal. We know that cabinet discussed it twice, at least 
twice. And we know that the Premier . . . Well we know who 
the Premier is. And so, Mr. Speaker, it seems clear that either 
the Premier is in on it or he was incompetent. And I don’t think 
it’s the latter. Which is it, Mr. Premier? 
 
[10:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what the Leader 
of the Opposition is inferring. He just used the words, in on it. 
Mr. Speaker, he just used the words, in on it. His context, his 
preamble was about a scandal that doesn’t exist, so I would just 
ask my honourable friend, in the interest of debate in this 
Assembly, I would ask my honourable friend to clarify what he 
meant by, in on it. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — I’d ask the Premier just to answer the 
question. We have a scandal that wasted millions of dollars. We 
have a Premier that won’t answer simple, basic questions day 
in, day out. 
 
My question to him: what is he hiding? Or is this just a question 
of incompetence? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, let’s revisit history here with 
respect to the NDP’s [New Democratic Party] position on the 
Global Transportation Hub. That member that just asked the 
question and the NDP raised concerns and questions about the 
Global Transportation Hub. They said the Provincial Auditor 
should look at this particular deal. They said the Provincial 
Auditor should have access to all of the documents. 
 



October 27, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 943 

What happened, Mr. Speaker? I asked . . . Together with the 
cabinet, we passed an order in council to have the Provincial 
Auditor look at every aspect of this deal, every single aspect. 
Mr. Speaker, we were asked by the auditor if they could have 
access to cabinet documents, which is not always done in our 
system of government. We said, absolutely. You can have 
access to every minute, to every cabinet document. Her report’s 
complete. She highlighted concerns around communications 
between ministry. But here’s what she said, Mr. Speaker, in the 
press release that attached to her report — that there was no 
evidence, no evidence, no evidence of fraud or of conflict of 
interest by the board of directors, which includes the minister 
who was involved in those cabinet discussions. 
 
She went on to say in the media on July the 4th, 2016, in the 
public media of this province, she said very clearly, there were 
no red flags. That doesn’t fit his conspiracy. That doesn’t fit his 
particular agenda, but it’s what the auditor said. Now if he 
thinks the auditor is wrong, he should stand up and say it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — The Premier plays fast and loose with 
the facts, Mr. Speaker. We called for a judicial inquiry of this 
GTH land scandal. The auditor’s report exonerated no one and 
was scathing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me try another one to the Premier. He hasn’t been 
answering any questions on this front. Why did the cabinet, 
why did the cabinet work so hard, so hard to keep the name of 
the Sask Party-supporting Alberta land baron, who also 
happened to rent land from the then minister, off that 
transaction? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Here are the facts, Mr. Speaker. The 
Provincial Auditor had full authority to look into every element 
of this transaction that she felt appropriate. She had access to 
every document to which she asked, including cabinet 
documents. She had access to every individual to whom she 
wished to speak. She made a very thorough report based on a 
very thorough audit. And her conclusion, Mr. Speaker, was that 
there was no wrongdoing, that there was no fraud, and that there 
was no conflict of interest. She further indicated that there were 
no red flags that would require further inquiry on her behalf. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition has had a night to think about his 
position on this matter. He was asked about three or four times 
yesterday whether he agrees with the conclusion of the 
Provincial Auditor, whether he has confidence in the Provincial 
Auditor and her work. This is a very serious matter, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s a very serious parliamentary issue, whether he 
does or doesn’t have confidence in an independent officer of the 
Assembly. Does the Leader of the Opposition have confidence 
in the Provincial Auditor? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Full stop. We certainly have trust in the 
Provincial Auditor. But we have no confidence and no trust in 

the government. That was not a forensic audit. There’s been no 
judicial inquiry, and that audit itself was scathing and 
exonerated no one. 
 
The question once again. We know that the fact was that that 
Sask Party-supporting Alberta land baron that rented land to the 
then minister made a sweet 6 mil or so on this deal, all while the 
nuns were ripped off, being threatened with expropriation. My 
question to the Premier: why did the Sask Party work so hard, 
work so hard to keep his name off the deed? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think I just 
heard the Leader of the Opposition express his confidence in 
the Provincial Auditor. I would assume that would extend to the 
work that has been done by the Provincial Auditor. 
 
This side of the House, the government has accepted the report, 
has accepted the recommendations from that report, all 10 of 
them, and are working to implement them. And the government 
has accepted the conclusion of that report done by the 
Provincial Auditor. That conclusion, that conclusion as related 
in the press release attached to the report was that there was no 
wrongdoing, that there was no fraud, and that there was no 
conflict of interest. Does the Leader of the Opposition accept 
that conclusion? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Day after day we see this government 
try to find some sort of cover. The report of the Provincial 
Auditor was scathing, and it merits answers from this 
government — something that day in, day out we’ll press for, 
but aren’t coming from this government. The question is 
simple. There’s the land baron that supported the Sask Party 
that has a relationship with the government, that made a sweet 6 
mil. I think his name was on the . . . Well it actually wasn’t 
even on the title. Why did the Sask Party work so hard, so hard 
to keep this individual’s name off that title? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — The fact of the matter again, Mr. 
Speaker, is that the Provincial Auditor had complete and total 
authority to look into every element of this transaction to which 
she felt appropriate. She looked into the issue raised by the 
Leader of the Opposition. Her conclusion was that there was no 
wrongdoing, there was no fraud, and that there was no conflict 
of interest. She had access to the entirety of documents with 
respect to the matter. She had access to every individual with 
respect to the matter. And what her conclusion was after that 
very thorough audit, to which she had access to every document 
and individual, was that there was no fraud, that there was no 
conflict of interest, and that there was no wrongdoing. 
 
And again, again the Leader of the Opposition . . . I think it’s 
important that he answer the question as to whether he, whether 
he has confidence in the work that the auditor did, whether he 
has confidence in the work that the auditor did, who obviously 
did a very, very thorough audit with respect to all of the matters 



944 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2016 

that he is asking questions about. The auditor answered those 
questions and her conclusion was that there was no 
wrongdoing. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — This is pathetic, Mr. Speaker. The 
question was to the Premier. Not a single answer. I think it’s 
time that the Sask Party answer a question in this Legislative 
Assembly, not this opposition. 
 
That report of the auditor’s was not a forensic audit. But what it 
was, was scathing. It exonerated no one. And it showed, of 
course, that the then minister had his hands all over this thing. 
And it also showed that the Alberta . . . Sask Party-supporting 
Alberta land baron that has a relationship to government, that he 
had a . . . that he was . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who’s that? 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — It would seem that his name never 
showed up on that deed. My question . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . The Premier’s saying, who am I talking about? 
I think it’s time this Premier dig into this file, get to the bottom, 
then come clean to Saskatchewan people. Why did the Sask 
Party work so hard to keep that individual off that title? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — The fact is, Mr. Speaker, the Provincial 
Auditor has got to the bottom of all of the questions being 
raised. They just don’t like the answer, Mr. Speaker. The 
Provincial Auditor had full authority to look into every element 
of this. Cabinet did not prescribe what sort of audit that would 
be done; that was up to the Provincial Auditor. 
 
She chose to proceed on the basis of which she did, which was 
a very thorough audit of all documents of all individuals 
involved in the transaction. She got to the bottom of this. And 
what she said was that there was no wrongdoing, there was no 
fraud, there was no conflict of interest, and in a later interview 
said there were no red flags that would merit follow-up. 
 
Does the Leader of the Opposition have support, have 
confidence in the conclusions of the Provincial Auditor? Yes or 
no? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Second Bridge for Prince Albert 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, sometimes that government 
refuses to provide answers. Sometimes, like when it comes to 
managing the economy, they obviously just don’t have them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all movement of goods and people across the 
Northern Saskatchewan River is restricted to a narrow, 
dangerous, and poorly maintained bridge. We are talking about 
a key artery in and out of northern Saskatchewan. A second 
bridge will benefit all points north and provide an alternate 
route in the event that the Diefenbaker bridge needs to close. A 

second bridge is good for the economy, and it’s good for 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
So will the new minister show a new tone and commit to the 
newly elected councils in Prince Albert and all of the northern 
communities that this government will build that second 
bridge? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
member opposite for the question. We’ve had a meeting in 
September with the city officials from P.A. [Prince Albert] and 
the RMs [rural municipality] around that. We’re working with 
them. We’ve agreed to do a study on the bridge that we’re 
going to do. As we speak now, it’s going to tender, and that’s 
going to be done by an independent. And we’re working with 
the city and the RMs on the bridge that we have and the 
structure that we have. 
 
In regards to the second bridge, I wanted to say this, Mr. 
Speaker: that we are the first ones, the province is the first ones 
that we’ve come to the table and said, we will be there. Now we 
need the city and the federal government to come to the table. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Role of Government in Delivery of Education 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, that clearly shows a lack of 
respect for my city and for my democratically elected city 
council. It also shows a lack of understanding for the needs of 
municipalities across the North. That is exactly why rural and 
local voices are so important and why local democracy matters. 
 
Yesterday, even though he was given a bunch of chances to 
change his answer, the Education minister refused to rule out 
removing democratically elected trustees and replacing them 
with Sask Party appointees. Last spring the Advanced 
Education minister refused to rule out the same thing. So will 
the Minister of Government Relations split from her colleagues, 
stand up for democracy, and commit to supporting and 
defending the democratically elected municipal councillors? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite made 
a wide-ranging statement regarding democracy in a general 
sense, elected trustees, elected councillors. Mr. Speaker, this is 
part . . . the side of the government that strongly believes in 
government, strongly believes in the . . . [inaudible] . . . input of 
our officials. And, Mr. Speaker, we intend to work with all of 
the new people, whether it be a mayor, a councillor, a school 
board trustee. Those are all people who have put a lot of time 
and their own credibility at stake to have run, and we thank 
them all for the work that they’ve done in having run for the 
election, whether they were successful or whether they were 
not. 
 
I instructed my office earlier today to send a letter to each 



October 27, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 945 

successful school board trustee, thanking them for having run 
and looking forward to working with them. Over the next few 
months we will be dealing with issues of transformational 
change, how best to ensure that we deliver the best quality 
education to the students of our province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Coroner’s Inquests 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, hopefully that minister can 
convince his colleagues that democracy matters too. Yesterday 
there was another troubling new piece of legislation put 
forward. After increasing the personnel in the coroner’s office, 
we had high hopes that it would make more positive changes 
that would help families get more answers in a timely manner. 
Instead, now they’re removing the requirement for the coroner 
to hold an inquest into a death in custody. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the whole point. Those inquests are meant 
to provide transparency and justice, and they give the family 
some answers. Some of those who died were in remand or 
police custody and had yet to even been convicted of a crime. 
Why does the minister think it is necessary to repeal this 
section? I know they don’t like giving us answers, but the 
families who’ve lost loved ones deserve nothing less. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, these amendments that we brought forward in the draft 
legislation, in the legislation yesterday, were thoroughly 
canvassed with the coroner’s office, Mr. Speaker. And make no 
mistake, if there’s an in death . . . death in custody, Mr. 
Speaker, they will still be investigated by the coroner’s office. 
 
The latitude given to the coroner now with respect to the 
changes that have been brought forward, he will decide whether 
or not a coroner’s inquest is appropriate in the circumstances. 
But they’ll still be investigated, Mr. Speaker. There’s 
oftentimes, when there’s a regrettable death in custody, it may 
be a natural cause, Mr. Speaker, and the chief coroner has 
advised that there does not need to be an inquest in respect of 
every death in custody. But I can assure the member that they 
will be investigated, and the coroner will make the appropriate 
determination as to whether or not an inquest should be held. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, the change removes the 
requirement and leaves the discretion up to the coroner and the 
minister. That is not appropriate. In August last year, Breanna 
Kannick died in custody. In December last year, Shauna Wolf 
died in custody. In February, a 38-year-old man died in custody, 
and at the beginning of this month, yet another man died in 
custody. And on top of these deaths, a scathing report was put 
out just a few months ago by the child and youth advocate, 
highlighting many issues with Corrections that contributed to a 
youth death in custody. 
 

[11:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, currently, unless the coroner is satisfied that the 
person’s death was entirely a result of natural causes and that it 
was not preventable, an inquest is required. That is no longer 
the case. With so many deaths and a report highlighting the 
issue, why is the government now choosing to remove the need 
for investigations? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Let me say this, Mr. Speaker. We have 
full confidence in the chief coroner with respect to the decisions 
that he makes when it comes to calling an inquest. And when 
we do have a concern about that, Mr. Speaker, we’re more than 
willing within the Ministry of Justice to direct inquests be held, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I can assure the member opposite and the people of this 
province that investigations will be done with respect to every 
in-custody death. They’re all regrettable, Mr. Speaker, but not 
each one needs to have a coroner’s inquest. 
 
The chief coroner has shown his professionalism with respect to 
the conduct of his office, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll continue to 
have confidence in the coroner’s office with respect to the 
decisions that he makes. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

Changes to Workers’ Compensation 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, more than a year ago, this 
government struck its workers’ compensation committee of 
review. They toured the province listening to employers and 
workers about how we can improve workers’ compensation 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
This week the legislature took an important step. Showing how 
important it is, both sides of this House came together; we 
collaborated, and passed legislation to include psychological 
injuries for all workers. But there still is plenty of room for 
improvement when it comes to workers’ compensation. People 
still feel like they’re being put on trial for getting injured at 
work, and the benefits they get don’t allow people to live with 
the dignity they deserve. 
 
This report should hold some important solutions, so people 
want to know a definitive answer: when will this government 
release the committee’s report and when can we expect changes 
for workers here in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I met with the 
committee of review in June of this year and had discussions 
with them about their recommendations as they were finalizing 
the report. They indicated to me at that time that one of the 
recommendations was going to be that we look at and do a 
careful analysis of where the province was on post-traumatic 
stress disorder. 



946 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2016 

In response to that, without waiting for the report, we did some 
canvassing of the various professions that would be affected by 
this. And I would like to thank the members opposite for their 
support for the bill that was passed yesterday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can advise that I have followed up with the 
ministry officials and I understand that the report will be 
released in November of this year, so within a few days from 
now. And I look forward to working with the members opposite 
on whatever other recommendations are in there. 
 
We also would like to take this opportunity to thank the people 
that worked on the committee of review, did their consultation, 
travelled around the province. The safety and security of our 
workers is something that we should all value. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Government House Leader on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, 
I ask leave to move a motion regarding the Advocate for 
Children and Youth. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Appointment of Advocate for Children and Youth 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move the 
following motion: 
 

That pursuant to section 3 of The Advocate for Children 
and Youth Act, Corey O’Soup be appointed to the position 
of Advocate for Children and Youth. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
the motion: 
 

That pursuant to section 3, The Advocate for Children and 
Youth Act, Corey O’Soup would be appointed to the 
position of Advocate for Children and Youth. 
 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 
 

Rural and Remote Health Care 
 
Mr. Steele: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to stand here in 
front of you, this government, and the people of Saskatchewan 
to speak on health care, specifically in rural and remote areas 
today. At the end of my remarks, I will make a motion that will 
support the continuation of the government’s support, funding, 
and innovation in areas of rural and remote health care. 
 
I want to start by pointing out that this government has been a 
leader in the field of health care since we’ve taken office in 
2007, including reduction of wait times and increase in health 
care spending. The leadership has been shown not only in the 
benefit to urban care centres but also those in rural and remote 
areas of this province. Mr. Speaker, we have made significant 
improvements towards recruiting health care professionals and 
creating facilities and pioneering innovative services throughout 
the rural and remote areas of this province. 
 
In the area of physician recruitment for the province, the 
numbers speak for themselves: a 37 per cent increase in 
physicians from the previous government’s time in office. That 
is nearly 650 more licensed physicians. It is not just general 
physicians. Since 2007 the number of specialists in 
Saskatchewan has grown up to 35 per cent. The Canadian 
Institute of Health Information even recognized Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, as one of two provinces with the highest physician 
growth rates the past five years. 
 
Looking more specifically at rural and remote physician 
recruitment, there is no shortage of this program, aimed to 
ensuring citizens have access to health care professionals in 
their communities. It started with the increase of the number of 
available seats at the College of Medicine in Saskatoon from 60 
to 100, doubling the number of medical residence seats. Almost 
immediately these medical students have an opportunity to 
participate in rural health care and programs such as physician 
rural externship program, or PREP. PREP provides to 
second-year medical students an opportunity for gaining work 
experience in rural communities while under the direction and 
supervision of licensed physicians. 
 
We then went a step further, Mr. Speaker, introducing programs 
like the rural family physician incentive program which is a 
grant of 120,000 given over a five-year period for recent 
medical graduates participating in communities of 10,000 or 
less. This program has been highly successful with 36 
physicians already benefiting and the Saskatchewan Physician 
Recruitment Agency already receiving 15 applications this year, 
an increase from last year. Moreover these physicians tend not 
to leave these rural or remote communities after they begin 
these practices. Our rural physician turnover rate still remains 
lower than the last years of the NDP was in office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not just physicians that we have seen in this 
increase either. There are more than double the amount of nurse 
practitioners working in the province since 2007, and 60 per 



October 27, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 947 

cent of these nurses are working in our rural communities. 
 
Although we’re looking hard at home for health care 
professionals, the province is already benefiting from 
innovative successes such as Saskatchewan international 
physician practice assessment, SIPPA. Over 190 doctors from 
abroad have been accessed, passed, and hired through SIPPA. 
This is made even more incredible by the fact that nearly 80 per 
cent of those SIPPA physicians’ practices are located in rural 
communities of Saskatchewan. 
 
Another highly successful initiative presented by this 
government has been the rural physician locum pool. In 
2015-2016 we spent nearly 3.8 million to support 20 rural 
locum physicians. There are now around 40 positions in locum 
pools which help to stabilize rural communities like Canora, La 
Ronge, and Shaunavon, a community in my own constituency 
of Cypress Hills. Those are not the only communities who have 
benefited from the efforts to increase the number of physicians 
in rural and remote Saskatchewan. Broadview, Maidstone, 
Leader, Wakaw, Fort Qu’Appelle, Rosetown, Kelvington, 
Redvers are just a few of many communities in this province 
who have reached physician stabilization because of this 
recruitment efforts. 
 
Recruitment of these talented and skilled health care 
professionals is not only the thing that government has done to 
support rural and more isolated health regions. Creating 
facilities in which citizens of these communities can access 
health care has also been very important to us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m referring to the great facilities such as the 
Southwest Integrated Healthcare Facility that is situated right in 
my home constituency, in the town of Maple Creek. This 
facility is equipped to deal with different levels of care as it is 
equipped with 24 acute care beds, 48 long-term care beds, and 
is able to handle emergency aid as well. 
 
This project is a source of pride for this government, but also 
for the community in which it serves, as 20 per cent of the 
project was funded by the local community with this 
government contributing another 80 per cent needed to create a 
modern, effective care centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, although the Southwest Integrated Healthcare 
Facility is particularly important to me and my constituents, it is 
far from being the only great rural health care facility that this 
government has supported and funded. Another excellent 
example is the Kelvington and area hospital, which has opened 
this past spring. 
 
Last year we also saw the opening of many rural health care 
facilities in this province, including health centre in Biggar, the 
health and wellness centre in Canora, the Tisdale long-term care 
centre, the Kipling integrated health care centre, the Radville 
Marian health care centre, the Kerrobert and district health care 
centre, just to name a few. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, since 2009 we as government have spent 
over 200 million in investing in 13 long-term health care 
centres in our communities, and most of which are located in 
rural areas of this province. There are even facilities on the 
horizon with more rural health care projects in the early stages: 

Weyburn, La Ronge, and Leader. 
 
Additionally there is over $19 million invested in improving our 
eight primary care facilities throughout the province, another $8 
million invested in collaborative emergency centres and in five 
of our rural communities. We feel that these investments pay 
back twofold for the citizens in which these facilities serve. 
 
Now many rural and remote citizens not only have the access to 
modern, well-equipped care centres but also in many cases are 
able to get to these facilities more quickly, as it has been a 
priority to strategically locate these central locations so that 
they will be accessible to most people. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I am able to tell you about all of these 
great rural health care facilities in different reaches of our 
province because since 2007 this government has increased 
funding to rural health regions by 57 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, next I want to speak on STARS [Shock Trauma 
Air Rescue Society], the shock trauma air rescue service which 
has been operating in Western Canada, providing highly 
specialized air medical services to our people, over the 30 years. 
STARS offers a lifeline anywhere in our province, offering 
advanced, quick health care services. 
 
STARS and the Saskatchewan emergency medical services 
system together provide efficient, effective time and services 
with quick emergency response time across the province. Mr. 
Speaker, it is a critical link to rural and in isolated areas, hope 
and life-saving transportation in quick time frame to those that 
are injured or ill. 
 
[11:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has provided 48 million in funding 
to STARS since 2012 for its annual operating fund. This 
government makes the level of health care to be provided to 
those in remote and isolated areas a priority. 
 
STARS has provided care to 2,200 patients in the province 
since it started in Saskatchewan; 757 of those were injured in 
2015 and 2016 alone. The STARS flight team consists of 
advanced care paramedics, critical care nurses, physicians’ 
oversight, which are always also available on flights if required. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government appreciates rural fire departments 
and their staff and volunteers who help assist STARS teams 
with landing and taking off. Mr. Speaker, we are constructing 
new helipads to help service the new Moose Jaw and Children’s 
Hospital. We need to continue to meet needs of the 
Saskatchewan people as the services for STARS continues to 
grow. 
 
I want to finish by saying that STARS and all of the air 
ambulances are a key part of the provincial network of 
emergency medical services that include our ground and water 
and air first responders. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to turn your attention to technology. 
Technology and technical innovations are going to be tools that 
we as a government can implement to ensure that long-term 
sustainability of health care services in rural and remote 



948 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2016 

communities in this province. One such technology I want to 
speak of is the one robotic health care pilot project that was 
conducted in Pelican Narrows due to the remote nature of the 
large number of youth in this community. This project showed a 
significant potential as a remote presence. Technology allowed 
the health and care professionals to perform real-time 
assessment and diagnosis of patients. 
 
This technology has been said to have the potential to transform 
access to health care services in rural and remote communities 
because it allows citizens access to medical professionals 
without having to leave their respective communities. Mr. 
Speaker, it was found in the pilot project that 63 per cent of 
acutely ill children received effective treatment in their 
communities of Pelican Narrows through this technology. 
Before this, they would’ve had to travel to Saskatoon for 
treatment, a journey of over 500 kilometres. 
 
In fact, this pilot project allowed, saved residents of Pelican 
Narrows over 240,000 in transportation costs because they were 
able to be treated locally. Because of this, Mr. Speaker, this 
government has dedicated even more money to the project — 
500,000 to be exact — to continue this remote presence 
technology in our northern communities. This technology has 
potential to be in all of our isolated rural communities and assist 
communities to do . . . and that have fewer medical 
professionals, provide speedy and effective care. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, because of the continued diligent work done 
by this government since 2007 in the area of health care in our 
rural and remote Saskatchewan communities, I would like to 
make this following motion: 
 

That this Assembly support the continued efforts of this 
government and health regions to improve access to health 
care in rural Saskatchewan, including their ongoing efforts 
to recruit physicians and to stabilize hospital services in 
rural and remote communities. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cypress Hills has 
moved: 
 

That this Assembly supports the continued efforts of the 
government and health regions to improve access to health 
care in rural Saskatchewan, including their ongoing efforts 
to recruit physicians and to stabilize hospital services in 
rural and remote communities. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
from Prince Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m really 
honoured today to stand up here and talk about health care in 
Saskatchewan. And when I’m going to be talking about health 
care I’m going to be primarily focusing on the issues within 
Prince Albert. I’m well aware of a lot of the issues in Prince 
Albert, being a former health care employee, but also a resident 
of the area for I don’t even know if I want to say how many 
years, but most of my life. So even though I recognize that a lot 
of the issues that are happening in Prince Albert are reflective 
across the province, when I make reference to these issues it 

will be primarily what’s going on in the Prince Albert area. So I 
really want to make sure that you guys realize that. 
 
And there’s a long list of issues, health care issues in Prince 
Albert, but I’m just going to highlight a few. I don’t want to 
seem remiss that I’m not acknowledging some of the other 
areas but it is a long list, unfortunately. And when I think about 
Prince Albert health care being part of the rural and remote 
health care portfolio, it’s really surprising for myself because 
Prince Albert is the third-largest city in the province. We deal 
with a lot of the issues within the province, especially around 
the surrounding areas and the northern area, so we’re a hub for 
a lot of the services that are being provided. So to consider us as 
being rural and remote it seems surprising for myself because 
we serve such a great large area. 
 
And I also want to start off by acknowledging that although we 
do have a long list of health care issues in Prince Albert, it is 
not due to the fact of the health care workers that we have 
working in that industry. We have amazing health care workers 
in our city, in our surrounding areas as well, and they are very 
overworked. They do as much as they can, and they have a lack 
of resources. And those are some of the issues of why there’s 
struggles in the health care system. So I want to make it very 
clear that when we talk about these issues that it’s not a 
reflection of their hard work. 
 
So first of all, I think the members across would be surprised if 
I didn’t mention the fact that we need another hospital in Prince 
Albert. We either need a second one or we need a larger one, 
whatever. We need something because our capacity in Prince 
Albert . . . Just in 2015 and ’16, we had 80 days that we were a 
code burgundy, and a code burgundy, Mr. Speaker, is over 
capacity. And that is astonishing because when you have over 
capacity in the hospital, it really puts a lot of stress in all the 
areas in the hospital, and I think particularly in ER [emergency 
room] because what are the doctors going to do when they have 
people who are coming with these serious issues and they can’t 
place them in other departments? And so we get a backlog 
there. 
 
And the reason why I say that we need a provincial hospital, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, is because we service surrounding areas 
and the North. And they say that Prince Albert Parkland Health 
Region statistics show that between 20 to 23 per cent of those 
admitted into the in-patient unit and who get the day surgery in 
our hospital are from outside the region. And so we need to 
look at that when we’re talking about providing that health care 
service in Prince Albert. 
 
And approximately 30,000 visits were made to the Victoria 
Hospital and 5,700 surgeries were performed in 2014. That was 
two years ago and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would suspect that 
those numbers are probably higher now due to the fact that we 
have a higher population. And a lot of people are utilizing the 
services at the hospital, which is again a good thing, but we 
need to accommodate for that. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know the previous Health 
minister, Mr. Duncan, he went to — previous Health minister 
— he went to Prince Albert in 2013 and he talked to the media 
there. And he himself said like this was an eye-opener for him, 
the number of services that Prince Albert Parkland Health 



October 27, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 949 

Region delivers to other health regions and what that means in 
terms of the pressure it puts on our Victoria Hospital. Because 
like I said, we serve all of the surrounding areas, and that 
includes other health regions and the people that live in those 
areas. And we’re always wanting to help, so that’s not 
something that’s an issue. But the issue is that it puts a big 
burden on the services provided there. 
 
So when he talked to the media there, he talked about the 
increased number of births in Victoria Hospital. And you know, 
more recently I realized how much our obstetrical ward is being 
utilized in Prince Albert. I have two young grandsons and so I 
spent some time there, and I have some nieces who are working 
in that department. And it’s amazing how many people utilize 
the services there. And the health regions around Prince Albert, 
a lot of them, they have health services but obstetrical care isn’t 
one of them that they oftentimes provide. So they will come to 
Prince Albert, and they will stay there around the time that their 
baby’s due and they will have their baby there. And so we have 
thousands of births per year just in Prince Albert, and more and 
more these births are being high-risk births. And so they’re 
providing some challenges to our health care workers, and 
they’re needing specialized services. 
 
And more and more the surgical unit is being utilized. And they 
made some advancements in our obstetrics ward so that they are 
able to accommodate for the surgical team right there because 
when you have thousands of births per year . . . And that’s 
incredible. And again those workers, the health care providers 
in that department, are amazing. So even like the Health 
minister here says, more babies are delivered here at Victoria 
Hospital than it was designed for. And there’s an over capacity 
in the maternity ward, and it’s a cascading effect on the other 
operations of the hospital. 
 
And so I’m happy that the minister acknowledged that issue. 
And I hope we can work to resolve that because we need to put 
some more investment within, again, the Victoria Hospital and 
meeting that need. 
 
And so one thing: there was a rally earlier this year about 
having midwife services provided in Prince Albert, in the 
region, and possibly in other health regions surrounding Prince 
Albert. And so we know that only three of the 13 health regions 
provide midwife services. And when you have midwives in 
health regions, they really save the health region money. It 
could be into the multiple thousands of dollars. And so I think 
that, given the large size of the North, northern Saskatchewan, 
and the number of smaller communities that are surrounding 
there, that could be an option to help out the ease of services 
within Prince Albert and area. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know oftentimes the members across say 
that we’re looking for more money, but we’re also looking for 
other options and some of these other options aren’t also . . . 
They could be cost effective, you know, and so I’m hoping the 
Health minister looks into this a little bit. 
 
I know in Saskatoon there is a wait-list for the midwife, and 
only about 50 per cent of the women actually eventually get 
one, you know. And so it looks like that’s an issue across the 
province, so I hope that is addressed. 
 

And my time is coming near, which I can’t believe. I’ve already 
almost talked 10 minutes but I didn’t even get to the issues of 
mental health and addictions within our city of Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there was a report that came out that 
talked about how Prince Albert was ranked the unhealthiest 
region in the country, and that is not a proud statement to 
accept. So there’s a lot of reasons why we are deemed as one of 
the most unhealthiest regions, and a lot of it is the fact that 
there’s an overweight problem, smoking, and they say that 
about 40 per cent of the people are not considered in good 
perceived mental health. And so there’s a lot of issues here that 
need to be addressed, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
[11:30] 
 
We had a health care rally in Prince Albert a few weeks ago, 
and we had all four of our critics: the critic for Justice, the critic 
for Health, the critic for Social Services, and the critic for 
Education. And we talked about that’s how decisions need to be 
made at the table, with all four ministers sitting at the table. All 
the ministers need to get on board and work on these health care 
issues. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 
Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this is a bit of a touchy subject, and I really don’t know where 
to start when I think of the motion that’s on the floor. And 
knowing that, I’m wondering how the NDP can actually talk to 
it because in their record I’m not sure that they have a good 
definition of health care. And I’m sure even their record of 
knowing what rural is, is even more decimating. 
 
But anyway, we’ll carry on. When the Saskatchewan Party 
came, had the opportunity to govern the province, Mr. Speaker, 
there was a drastic shortage of health care providers. There was 
a doctor shortage, a nurses shortage, and we inherited a health 
care deficit on the brink of really what we’d call total disaster. 
 
The NDP record of health care was indeed dismal, especially, 
especially, Mr. Speaker, in rural Saskatchewan. During their 
tenure there was no priority given to Saskatchewan health care. 
They closed 52 hospitals — 52 hospitals. That was even more 
devastating than even looking at any kind of other health care 
facilities. Fifty-two hospitals were closed. Doctors were laid 
off. Nurses were terminated. And, Mr. Speaker, to complement 
that, they closed 19 long-term facilities, eliminating 1,200 
long-term care beds. 
 
Of course you can see why this would lead to Saskatchewan 
having the longest surgical wait time in Canada. Now isn’t that 
a record they’d be proud of, the longest surgical wait time in the 
Dominion. 
 
Now I don’t want to dwell on the past but it’s important to 
realize where the province was in terms of health care and at 
perhaps its lowest point in Saskatchewan history. It’s important 
to remind ourselves of the NDP care record of the province as 
they had no plan to correct the situation or even make 
improvements. 
 



950 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2016 

I recall in 2009 one of my constituents, Catherine, was working 
with me and she indicated that she wanted to go into the nursing 
practice but she was told that she would have to wait six years 
to get into the nursing program in Saskatchewan. Her options 
were simply this: either six years that you had to wait or you 
had to leave the province for your nursing education or simply 
change your career option altogether. A nursing shortage and 
yet no desire to improve the nursing program. That was the 
NDP approach and a further disrespect to rural Saskatchewan 
health care. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, over the past nine years there have been 
great enhancements to Saskatchewan’s health care. One of the 
first improvements was to increase the medical training seats at 
the College of Medicine. It went from 60 to 100. The number of 
residency seats was also doubled to a number of 120. Our 
government invested millions every year into Saskatchewan’s 
international physician practice assessment, changing the 
international hiring practice from somewhere around six 
countries to a global focus. This initiative has attracted more 
doctors to serve the province with about 80 per cent of them 
practising in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
The investment into health care has proven to be successful, 
with nearly 650 new doctors in the province and over 3,000 
new nurses. We have proven that the physician numbers 
practising in rural Saskatchewan has increased with the 
introduction of the rural family physician incentive program. It 
has provided incentives in rural Saskatchewan. There are more 
doctors coming to Saskatchewan. There are more doctors being 
trained in Saskatchewan, and there are more doctors looking at 
rural centres as a setting to set up their practice and to become 
part of those welcoming communities. 
 
Saskatchewan went from the longest wait time under the NDP 
to the shortest wait time in Canada. The expression of rural 
family medicine seats is working in Swift Current, in La Ronge, 
North Battleford and, yes, in Moose Jaw. 
 
In 2014 four medical students were selected as part of the 
training program and continued their medical studies in Moose 
Jaw. That was in 2014, Mr. Speaker, and I’m pleased to say that 
all four of those students received their certificates and all four 
have plans to stay in Moose Jaw. The program works. 
 
You know, perhaps Moose Jaw is the epitome of good rural 
health care. You know, back in the spring of 2007, Dr. Miller, 
who was then head of the medical staff, had led a . . . 
[inaudible] . . . to ask for an expansion of the then hospital. At 
that time we had two cabinet ministers and a premier from 
Moose Jaw, but they were told that there was no plans for the 
medical services to be improved in Moose Jaw. That was with 
two cabinet ministers and a premier. Well that all changed when 
we took government, and there was announcement for a new 
state of the art hospital that was announced in 2011. And last 
fall, in the fall of 2015, the new state of the art hospital began 
serving the community and the Five Hills Health Region. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a rural health success story, but it doesn’t 
stop there. An MRI [magnetic resonance imaging] was added to 
the hospital. It’s the first MRI located outside the two major 
centres of Regina and Saskatoon. You know, this added service 
of an MRI into the newly named F.H. Wigmore Regional 

Hospital is an important step toward meeting increased 
demands and ensuring that patients can be diagnosed and 
treated sooner and closer to home. Just part of the 
improvements of health care in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
At this time I’d like to acknowledge the Moose Jaw Health 
Foundation and the community of Moose Jaw, as well as the 
other communities and RMs in the health region for their 
overwhelming support of the hospital and the added support of 
supplying the MRI. It’s just a great asset to the community and 
a great asset to the health care for rural Saskatchewan. Our 
government has placed particular attention on rural health care 
in many different facets. We’re building 13 long-term care 
facilities throughout the province. There are projects planned: 
$500,000 for the Weyburn hospital, $500,000 for a La Ronge 
long-term care, and 2 million for renewal of the Prince Albert 
Victoria Hospital, which is much needed. 
 
Let’s talk a little bit about STARS, a new initiative that was 
brought in by our government and a vital service for provincial 
health care service in rural and northern Saskatchewan. STARS 
is a valued partner in Saskatchewan emergency measures 
services, collaborating with the Saskatchewan air ambulance 
and the ground ambulance as well. It was established in April of 
2012 and launched in Regina in October 2012 and a base in 
Saskatoon shortly thereafter. Last year in 2015-16, STARS 
provided care for 757 critical injured patients across the 
province and, since its inception, has flown or provided care to 
2,200 patients in the province. 
 
Along with STARS, there’s been the construction, as my 
learned friend from Cypress Hills had mentioned, for helipads 
to be constructed. And yes, there was a new helipad included 
when they built the new hospital in Moose Jaw — forward 
thinking for better health care for Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot that could be said — and I’m going to 
be out of time — but the improvements to health care in this 
province are many, and our commitment to health care in the 
province certainly continues. Let’s talk about long-term care: 
200 million to replace 13 outdated long-term care facilities in 
13 rural communities. There are 225 long-term care facility on a 
P3 [public-private partnership] model, delivered on time and on 
budget in Swift Current. And we can talk about the 
Saskatchewan international physician practice assessment: over 
300 physicians have been assessed, and more than 190 of those 
doctors are now providing service in Saskatchewan. 
 
There’s the story about the Saskdocs, a one-stop point for 
physicians seeking to practise in Saskatchewan. The rural 
physician local pool helping rural Saskatchewan physicians. 
Let’s talk about the collaborative emergency centres, an 
innovation way to improve health care and primary care and 
emergency care on a 24-7 basis as required. And we can also 
talk about the innovation sites, a primary health care service 
which there is a centre in Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve touched on a lot of points. The bottom line, I 
haven’t said as much as I would like to, but the bottom line is 
the improvement to health care we’ve had in this province since 
this party formed government back in 2007. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 



October 27, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 951 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure and honour to rise today to join in the debate around 
rural and remote health care. Now I want to take this 
opportunity to mention our Health critic who’s done some very 
great work in this area and especially in the last few months, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
When we heard about transformational change and the fact that 
it was going to apply to health care, we were curious to see how 
that’s going to play out. And I suppose we’re still very curious 
to see how that’s going to play out because we haven’t quite 
heard the outcome of that yet. But what we did know was that 
the consultation surrounding transformational change was a 
very short period, and we heard a lot of concerns about the 
actual consultation that was happening. There was issues with, 
from what I understand, submitting documents to the website. 
 
So what we did in particular, our Health critic spearheaded sort 
of a road-trip consultation, in particular targeting rural 
locations. And I may not actually hit all of the locations that our 
Health critic went to, but I know she went to La Ronge, Prince 
Albert, Moose Jaw, Preeceville, The Battlefords to speak to 
people and to hear their concerns and hear what their thoughts 
were, and not just concerns but what their suggestions were for 
solutions to address health care challenges in the province. 
 
The Health critic invited not only members of the public but 
also members of her opposition caucus to join her. And I had 
the opportunity to go in Prince Albert with actually my other 
colleagues from Prince Albert Northcote and Regina Lakeview, 
and then myself and the Health critic, which was a really great 
opportunity. We had essentially the critic for Justice, the critic 
for Health, the critic for Education, and the critic for Social 
Services all there together hearing the public’s concerns and 
suggestions with respect to improving health care in a difficult 
financial time. 
 
And that’s how we see health care, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We see 
it not a siloed issue. We see how it spills over into all the other 
ministries. And when it’s not addressed properly, for example, 
it can bleed into other ministries, like Justice for example, 
which essentially kind of becomes the catch-all when all the 
other ministries fail, unfortunately. So we had the opportunity 
to speak with people. And our Health critic, if she had been 
here, she would attest to the great consultation and the great 
feedback we were able to get with respect to that. 
 
So when we did those, we heard from many rural community 
members who said that their families and their neighbours are 
struggling to get the health care that they need, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Their community health centres are closing or they’re 
reducing their hours. Their communities are struggling to retain 
health care practitioners, partially because those who are 
working in the community . . . And there’s some very, very 
great nurses and nurse practitioners and those in the health care 
field who are working in these communities, but are essentially 
run off their feet and are struggling to maintain a balance and be 
able to continue on with their careers. 
 
Other community members have expressed concerns that their 

parents and grandparents are struggling to access long-term 
care, some of them moving out of their hometown they have 
lived in all their life. I know that. I can attest to this personally, 
Mr. Speaker. So I take some offence when the member from 
Moose Jaw North says that we don’t know what the definition 
of rural is. 
 
[11:45] 
 
My grandfather who lives in Humboldt, when he was unable to 
live in his home anymore, had to stay in the hospital longer than 
he needed to, longer than he should have, because the long-term 
care home in Humboldt was booked up. And then he had to be 
moved to Watson, the long-term care home in Watson, while he 
waited for space in Humboldt. So he had to move out of his 
home community and had to spend about eight months in the 
long-term care home in Watson, where there were very, very 
good, hard-working care home workers there who provided him 
absolute impeccable care, but he was far-removed from his 
family. He was far-removed from his friends. And he wasn’t 
able to get that level of social interaction that he needs and he 
should have and he deserves, not only as a farmer for 80-plus 
years, but as a World War II veteran, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So I’d like to see, when we’re talking about successes in the 
rural health care area, I’d also like to not forget those people 
who have to wait for months on end just to get a long-term care 
space. Thankfully, Mr. Deputy Speaker, my grandpa is now in 
the long-term care home in Humboldt. He is across the hall 
from his brother. He has lots of family and friends who can visit 
him. So we’re very grateful for that, and we’re very grateful he 
was actually able to make it from Watson to Humboldt. So not 
only can I attest to that personally, that as a challenge in the 
rural and remote locations, but I know we heard it from many 
different people when we were doing our consultations. 
 
Another concern we were hearing is that specialist care is 
getting further and further away and much harder to access. 
Again that’s another one that I can also attest to personally. I 
had another grandfather that was very sick who also lived in 
Humboldt who had to travel back and forth to Saskatoon for his 
specialist appointments because the specialist doesn’t come to 
Humboldt often enough to get the treatment that he needed, 
which is very difficult. He had to rely . . . And thankfully for 
my parents and my uncle they were able to travel him around 
and get him to the appointments that he needed to get to. But 
when I think about that, I think about the people who are in 
rural areas who don’t have family who can, you know, take a 
day off work or take some time away from their children and 
drop everything to essentially help their elderly loved ones, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And that kind of goes into another concern that we’ve heard a 
lot, which is that ambulance services are not always available. 
They’re spread thin and they can be incredibly expensive. And 
the members opposite like to talk a lot about STARS, but they 
don’t seem to want to talk a lot about rural ambulance services, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. The reality around ambulance services is 
that Saskatchewan is the only province to charge for medically 
necessary ambulance transfers between health care facilities. 
And we’re also one of the only two provinces that don’t cap 
ambulance fees, which allows them to charge taxi-like 
per-kilometre rates, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which creates a lot of 



952 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2016 

problems. 
 
And I know that my colleagues and former colleagues last 
session spent a lot of time talking about this and highlighting 
this concern, and how bills were piling up essentially for people 
who had no choice but to take an ambulance but then also were 
faced with astronomical bills, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And when 
budgets are thin, you don’t exactly, people don’t necessarily 
plan for becoming ill or becoming injured and requiring to use 
an ambulance service. So when that situation happens and then 
there’s an exponentially large bill that they have to pay for 
afterwards, it certainly impacts families in an extremely 
negative way. 
 
From what I understand, there’s a pick-up fee even for road 
ambulance fees that falls between 245 and $325, and then 
there’s a per-kilometre rate that gets tacked onto that, which I 
believe is $2.30. And I don’t think it takes a rocket scientist to 
figure out that this per-kilometre fee disproportionately affects 
rural residents because you have to be transferred to city 
hospitals for care when the hospitals maybe don’t have all of 
the services that they should have or that they need for these 
communities. 
 
And we’re dealing with an aging population, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I don’t think that’s controversial to say. We know full 
well that there’s an aging population in this province and we 
need to make sure that we’re addressing this, not only in 
making sure that they have access, and timely access, to care 
that’s occurring in or that’s in their home location that they can 
actually get to. And if they do have to travel to a larger centre, 
they shouldn’t have to bear the burden of having to deal with 
that travel. And that the long-term care homes are not only 
adequate, that the infrastructure . . . And I didn’t even get the 
opportunity to talk about some of the infrastructure issues 
unfortunately, with respect to long-term care, care homes in the 
province, and particularly in rural and remote locations. And 
that they’re adequately staffed, that our staff members that work 
very hard there are being respected and treated in a way so that 
they can fulfill their role and they can do their job. 
 
And it’s really unfortunate that I can’t add to this debate any 
further. I didn’t think that I would run out of time but I suppose 
I am. So I know other people are going to want to join in this 
debate as well, so with that, I will end my comments. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Well thank you, thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
And I’m very pleased to rise in this debate on this motion. I find 
it quite amazing that the opposition would talk about this when, 
you know, they have such a rural contingent here. The only 
time they’ve seen rural Saskatchewan is when they stop on their 
drive between Regina and Saskatoon at Davidson for a coffee. 
And they actually wanted to talk about rural health care. 
 
Well I can tell you a few things about rural health care because 
I actually do live in the rural . . . And you know, Mr. Speaker, I 
guess I kind of want to go back to what was going on at their 
convention. And you know, they had some really, really, 
strange resolutions come up at their convention, like right out in 
left field, Mr. Speaker. But the one that they did have, and I 

wanted to speak on this one, and I’m going to read it into 
Hansard. On a BH-01, and this passed at their convention, 
whereas the Sask Party . . . And I’m quoting from their 
resolution: 
 

Whereas the Sask Party has made big promises about its 
ability to deliver quality rural health care and have 
appointed a minister, paid through taxpayer’s dollars, that 
is solely responsible for rural and remote health;  
 
Whereas Northern communities are continually faced with 
barriers to accessing health services, including preventative 
measures; and 
 
Whereas underfunding by the Sask. Party has resulted in 
rural communities across the province being forced to face 
more and more facility closures and disruptions in health 
services; and 
 
Whereas Saskatchewan has the worst ambulance fee . . . in 
the country, and rural residents are disproportionately 
burdened by high ambulance bills, based on a per 
kilometre charge, and 
 
Whereas more and more often, rural residents do not have 
the option of accessing health services in communities 
close to their home; and 
 
Whereas the Sask. Party has appointed a minister, paid 
through taxpayer’s dollars, that is solely responsible for 
rural and remote health, but it is unclear exactly what 
actions he has taken to improve rural and remote health 
care, 
 
Be it resolved that the NDP members of the legislature 
continue to expose the Sask. Party’s failings in rural and 
remote health care, 
 
Be it further resolved that NDP members of the legislature 
continue to highlight Sask. Party’s complete failure to 
ensure that rural and remote residents of the province have 
timely access to appropriate and quality health care. 
 
Be it resolved that the NDP members of the legislature call 
on the minister to either do his job competently and stand 
up for rural and remote health care or step down and have 
his ministerial bonus as well as all other expenses related 
to his ministry directed to improvement of rural and remote 
care. 

 
This was put through by — needless to say they don’t have any 
rural members — Regina Gardiner Park NDP and Regina 
Wascana Plains NDP. Mr. Speaker, that is pretty rich coming 
from an opposition that, when they were in government, when 
they were in government, closed down 52 hospitals — two in 
my constituency alone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you take a look at what this government has done. 
While they were shutting down 19 long-term care facilities, 
take a look at what we did. We’re building 13. The fact is 
Tisdale has a new long-term facility there. It has opened up now 
and, Mr. Speaker, that is the first long-term facility that was 
built in the Carrot River Valley constituency since back in the 



October 27, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 953 

Grant Devine days. And they sit there and try and say that we 
aren’t doing things for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
When I was first elected, we had the grand total of four 
physicians in Nipawin — four. We’re up to 12 now, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, they always talk about, and especially 
the member from Athabasca says well, you guys will be out 
next time. He’s been saying that since 2007, but he keeps on 
saying that. Well, Mr. Speaker, as the member from Nutana 
likes to say, she likes to say past performance is a good 
indicator of future performance. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, heaven forbid they ever got back into 
government again because what would they do to health care in 
rural Saskatchewan? Mr. Speaker, I am sorry. I think it would 
go down. It would go down big time because they never really 
did care about the things in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know, you take a look. Since we have been 
fortunate enough to be in power, there’s 3,000 more nurses 
working out there, 650 more physicians. Is there work to do in 
health care? Absolutely. But it has gone up tremendously. We 
went to the longest wait times in the whole country, the longest 
wait times, Mr. Speaker, down to very close to being the 
shortest on surgical wait times. 
 
Now these are things, these are facts, Mr. Speaker. These are 
simple facts that the NDP does not want to admit of their 
disastrous failure of providing health care to rural 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, they start talking about our 
minister of remote and rural health and they say that well, you 
know, he’s really not doing anything and it’s a waste of money. 
 
Well let’s just take a look at what we’ve done. Let’s take a look 
at what we’ve done. Here is . . . and I’m going to quote a little 
note that came from the Preeceville integrated health care action 
committee. It came on October the 19th of 2016, just a few days 
ago actually. Now listen to this, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Your efforts to not only listen and answer questions but 
also receive and look into names of potential physicians 
put forth by you, by our committee has been invaluable. 

 
That’s how people in rural Saskatchewan look to the minister. 
 
And then they talk about his expenses. Well you know what? 
Let’s go back to when Judy Junor used to be the second Health 
minister. And she wasn’t really all that interesting to travel 
around. She didn’t want to listen to the individual communities. 
They talk about the costing of travel. Our Health minister, our 
rural Health minister spent way less than Judy Junor did on 
travel. But yet would she go out there and listen to the 
communities? No. She never went out and listened to one of our 
communities. 
 
The problems we were having, and I can still remember, Mr. 
Speaker, when they shut down the hospital in Arborfield. When 
the NDP was in power and they shut down the hospital in 
Arborfield, and they said, well don’t worry; Carrot River is only 
15 miles away and, you know, we don’t plan on, we’re not 
going to shut down Carrot River. So they shut down the 
hospital in Arborfield. 
 

What do they do a couple years later? They went to Carrot 
River and they shut down that hospital in Carrot River. And it’s 
pretty hard to put the toothpaste back into the tube. And they 
shut down the hospital in Carrot River. They said, well don’t 
worry; Nipawin is only another 25 miles away. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can pretty well guarantee you, had they stayed in 
power, with the shortage that they were giving us on physicians 
in Nipawin, pretty soon they were going to shut that one down 
too. And they’d say, well don’t worry; Prince Albert is only 117 
miles away from Carrot River. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — On bad roads. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Yes. And it was brought up, it was brought 
up, on bad roads. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of money . . . We have put a lot of 
money into health. Here’s one thing actually, Mr. Speaker, that 
we could cut costs on health, if we had the support of the NDP. 
You have to realize that all these hospitals have to be heated in 
the wintertime. Now we’re going to have to pay a carbon tax on 
that heat that’s going into there, and they won’t even support 
that end of it. Mr. Speaker, I just had to get the carbon tax in. 
 
[12:00] 
 
Anyway I have to say that what that government did when they 
were in power to rural health was a disaster. And I’m going to 
say it again. Past performance is a good indicator of future 
performance. And, Mr. Speaker, if, if by some silly reason they 
ever got into power, I would be desperately, desperately 
concerned about what kind of health care we had in 
Saskatchewan. Heck, we wouldn’t even have any roads to be 
able to get to one of their hospitals in the city, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I strongly support this motion, and I know that all 
of the members on this side of the House strongly support the 
motion also. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Thank 
you very much. I’m pleased to enter into the debate on the 
proposed motion by the Saskatchewan Party caucus. And I want 
to point out, Mr. Speaker, just to preface some of my comments 
as it relates to health care based on the last point raised by the 
member from Carrot River in which he said, past behaviour 
dictates future activity or future actions. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen this time and time again. Now 
we look at Saskatchewan as a province. Is the province now 
going into deficit? Is there a crisis in health care? Yes, Mr. 
Speaker, there is. And the bottom line is that that’s compliments 
of the Saskatchewan Party Tory caucus, and I think it’s really, 
really important that people understand that. 
 
Now going back to the member’s comment about what the NDP 
did. But what people ought to know is that the NDP didn’t 
enjoy record revenue like the Saskatchewan Party did. They 



954 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2016 

enjoyed record revenue and a booming economy, and it is all 
gifted to them by the people of Saskatchewan. It was not 
because of their strategy or because who they are that the 
activity occurred, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan was on a roll, on 
an exciting roll, and the Saskatchewan Party, by opportunity 
and timing, Mr. Speaker, they all of sudden think that they 
developed and they perfected and invented sliced bread, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But this for the history folks that might be watching this debate. 
When the NDP took over office from the Saskatchewan Party, 
or sorry, the Conservative Party under Grant Devine, the 
interest . . . I’m not talking about the debt, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
talking about the interest. In my recollection, Mr. Speaker, the 
interest on the debt alone left behind by Grant Devine and many 
of his supporters across the way, the interest alone, just the 
interest — we’re not talking record revenue — the interest 
alone was almost three times our full budget for Education just 
on the interest, just on the interest. And it’s amazing that the 
conservative storytellers and the historians from across the way 
refuse to even acknowledge that, Mr. Speaker. They never 
acknowledge that. And I want to make that point out. 
 
Whenever they talk about the NDP, their world was created in 
1991 when we took over government, Mr. Speaker. Prior to 
that, Saskatchewan and the problems, they don’t want to talk 
about that particular era, Mr. Speaker, because they are 
ashamed. Truth be told, if the member from Carrot River wants 
to go down this historical path that he’s going down, then the 
question that I would ask him is that, is it true that the interest 
left behind by Grant Devine, just the interest payment alone on 
the debt, was almost three times the budget for Education? And 
if he gets up and answers that question, Mr. Speaker, and 
doesn’t answer it correctly, then it proves my point that they 
refuse to recognize the full story behind what they’ve done 
when they were in government last under Grant Devine. 
 
And yes, Mr. Speaker, the past activities do dictate future 
behaviours, and I think the Saskatchewan people will see very 
quickly that they’ve had enough of the Saskatchewan Party. 
They’ve given them their third mandate, Mr. Speaker, and the 
voters are always right. And the voters will come along, and 
they’ll say well, enough of that charade. These guys got to go. 
We need a new government. And I think, Mr. Speaker, the 
future activity will certainly show that the NDP will be back, 
Mr. Speaker. The only problem is, we got such a mess in 1991 
to clean up, and then we’re going to have another mess in 2020 
if not sooner. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to quickly talk about health care 
because we’ve got a short 10 minutes. And I want to point out 
one of the things that’s really important, Mr. Speaker. As you 
go into our facilities today, as you go into the hospitals today, 
you will find — which is really, really amazing — there’s 
people out there in hallways, Mr. Speaker, lying on emergency 
cots in hallways. And when you see places which are really 
important to the health care system overall, as an example I 
would use the Lighthouse, where the public fire inspectors are 
going in there saying we can’t have people in hallways because 
they’re a fire hazard . . .  
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, you look at all that particular challenge 
throughout our health care system. Spend some time in the 

hospitals like I do. I visit a lot of people, Mr. Speaker, and I can 
see the wear and tear that the health care system has on many of 
our point-of-care personnel. And I like that phrase, 
point-of-care personnel, because you’re talking about nurses; 
you’re talking about doctors; you’re talking about lab techs; 
you’re talking about maintenance people. They are a health care 
team. And many of these point-of-care personnel, you can see 
the stress and strain on them, Mr. Speaker. They obviously 
know that this government has not done enough for health care. 
And despite having record revenue, they have so badly 
underperformed, Mr. Speaker, and you can see this in evidence 
all throughout the province. 
 
And the evidence that I want to refer to, Mr. Speaker, as I can 
go on and on about the provincial evidence, but I want to talk 
about the northern part of Saskatchewan of where I am from, 
Mr. Speaker. We often see that many of the older people will 
talk about health care overall. They will talk about 
environmental health. They will talk about physical health. 
They’ll talk about emotional health. They’ll talk about mental 
health, Mr. Speaker. And when you hear this government talk 
about all these different points on health care, Mr. Speaker, no 
more telling, no more telling is their failure to recognize health 
of the people of Saskatchewan in rural and urban and, you 
know, in the far northern parts of our province where mental 
health is certainly becoming a major problem for many of our 
young kids. 
 
When you see the level of suicide in northern Saskatchewan 
where you have 10-year olds now committing suicide, 12-year 
olds, 14-years old committing suicide. That is a mental health 
issue and yet despite the record revenue, none of those members 
across the way have spoken about that particular issue. They’d 
much rather talk about something that happened 20 years ago, 
and they don’t even tell the full story on that particular aspect of 
the history of Saskatchewan. 
 
And that’s why it’s shameful, Mr. Speaker, to see them sitting 
here, playing politics with motions of this sort because we all 
know everybody in Saskatchewan ought to have access to good, 
decent health care, and we need the proper dollars and support 
mechanisms in place to ensure that happens. 
 
We all know that on this side of the Assembly that 
Saskatchewan health means everyone in Saskatchewan enjoys 
those benefits. So when I hear them talk about some silly 
historical reference to what happened 20 years ago and not 
begin to address the real issues that are plaguing our province, 
whether it’s emotional health, whether it’s physical health, 
whether it’s mental health, or environmental health . . . Mr. 
Speaker, this is a whole new ball game for the people of 
Saskatchewan when we’re talking about health overall. 
 
And the Saskatchewan Party just doesn’t get it. They never 
have. They never will, and that’s why I think the people of 
Saskatchewan are going to make up their minds over the next 
several years showing that these people across the way simply 
have dropped the ball. They’ve had the great opportunity under 
record revenues and a booming economy. and they simply can’t 
figure it out. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out, as the member was 
talking about a trip on our way to Saskatoon, and one of the 



October 27, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 955 

points I would raise . . . And when you’re driving down 
Highway 11, he made the reference that we’d stop in for a 
coffee at Davidson. Well, Mr. Speaker, what the member ought 
to know, and I think he does know but doesn’t want to make 
any comments on that, as you pass Craik — and I pass Craik 
quite often — there’s a sign that advertises 24-hour emergency 
care. However, as a result of the Sask Party cuts, as a result of 
their cuts, Mr. Speaker, this community no longer offers 
24-hour care and that sign is very dangerous. Why is it 
dangerous? Well some people might pull off the highway to try 
and seek medical attention if they need it and to only end up to 
a closed emergency room sign. Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s the 
danger. 
 
So for him to talk about the fact that they have all this 
commitment to rural Saskatchewan, I’m going to ask the 
member from Carrot River: when will he be taking down that 
sign? Because they’ve shut down that 24-hour designation, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s the Sask Party with record revenue have shut 
down the emergency service in Craik, and the sign still is there. 
So for the member to stand up and talk to us about commitment 
to health care in rural Saskatchewan and the remote parts of our 
province which I think the North is included, Mr. Speaker, they 
have dropped the ball time and time again. 
 
Finally I’ll say this. In northern Saskatchewan, many elders tell 
me, many elders tell me that we do need some supports around 
education, around drugs and alcohol, in particular drug abuse, 
Mr. Speaker. In northern Saskatchewan families are crying to 
get help for their young members of their community to try and 
get into a drug centre. In northern Saskatchewan those services 
are severely lacking. They are severely lacking, and they’re 
hurting families. They’re hurting communities. We need to 
have our own strategy in the North to try and rebuild the lives 
of people that have been ravaged by chronic illicit drug use. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we don’t sit here, we don’t stand here in the 
Assembly and listen to the bafflegab coming from the 
Saskatchewan Party, because they just haven’t figured it out. So 
on that note, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot more to say, and we 
certainly will be talking about these issues as time progresses. 
And on that note, of course we’re going to oppose the motion 
being presented. Thank you very much. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Time for debate has expired. 
Questions. I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We know 
in more than one year the Minister for Rural and Remote Health 
only visited the North three times. To the member from Moose 
Jaw North: when will the Rural and Remote Health minister get 
serious about the health of northerners and actually make this a 
priority? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 
Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, you 
know the question almost should be called out of order because 
our rural and remote minister has done extensive travelling 
throughout the province to improve the health care system in 
every corner of this province. And if we look back at what they 

did when they had a second Health minister at that time, when 
Judy Junor was the minister, they spent about $35,000 in 
travelling and didn’t go anywhere. 
 
And our Rural and Remote Health minister has been very active 
in this regard. He’s been in every corner of the province and his 
travel costs were considerably less at $24,000 in the last year. 
So you can see just by the action that he’s been doing and 
where he has been that it is a priority for this government, and 
he is very busy at it. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve heard quite 
a bit from the members opposite about how somehow they 
seem to know what’s best for the people who live in rural 
Saskatchewan. This is interesting since, in the recent election, 
the people of rural Saskatchewan soundly rejected them. Mr. 
Speaker, my question is to the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote: how can you criticize our government’s step forward 
in providing high-quality rural health services when the good 
people of rural Saskatchewan so overwhelmingly rejected your 
plan in the last election? Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
thank you for the question. But one thing we know is that this 
government hid a lot of things from people from rural 
Saskatchewan, and if they knew exactly what you guys had 
planned for them, the election results would be completely 
different. And we haven’t heard what are you guys going to do 
with regards to the high cost of the fees that people in rural 
Saskatchewan have to pay. So be truthful to the people in rural 
Saskatchewan, and the results will be different. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
You know, unfortunately this province has the worst record 
when it comes to ambulance fees in Canada, absolutely the 
worst. And we saw in last session, both ministers, both 
ministers of this file fumbled it completely when we had people 
come here. In fact they even suggested maybe they should 
consider fundraising. 
 
Will the member from Moose Jaw North say enough is enough 
is enough and say, it’s time to change the ambulance fee 
structure? It’s hitting people in rural Saskatchewan really too 
hard. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 
Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it gives me 
an opportunity just to expand a little bit on what the member is 
referring to because the ambulance fees that this government 
has provided have almost doubled from 2006-2007 when they 
were in power. 
 



956 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2016 

Further to that, our commitment to rural Saskatchewan for 
ambulance fees, we introduced more than air ambulance, 
STARS ambulance that has the capacity to service all of 
Saskatchewan into the far North. That side of the House, when 
they were in government never even considered . . . they 
wouldn’t have STARS ambulance. I think what we’ve done for 
the ambulance service in Saskatchewan is a far improvement 
from whatever was proposed by the members opposite when 
they were in power. Thank you. 
 
[12:15] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Mr. Nerlien: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, earlier this week the 
member from Saskatoon Nutana was railing about, and I quote, 
“. . . the best predictor of future behaviour is past behaviour.” I 
couldn’t agree more. While we have made record investments 
in health care infrastructure, record doctor recruitments, and 
hiring of nurses, we can easily compare our behaviour against 
the NDP, who closed 52 hospitals and refused to bring 
life-saving STARS to the province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as a former citizen, I was not the least bit 
surprised that our neighbours in Medicine Hat reduced the 
federal NDP to the new one-percenters in the recent federal 
by-election, barely squeaking past the ever-competitive 
Rhinoceros Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is for the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. Why would the people of Saskatchewan ever 
expect the NDP to change from their past behaviour given their 
miserable record in health care in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite really like 
to talk about things that happened when I was, frankly, six or 
five years old. It’s quite ridiculous and I’m pretty sick of 
hearing about it. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan want to talk about the issues in 
health care that are happening today, decisions that are 
happening from that government. And they’re sick of talking 
about things that happened 30 years ago. And if we really want 
to talk about history, then we can go back to the ’80s and some 
other problems that happened back then, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — You know, Mr. Speaker, this is a really 
important question from the member from Carrot River. Now, 
Mr. Speaker, to the member from Carrot River: when will this 
government commit to meaningful work in the North to ensure 
holistically healthy lives — and this is a very serious question 
— holistically healthy lives to effectively begin to address the 
devastating epidemic of suicides in the North? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot 
River Valley. 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, this is a tragedy. And I’ll be 
the first one to admit that it is a terrible tragedy, what has 
happened up there. And we certainly feel for the families who 
have lost loved ones and the suicides that happened. And we are 
working hard to try and alleviate that problem in various 
different ways. And it’s something that nobody, I don’t care 
what political stripe you are anywhere wants to see happen. 
 
This is a tragedy. And the member brought up a very good 
thing. And this is something that our government is going to be 
working towards to try and help alleviate these problems. And I 
wish I could . . . I wish that this would never happen. It should 
never happen to anybody, any family, anything like that. It is a 
tragedy. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP made only one reference to 
rural Saskatchewan in their entire election platform, and that 
one reference was to promise to come up with a strategy later. 
They have no plan for the health care in rural Saskatchewan, 
and rural citizens are just an afterthought. 
 
My question is to the member from Regina Douglas Park. After 
three elections, do not you think it is time to realize that the 
people of Saskatchewan are not just giving our party “a chance 
to govern” — as the member from Athabasca said on Monday 
— and that the members opposite are not owed the right to 
govern but have to earn it? Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the premise of that 
question is so ridiculous, I don’t even know where to start. We 
are the party that has been going around for the past two 
months, going around to different locations and speaking with 
actual public, asking them what they think they would like to 
see happen to their health care system, where they would like to 
see improvements. 
 
This government has not done that. Their transformational 
change agenda has included consulting, which is the most 
narrow consultation process I’ve ever seen. So frankly, Mr. 
Speaker, that question is absolutely ridiculous. We are the party 
that consults. We are the party that listens to people. Whether 
they vote for us or not, we still listen to them, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and we will continue to do that and stand up for those 
people. 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Between 1991 and 
2007, the NDP closed 52 hospitals in rural Saskatchewan. The 
Fyke Commission called for the closure of 50 more hospitals in 
rural Saskatchewan. The Leader of the Opposition spoke about 
this report on May 25th, 2016, saying to our government “. . . 
wasted their opportunity to implement the expert 
recommendations and bring meaningful and positive 
improvements . . .” My question to the member of P.A. 
Northcote: how much out of touch with rural Saskatchewan can 
you be that the party believes in closing 50 more rural hospitals 
that would result in meaningful and positive improvements? 
 



October 27, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 957 

The Deputy Speaker: — The time has expired for the 
75-minute debate. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 2 — Calls to Action in the Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission’s Report 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Mr. Belanger.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to speak to 
this important motion, a motion that calls upon this government 
to fulfill those calls to action contained in the Truth and 
Reconciliation final report that pertained to the jurisdiction of 
the provincial government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Truth and Reconciliation Commission was 
launched at the request of those who were found to have been 
caused injury in the residential school system. In fact the 
commission was part of the compensation. Survivors of that 
residential school system used part of their benefits to launch 
this commission to get at, first of all, Mr. Speaker, having a real 
national discussion, a truthful discussion about the past in 
Canada with regard to First Nations people and the residential 
schools. And also, Mr. Speaker, the last part of it, the 
reconciliation which must necessarily come after the truth has 
been told, and at the end of that commission they launched a 
number of reports, including 94 calls to action which are 
incumbent upon people across this country if we are to truly 
heal from the past in this country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The mandate for the Truth and Reconciliation Commission 
noted that “There is an emerging and compelling desire to put 
the events of the past behind us so that we can work towards a 
stronger and healthier future.” Mr. Speaker, I think that we 
should all share that goal, to look at our past in an honest and 
open way and then set about the goal of reconciliation, of 
making things right. And I do hold some hope in that we are 
talking about issues that perhaps even a decade or certainly two 
decades ago we simply didn’t talk about in this country or in 
this province, and I do see that as hopeful. 
 
As the last sentence in the mandate introduction noted, “The 
truth of our common experiences will set our spirits free and 
pave the way to reconciliation.” And, Mr. Speaker, I do 
sincerely hope that we are on that path to reconciliation, and we 
certainly do need to be, and I hope to outline some of the 
reasons why. 
 
Some of the goals of the TRC [Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission] were to acknowledge the residential school 
experiences, to call witnesses, to “support and promote and 
facilitate truth and reconciliation events at both the national and 
community levels” and to promote the awareness and public 
education of Canadians. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, we are 

down that path, but we have far to go. 
 
The Truth and Reconciliation Commission formally recognized 
19 residential schools that operated in Saskatchewan from the 
early 1880s up until the closure at Lebret, Mr. Speaker, which 
was the last residential school in Canada to close. So in some 
ways we’re speaking of a time long ago, but certainly the 
closure of Lebret is something that is within the lifetime of, I 
would dare say, perhaps with the exception of the pages, all of 
us in this legislature, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A little information about the TRC. During the six years of its 
operation, the commission held events in all parts of the 
country. Some of the most visible and largest events were held 
right here in Saskatchewan, and I think specifically of 
Saskatoon. The commission estimates that there was as many as 
155,000 visits at seven national events, and over 9,000 
residential school survivors were registered to attend them, Mr. 
Speaker. These are people — 9,000 — who gave testimony at 
the commission. The commission made an offer to everyone 
involved in the residential school system to have the 
opportunity to speak about their experience. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if anyone here had the opportunity to 
hear some of that testimony that was given over the five years 
that the commission went across the country. I know that the 
CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] did a good job in 
reporting on the commission and bringing some of those stories 
forward, and we see that work continuing today. 
 
I noted on the way over this morning to the legislature, Mr. 
Speaker, that there was a young student at the University of 
Regina who is going to be screening a film, recounting the 
stories of residential school survivors. And it is heartening to 
see how young people have taken up the goal of reconciliation 
in earnest and are doing their part to ensure that we don’t see 
this commission as, you know, a five-year commission, a table, 
some reports to collect dust. This is a document that really, 
really demands that we understand our history and that we all 
set about the work of reconciliation. 
 
And so I commend those people who have taken up the calls, 
the 94 calls, and who have set about implementing them at the 
best of their ability. And certainly as legislators, we have a 
special responsibility here, Mr. Speaker, to do what we can to 
set us on the path and continue down the path of reconciliation 
in this country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there certainly have been things that have changed 
since the 1880s when residential schools were first established 
in this country. In fact, much has changed. But I think it’s 
important that we remember that history and we go back and 
revisit some of that. 
 
In the 19th century, the Canadian government believed the best 
chance of success for indigenous children was to learn English 
and to adopt Christianity and Canadian customs, Mr. Speaker. 
Sir John A. Macdonald, prime minister at the time, 
commissioned journalist and politician Nicholas Davin Flood, 
who a school in my neighbourhood is named after, to study 
industrial schools for Aboriginal children in the United States. 
Davin’s recommendations were to follow the US’s [United 
States] “aggressive civilization” — in quotes, Mr. Speaker — 



958 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2016 

agenda, and noted, “If anything is to be done with the Indian, 
[then] we must catch him very young.” And “The children must 
be . . . constantly within the circle of ‘civilized conditions,’” 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s difficult for us today, I think — certainly I have difficulty 
even in speaking those words — but we have to understand our 
history if we are to heal from it. And so I think it’s important 
that we understand the context in which these schools were 
established and what their aims and goals are. 
 
Part of the strategy of the residential schools was to alienate 
children from their families and familiar surroundings. It 
became mandatory in 1920 for every Indian child to attend 
residential school and illegal, Mr. Speaker, for them to attend 
any other educational institution. The government felt that 
children are easier to mould than adults and the concept of a 
boarding school was the best way to prepare them for a life in 
mainstream society, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[12:30] 
 
Sometimes I hear people in the community, people that I see on 
social media, who say, you know, why don’t they just get over 
it? Why don’t we just move on? And I think, Mr. Speaker, those 
are comments born from a lack of understanding of the history 
and just the very, very significant impacts of the residential 
school system. So I’m going to speak at a little more length here 
about what exactly that looked like from an outsider’s 
perspective. 
 
In 1931, at the peak of the residential school system, there were 
about 80 schools operating in Canada, and the last of which of 
course was Lebret, which closed in 1996. In all, about 150,000 
First Nations, Inuit, and Métis children were removed from 
their communities and forced into the schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve noted some statistics here today. But I think it 
warrants . . . You know, statistics are important. They provide 
some context. But I think in order for us to really understand 
what that’s like, we should think of, as parents and grandparents 
sitting here today, what that might have been like, might have 
been like to, by force, officials show up and tell you that by 
threat of law you have to put your children in a car with 
strangers or on a plane, in some cases, with strangers and ship 
them off to a school that’s very far away. And I think if, you 
know, we just sit and contemplate that for a minute, I think all 
of us can recognize how horrifying that must have been — how 
horrifying for those parents and those communities and how 
horrifying for those children who were scooped up by strangers 
and taken somewhere far away. 
 
And if that had been the end of it, Mr. Speaker, I think that 
would have been bad enough, but we all know that that wasn’t 
the end of it. Residential schools were established with the 
assumption that Aboriginal culture was unable to adapt to a 
rapidly modernizing society, and students were discouraged 
from speaking their first language and practising their 
traditions. If they were caught, they would experience severe 
punishment, Mr. Speaker, severe punishment for doing what 
you grew up with, what you knew, for speaking your own 
language, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Throughout the years, students not only experienced that type 
of treatment but they also were subjected to substandard 
conditions. They endured physical, emotional, and sexual 
abuse, Mr. Speaker, and they rarely had the chance to see 
opportunities of normal family life. Most children were away 
for 10 months of the year; some stayed year-round. 
 
Correspondence that was sent home from those schools, Mr. 
Speaker, was written in English, so even when they were 
allowed to send letters home, often their parents wouldn’t be 
able to read those letters. And even if you went to school with 
your brothers and sisters, there was segregation by gender, and 
you wouldn’t even be able to talk with your brothers and sisters, 
Mr. Speaker. And I think we can all imagine the type of 
devastation, the loneliness. I’ll never forget one of the survivors 
talking about how he cried himself to sleep and the loneliness, 
and the pain in his voice. And this is a grandfather, perhaps 
even a great-grandfather talking about how lonely, how deeply 
lonely he was being in that school. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, those stories are hard to hear, but imagine, 
imagine living those stories; imagine that that happened to you 
and your family. And I think people live those stories. They live 
those stories because of deliberate policies set forth by 
governments, so at the very least it’s incumbent upon us to 
listen and to truly take it in and try to understand with empathy 
what that might have been like. 
 
Of course the purpose of the schools was to eliminate all 
aspects of Aboriginal culture, or more succinctly put in some 
instances, kill the Indian in the child, Mr. Speaker. Hair was cut 
short. Uniforms were imposed and days were strictly 
regimented. Now remember this was all done under the guise of 
education, but even the education was substandard. Often by the 
end of turning 18, many students in those schools only had 
attained about a grade five level of education. Much of their 
day, in some cases more than half their day, was spent in 
classes. The other half was spent doing menial tasks and 
basically labour without pay in those schools, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Of course the damage didn’t even end there with the abuse, the 
loss of culture, the lack of a quality education. It also posed a 
very significant health risk, Mr. Speaker. We know now that 
some of these children were subjected to experiments around 
malnutrition. They were deliberately starved in these 
institutions. A Bryce report in 1907 noted that 24 per cent of 
previously healthy Aboriginal children across Canada were 
dying in residential schools when . . . And this doesn’t include 
the figure of those who were sent home to die when they 
became critically ill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ve gone into some length in painting a bit of a contextual 
picture here because I think it’s important. And I think that’s 
the first part, as we noted, of the Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission was that we all need to hear the truth. We need to 
hear it. We need to understand, because that sets us up for really 
earnestly going about the business of reconciliation. And that’s 
what we’re called to do with the TRC calls to action. 
 
One of the other things that I want to talk about a little bit that 
sort of runs a thread through all of that is the sense of shame 
that was imposed, that was elicited in First Nations 
communities and within those children. Survivors talk about 



October 27, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 959 

going home and not having the skills really, only grade 5 
education, but then also not having the traditional skills, not 
having the skills, the trap line skills, and the traditional 
knowledge, the ability to speak to their parents and their 
grandparents, Mr. Speaker. And this set in a very deep, deep 
level of shame that I think has been, I don’t want to say more 
damaging, but has caused great damage. That sense of . . . not 
guilt. Guilt is something that we experience when we’ve done 
something wrong. Shame is a sense of being wrong, being 
wrong as a human being. And, Mr. Speaker. I think that many 
of the issues that we see today, be it with alcoholism, with 
suicide, with rates of violence, has to do with that very deeply 
embedded sense of shame that has been passed on as well as the 
intergenerational trauma that has been passed on. 
 
Of course residential schools operated well into the ’90s, but 
there was a bit of a shift in the ’60s. And we also saw a 
deliberate policy that’s been deemed the Sixties Scoop which 
also has had very real impacts in communities, Mr. Speaker. So 
I think I should move ahead a little bit. But I did think it was 
very important that we remembered why these calls to action 
and why they’re so important, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I don’t want to lose sight of the hope, the sense of hope, 
certainly talking to Justice Sinclair the sense of hope, 
determination and hope, the good work that is being done. 
Hearing talk of reconciliation is something that I don’t think we 
did hear when we were going to school, so I think that that is 
hopeful. And we have to keep that hope alive, and note the very 
good work that’s going on in communities around this country 
and around this province, but also not be shy about the work 
that’s ahead of us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Today in Saskatchewan, 67 per cent of children in care are First 
Nations children. The national average is 48 per cent. In 
Manitoba or in Saskatchewan, 64 per cent of children who are 
First Nations live below the poverty line. That number for 
non-indigenous children is about 16 per cent. So these impacts 
exist today. Off-reserve First Nations employment in 
Saskatchewan is 21.7 per cent, and the North lost over 2,200 
jobs since last September. Mr. Speaker, this is where the past 
meets the present. Those impacts continue today. 
 
It was noted . . . I brought up in June when we stood here in this 
legislature, you know, certainly the social impacts, but the 
economic impacts as well. And I deliberately put them second 
and a bit down the line, but they are important as well. 
 
A recent study that showed that closing the First Nations 
education gap would provide massive economic benefit to all 
Saskatchewan people. According to that study, closing the gap 
would bring about an additional 90, nine zero, billion into our 
economy over the lifespan of the current population, Mr. 
Speaker. So this is, I think, a social, a moral, and an economic 
imperative that we get this right, that we start about the path of 
reconciliation. 
 
So certainly, many of the recommendations that were brought 
about in the calls to action were aimed at the federal 
government. Many of them are aimed at every individual, every 
person who resides in Canada. And some were aimed 
particularly at provincial governments, Mr. Speaker. 
 

So my goal now with the remainder of my time is to go through 
some of those goals. I know that it has been stated that the 
government is working on about 22 or 23 of these goals. I want 
to instill a sense of urgency about really going after those goals 
and also raise an alarm that not only do I fear that we’ve stalled, 
that we’ve actually gone backwards on some of those goals 
since last year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the first goals is calling upon levels of government to 
commit to reducing the number of children in care, Mr. 
Speaker. As I just noted, 67 per cent of children in care in this 
province are indigenous and that number is too high. We 
recently saw legislation or have been speaking to legislation 
that would make it easier to terminate contracts with First 
Nations child and family services providers. Mr. Speaker, I 
don’t know. I think that relationship with those providers is 
very important and we need to work harder to maintain and to 
increase that relationship. 
 
Something that I pay particular attention to is Jordan’s 
Principle. Jordan’s Principle, Mr. Speaker, is the principle 
based on an inquiry into the death of a young First Nations boy 
who spent his whole life in hospital because levels of 
government were wrangling about who should pay. Jordan’s 
Principle tells us that we should provide the service first and 
then work out who pays later. Mr. Speaker, we are not far 
enough ahead with Jordan’s Principle in this province and I can 
tell you that from first-hand experience. 
 
When listing some of the progress that has been made on the 
call for governments to develop culturally appropriate parenting 
programs for Aboriginal families, certainly there has been good 
work done, Mr. Speaker. I think that it’s important, though, that 
we not only do this work when money is flowing swiftly, that 
we prioritize this work. I think of the stagnation in funding to 
KidsFirst, the cutting of the RIC [regional intersectoral 
committee] coordinators. It’s important work, and not just when 
we’ve got the extra cash. Let’s prioritize these terms, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
One of the other recommendations was eliminating educational 
employment gaps, Mr. Speaker. Certainly we have a significant 
and endearing . . . enduring, rather, Mr. Speaker, gap between 
not only achievement rates but also graduation rates between 
indigenous and non-indigenous children in this province. 
 
We have sector goals, which are important. But we have noted 
— and I certainly have noted from this place — significant 
underfunding in education in this province, signals that we are 
going to really embark on a program of upheaval within 
education. And I’ve been told by educator after educator after 
parent after board that they are fearful that, when we embark 
upon that kind of change and upheaval, that we are going to 
move our eyes off of those goals in education. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that would be a huge mistake. 
 
I think about, you know, one of the things that the government 
says that they are doing with regard to this gap is making 
technological resources like the student data system available to 
First Nations schools. And in that, our public 
telecommunications company certainly plays a big role, Mr. 
Speaker, so I highlight that. 
 



960 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2016 

[12:45] 
 
Pre-kindergarten programs are noted here, Mr. Speaker. There’s 
a stagnation in funding for pre-kindergarten programs. We 
didn’t add any more last year in the budget, and that, Mr. 
Speaker, is a problem. 
 
I note Askî and the Help Me Tell My Story, that research, I 
would . . . that program, would highlight that as something that 
is positive, certainly, that’s gone on in our schools. 
 
When the government was listing their list of positives and their 
measures in order to address the calls to action, Mr. Speaker, 
they note the NORTEP program. Mr. Speaker, certainly, we 
agree. That is a great program. It provides teachers; 90 per cent 
of those teachers stay in the North. They have established 
relationships in those communities. And, Mr. Speaker, that is 
hugely important especially when we think of what we have 
lost, what people in the North have lost in terms of those 
relationships and those members of their community. That’s 
why I think that is very much in the wrong direction to be 
cutting that program. 
 
One of the other calls to action is calling upon levels of 
government to develop culturally appropriate early childhood 
education programs for Aboriginal families. Again as we noted, 
we’ve stagnated in our creation of early learning programming, 
pre-K [pre-kindergarten] programming, and KidsFirst 
programming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of other examples here, but to 
this I would say one more specific would be cuts to the 
Aboriginal court program worker, cuts to the alternative 
measures program, both of which go against not only the calls 
in this document but also what the government has said that 
they are doing to remediate those, to address those calls to 
action, Mr. Speaker. We’re moving in the wrong direction. 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I move to conclude and adjourn 
debate on the motion. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 
has moved to adjourn debate on the motion. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
move that this House be now adjourned. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that this House adjourns. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 
until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:49.] 

 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Ruling on a Point of Order 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 935 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 935 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 935 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 936 
  Beaudry-Mellor ......................................................................................................................................................................... 936 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 936 
  Ottenbreit .................................................................................................................................................................................. 936 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 936 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 937 
  Moe ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 937 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 937 
  Cox ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 937 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 937 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 938 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 938 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 938 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 939 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 939 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Remembering Jim Prentice  
  Harrison ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 939 
 Violence Prevention Week in Saskatchewan  
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 939 
 Regina Pulse Week 
  Kaeding ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 940 
 Pelagie Maurice Celebrates 102nd Birthday 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 940 
 Reopening of Choiceland Museum 
   Wilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 940 
 Local Entrepreneur Named to Coaches Council  
  Beaudry-Mellor ......................................................................................................................................................................... 940 
 Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres Banquet 
  Fiaz ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 941 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Privatization of Crown Corporations 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 941 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 941 
 Auditor’s Report and Details of Land Transaction 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 942 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 942 
  Harrison ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 943 
 Second Bridge for Prince Albert 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 944 
  Marit .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 944 
 Role of Government in Delivery of Education 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 944 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 944 
 Coroner’s Inquests 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 945 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 945 
 Changes to Workers’ Compensation 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 945 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 945 
MOTIONS 
 Appointment of Advocate for Children and Youth 
  Merriman .................................................................................................................................................................................. 946 
 
 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Rural and Remote Health Care 
  Steele .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 946 
  Rancourt ............................................................................................................................................................................ 948, 955 
  Michelson ........................................................................................................................................................................... 949, 955 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 951 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................... 952 
  Belanger ............................................................................................................................................................................. 953, 956 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 955 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 955 
  Nerlien ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 956 
  Fiaz ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 956 
  Dennis ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 956 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 2 — Calls to Action in the Truth and Reconciliation Commission’s Report 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 957 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


