






















































Hansard: June 07, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 12A  TUESDAY, JUNE 7, 2016, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Hon. Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Hon. Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Merriman, Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 51; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Maurice Riou http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 351 
 June 7, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before introduction of guests I will be tabling 
the 2016 report volume 1 to be laid before the Legislative 
Assembly, in accordance with the provisions of section 14(1) of 
The Provincial Auditor’s Act, to be tabled today, June 7th, 
2016. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 
and through you, it’s an honour to introduce some grade 5 
students from the great city of Swift Current from the mostly 
new, the relatively new École Centennial. They’re all waving. 
Mr. Speaker, this is a great new facility in Swift Current made 
possible by excellent staff and a great group of students. And 
today joining us are 43 grade 5 students. They’re accompanied 
by their teachers: Ms. Kellie Garland and Ms. Sarah Demeis. 
Also with the group are chaperones Jennifer Klassen, Bryce 
Coates, Kristin Carlson, Jennifer Skazyk, Kerry Lind, Mike 
Jarvis, Raeanne Kalenchuck, Gerald Johnston, and Amanda 
Schamber. Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of the 
Assembly to join with me in welcoming these students to their 
Legislative Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to stand up in my place and recognize a special guest 
that is visiting the Assembly, a good, dear friend, Carl 
Swenson, Mr. Speaker. Carl is here watching the Assembly 
today. And just to point out as well that he’s a lawyer by trade, 
but he’s also a very gifted poker player; so if he’s able to play 
poker to the extent that he has shown a number of people 
throughout the western part of Canada, he’s also going to be a 
great lawyer, Mr. Speaker, based on his skill set. So I would ask 
all members to welcome Mr. Swenson to his Legislative 
Building today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to stand in my place today and introduce three great 
members and constituents from Yorkton to their Legislative 
Assembly. The first is Sherry MacDonald. She’s employed by 
the Chamber of Commerce in Yorkton, very well known in the 
community and very active in the community, and a good friend 
and neighbour. In fact I think I could probably throw a rock 
from my backyard and hit her house if I had a good arm. With 
her today is her son, Colin, also from Yorkton, and her 
daughter, Kirsten MacDonald, who I will speak more about in 
members’ statements very shortly, Mr. Speaker. So I’d ask all 
members to welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 
leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sitting in 
your gallery, I’ve got a couple of guests to introduce. To you 
and through you, it’s my pleasure to introduce a special guest to 
the Legislative Assembly today. Seated in the gallery is Neil 
Fisher. Neil is the 2016 Saskatchewanderer. Where are you, 
Neil? There we go. See, you wandered right around the clock. 
Awesome. 
 
Saskatchewanderer promotes the best of the living, working, 
and playing in Saskatchewan. The program is a partnership 
between the Ministry of Parks, Culture and Sport; Economy; 
and Agriculture; as well as Tourism Saskatchewan. 
 
Neil is the first ever Saskatchewanderer who was born and 
raised in a different province. Neil grew up in Coquitlam, BC 
[British Columbia] but has called Saskatchewan home for the 
past two years. Neil is an accomplished photographer and 
videographer. His photography has been featured on the covers 
of the National Post and the Vancouver Sun. He has had work 
published in National Geographic’s children’s magazine, Nat 
Geo Explorer. The Smithsonian National Museum of Natural 
History used a photo of his in an exhibit focusing on 
bioluminescence.  
 
Through the mediums of photography, written blogs, video, and 
social media, the Saskatchewanderer promotes our province 
from different places and perspectives. So far this year, Neil 
braved the elements, attending the world’s largest snowball 
fight in Saskatoon, tried polar bear dipping at the Fort 
Qu’Appelle Winter Festival. I hope Neil hit some of the 
Saskatoon MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly]. He 
took in the first-ever Rush professional lacrosse game, the 
Saskatchewan Book Awards, and Saskatchewan Fashion Week. 
 
Beyond the stories of some of Saskatchewan’s great people, 
events, and careers, Neil has taken beautiful photography of 
Saskatchewan’s landscape and living skies, visiting landmarks 
like Castle Butte, Jones Peak, the Great Sandhills, Grasslands 
National Park, and more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Neil is creating interesting content and stunning 
photography that are furthering the scope of success in the 
Saskatchewanderer program and showcasing many of 
Saskatchewan’s amazing people, careers, events, and its natural 
beauty. Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in 
welcoming Neil to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, seated in your gallery 
is Wendy Theines. Wendy is from Shaunavon, has just been 
hired as program manager for artsVest Saskatchewan. Mr. 



352 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2016 

Speaker, for some of those new members who might not know, 
artsVest Saskatchewan is a terrific program managed by the 
nationally renowned arts and culture funding organization, 
Business for the Arts, which trains and mentors arts and culture 
organizations on how to approach businesses to create mutually 
beneficial partnerships that support culture while at the same 
time making good business sense. 
 
Since artsVest Saskatchewan began in 2011, the government 
has invested $1 million, and that was matched by Canadian 
Heritage. This in turn has leveraged more than $4.3 million in 
private sector sponsorships and resulted in more than $5.39 
million to Saskatchewan’s arts and culture economy.  
 
Mr. Speaker, Wendy has been involved in the non-profit and 
the cultural sector for more than 20 years as an employee and 
volunteer at local and provincial levels. Business for the Arts 
feels they are very fortunate to have found Wendy. She joins 
the artsVest program from the Grand Coteau Heritage & 
Cultural Centre in Shaunavon. She served as executive director 
for six years. She lives in Shaunavon with her husband and their 
two teenage children. 
 
Wendy is currently in Regina with artsVest mentorship program 
manager Rebecca Harrison from Toronto to present their 
mentoring sessions, and Ms. Harrison is with the participants 
now. Wendy will return there to continue for the afternoon 
sessions right after this. I’m sure Saskatchewan cultural 
organizations are looking forward to getting to know you and 
work with you in the artsVest program. Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all 
members to join me in welcoming Wendy to her Legislative 
Assembly and wishing her all the best in her new post. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join with the minister in welcoming these two important 
individuals to their Legislative Assembly, certainly Neil Fisher 
with the Saskatchewanderer program. It’s a bit of a dream job, 
and certainly seeing all the many delights of Saskatchewan — 
not just through the eyes of Saskatchewan people, but someone 
who’s come here — will lend new perspective to the many 
sights and delights to be encountered. Certainly we wish him 
many continued great adventures in the Saskatchewanderer 
program, and I will keep following along on Instagram and 
throughout different media. 
 
As well I’d like to welcome Wendy Thienes from the artsVest 
program. And certainly Shaunavon is a town with a rich 
heritage, a rich cultural scene, and her grounding in that 
community, Mr. Speaker, speaks well of the work that she’ll 
bring to artsVest. So, Wendy, best of luck with all of that. We 
look for the great work to come, building on your roots coming 
out of Shaunavon. 
 
But again, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to join me in 
welcoming these two very important individuals to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Bonk: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, I’d like to 
welcome Tim Taylor and his son Landon. Tim is a good friend 

of mine and one of the people who volunteered extensively on 
the last election campaign. Mr. Speaker, I have more to share 
about Tim’s — I can’t call him Tim; this is Mr. Taylor in our 
house — I have more to share about his accomplishments in a 
member’s statement shortly, but I ask all members to welcome 
Tim and Landon to their legislature. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present a petition to improve PTSD [post-traumatic stress 
disorder] coverage for Saskatchewan workers. Mr. Speaker, I 
have close to 500 petitions and there are more coming in every 
day, and I will continue to table one every day until this 
government does something about this. 
 
The petitioners are pointing out that post-traumatic stress 
disorder can severely impact the lives of Saskatchewan 
workers, that the delay in PTSD, Mr. Speaker, is harmful to 
both the individual and the system as a whole, Mr. Speaker. 
They’re calling on the government to make PTSD a 
presumptive illness to ensure that people get the prompt service 
that they deserve, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would like to read the prayer. We, in the prayer . . . I’m so 
glad to hear the government is interested in listening: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Saskatchewan government to 
make the necessary changes to ensure that if Saskatchewan 
workers are exposed to traumatic events on the job and are 
then diagnosed with PTSD, it is presumed to be caused by 
the worker’s employment, and the worker will 
subsequently be covered under workers’ compensation and 
receive the same benefits as other workers with 
work-related injuries. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Saskatoon and 
Prince Albert. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition in support of heritage languages here 
in Saskatchewan. We know that after 25 years, the Government 
of Saskatchewan is discontinuing all support for heritage 
language learning here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Since 1991, heritage language schools have depended on this 
modest funding from the Ministry of Education to help sustain 
their programs. And as a result of the announcement made by 
the Ministry of Education, many of these non-profit heritage 
language schools will be faced with a difficult decision of 
whether they can continue to operate. 
 
We know it’s increasingly important to work towards 
improving access to indigenous languages, many of which are 
endangered. Heritage language programs provide support not 



June 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 353 

only for immigrants, refugees, and their descendants, but also 
for Aboriginal peoples and all Canadians who recognize the 
benefits of learning additional languages. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to reconsider this decision and restore funding for heritage 
language schools in Saskatchewan heritage schools. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition today are 
from the city of Saskatoon. Thank you. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 

Yorkton Resident is Miss Teenage Saskatchewan 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, it’s an honour to stand 
and talk about the 2016 Miss Teenage Saskatchewan winner. 
Kirsten MacDonald, from my hometown of Yorkton, competed 
and won the pageant in Saskatoon last month. Kirsten and 17 
other girls competed for this much sought after title, and she 
will represent our province with distinction at the Miss Teen 
Canada Pageant in Toronto this July. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only is Kirsten a beautiful young woman, she 
has a heart to match. She has raised over $2,000 for Cardiac 
Kids for the Saskatchewan pageant. And she also goes to 
Toronto and will raise funds for the international charity, Free 
the Children. From my personal experience, I know she has 
volunteered extensively on the local level. In fact she has 
helped out at many Yorkton and area cancer program 
fundraising events over the past couple of months with Brayden 
Ottenbreit Close Cuts for Cancer. 
 
Kirsten takes the job of representing her city and province very 
seriously. She has embraced this, and I have no doubt that she 
will have a great shot at becoming Miss Teen Canada. Mr. 
Speaker, I would ask all members of this Assembly to join me 
in congratulating Miss Teen Saskatchewan, Kirsten 
MacDonald, on her victory and wish her all the best in Toronto 
in July. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Prince Albert Pride Week 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Saturday, June 
4, I was pleased to take part in Pride festivities held in Prince 
Albert. The Pride parade started at the Prince Albert Court 

House and made its way to Kinsmen Park, where speeches were 
made and several activities took place. There were more people 
in attendance this year than ever before, no doubt due to 
increasing awareness of the need for equality and fairness to the 
LGBTQ [lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer and/or 
questioning] community. 
 
Prince Albert had many events throughout the city this week in 
celebration of Pride Week, including the flag raising ceremony 
at city hall, a fundraising steak supper at Smitty’s restaurant, a 
poetry reading at Rock Trout Cafe, a Pride art night at the Mann 
Art Gallery, a rainbow prom at the East End community centre, 
and a diversity church service at Wesley United Church. The 
organizers of each event were very pleased with the turnout and 
are excited that Pride Week events continue to grow each year 
in Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we must continue to work together to ensure that 
everyone in Saskatchewan is treated with dignity and respect 
and that everybody enjoys basic human rights. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in 
congratulating the organizers and community leaders who made 
Pride Week in Prince Albert such a success and acknowledge 
their contribution in the fight for equality and respect. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moosomin. 
 

Saskatchewan Resident is One of Canada’s 
Outstanding Principals 

 
Mr. Bonk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is an honour to stand 
in this Assembly today and talk about a good friend of mine and 
one of Canada’s Outstanding Principals. As I referenced in my 
welcome, Tim Taylor is one of the people who helped get me 
elected, but he is also a pillar in his community.  
 
Mr. Speaker, school principals fulfill a dual role as both 
educators and administrators, and this is especially the case in 
small communities where principals are leaders in their 
communities. Tim has been principal of the Dr. Isman 
Elementary School in Wolseley for almost 26 years and is 
celebrating his 41st year as a teacher. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Tim was honoured this year for his outstanding 
contribution to his school and community by being one of two 
recipients from Saskatchewan and one of 40 principals from 
across Canada who were awarded the distinction of Canada’s 
Outstanding Principals. 
 
The Learning Partnership is a national organization that focuses 
on excellence in our education system and sponsors this yearly 
event. This group of principals was honoured at a gala in 
Toronto in February, where their commitment to excellence in 
education was showcased. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of this Assembly to 
congratulate Tim on being awarded one of Canada’s 
Outstanding Principals. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 



354 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2016 

Remembering Firefighters 
Victor Budz and Dennis Guenter 

 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May 31st marks 36 
years since Saskatoon firefighters Victor Budz and Dennis 
Guenter lost their lives battling the Queen’s Hotel fire in 
Saskatoon. To mark this sombre occasion and to recognize 
these brave men, Downtown Saskatoon and the Saskatoon 
Professional Fire Fighters, IAFF [International Association of 
Fire Fighters] 80 held a ceremony to honour them and to unveil 
a plaque at the Scotiabank Theatre where the hotel once stood. 
 
We heard that 46-year-old Vic Budz had been on the job for 17 
years and in that time had never missed one day of duty. He 
was an accomplished musician, a great neighbour, a good 
worker. He was a husband, father, son, and a friend to many 
people. We heard that Dennis Guenter was only 29, having 
worked for the fire service for less than two years. He was a 
superb athlete, a dedicated father, a great husband, and a choice 
friend with high moral integrity. 
 
MC [master of ceremonies] Jim Brayshaw painted a picture of 
that day that started out as simply a fire in progress. Jim said, 
there’s never anything mundane about a fire, but this was not 
thought of as an extraordinarily dangerous one. Circumstances 
made it otherwise. When all was said and done, on engine 11’s 
arrival at the scene there were four firefighters, but it returned 
that day to 1 hall with only two. Vic and Dennis gave their lives 
fighting to protect lives and property in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to extend much gratitude to these two 
men and to all firefighters for their willingness to put 
themselves in harm’s way for the rest of us, and to say thank 
you to downtown Saskatoon and IAFF 80 for ensuring we all 
know this important story. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 
 

Brothers Receive Honorary Degrees 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 
to recognize the accomplishments of a constituent and a very 
good friend of mine, Gavin Semple. Last week Gavin Semple 
and his brother Jack were both honoured by the University of 
Regina with honorary degrees. Gavin, who is the chairman and 
co-owner of Brandt group of companies, received an honorary 
Doctor of Laws degree. Jack, who is a talented guitar player, 
singer, and songwriter, received an honorary Doctor of Fine 
Arts degree. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Semples say they owe much of their success to 
their late father, John, who taught his six children about the 
importance and the value of hard work. In 1972 Gavin took an 
entry-level job at Brandt to supplement his family farm income. 
Within five years he worked his way up to becoming a general 
manager and part owner. Eventually he became the sole owner, 
a role he now is transitioning to his son Shaun. 
 
When 10-year-old Jack wanted to start playing guitar, he had to 
earn the money to buy one. After chopping wood and feeding 
cows for a couple of months, he got his first guitar. 
 

Mr. Speaker, Gavin and Jack are an example of how setting 
goals and working hard to achieve them can result in great 
success. I ask all members to join me in congratulating Gavin 
and Jack Semple on receiving these honorary degrees. Thank 
you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
North. 
 

Heart Garden Opens 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Friday I had 
the pleasure of attending Palliser Heights School in Moose Jaw 
to celebrate the opening of their Heart Garden. The Heart 
Garden was modelled after the Heart Garden in Ottawa, which 
was created at the closing ceremonies of the Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Heart Garden holds many purposes. It 
beautifies a space adjacent to the school, is a teaching space 
where students can learn outside. They can learn about plants, 
but most importantly it is a space where students can engage in 
meaningful activities that are related to reconciliation and 
acknowledge the legacy of the residential school system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every student at Palliser Heights School 
participated in the Project of the Heart, creating a tile of 
memory for students who attended residential schools. The tiles 
created a beautiful mosaic which was also unveiled at the 
opening of the Heart Garden. Mr. Speaker, the opening was a 
special day, with students from Empire Community School and 
William Grayson School also in attendance. Three residential 
school survivors were in attendance. The Empire School 
drumming group played while students walked the Path of 
Hearts into the garden where the mosaic plaque was unveiled. It 
was a meaningful ceremony identifying a regretful past. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating the staff and the 
students of Palliser Heights School for their dedication to 
reconciliation. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Group Home Opens in Esterhazy 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On June 3rd I had 
the pleasure of attending the grand opening ceremony for a new 
group home in Esterhazy which offers support to individuals 
with disabilities. This beautiful new facility includes an 
in-home day program and a sensory room. The sensory room in 
particular is very innovative as it is used to stimulate a person’s 
senses and has been shown to help with treatments. Mr. 
Speaker, these supports, along with the work of the fantastic 
caregivers at this home, will allow the five residents to be 
included in the Esterhazy community while meeting their 
unique needs. 
 
It is important that all people have the right supports in place to 
allow them to lead fulfilling lives. We believe that inclusion is 
at the heart of community living and care for individuals 
experiencing disability. That is why our government has 
contributed $400,000 plus a mortgage of over $800,000 to this 



June 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 355 

project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are committed to making our province the best 
place in Canada for those living with disabilities. Through our 
province’s disability strategy, we are working to improve 
services for these individuals. We are grateful to have partners 
like the Langenburg & District Activity Centre who do 
incredible work each and every day supporting individuals 
living with intellectual disabilities. 
 
Together we will make Saskatchewan a more inclusive and 
supportive province for all people. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Government’s Fiscal Management 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, back in 2008 this Premier 
seemed like a very different person. Despite being left with a 
surplus and a rainy day fund, a couple billion dollars, he waxed 
on about his so-called growth and financial security Act. He 
said it would toughen balanced budget legislation and prescribe 
debt reduction. He said his government would reduce the debt 
of the province and legislate that his government and all 
governments would forever balance the budget. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, even forever isn’t safe from Sask Party cuts. 
The Sask Party broke their own law, so they’re throwing it out. 
Incredibly they have simultaneously cut deep and ballooned the 
debt. No question, times are tougher these days. But during the 
boom, they squandered the wealth. During their time, they had 
tens of billions of dollars of extra revenue, and now it and then 
some is all gone. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, for the Premier: what happened? What 
changed? And how, with all this spending, are we still seeing 
deep cuts for Saskatchewan people and families? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, those dollars are not gone. 
Those dollars are now represented by $2.7 billion paid off on 
the operational debt of the province of Saskatchewan, the credit 
card we inherited from previous governments. Those dollars are 
represented in $6 billion worth of tax reductions for 
Saskatchewan families, for farmers, and for businesses — $6 
billion in tax reductions. You see, we on this side of the House 
think those dollars that belonged to taxpayers in the first place 
should be returned to those taxpayers when the opportunity 
presents itself, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Where else did the money go? $8 billion in infrastructure 
investment in this province to build new schools, to build 
hospitals, new long-term care facilities, record investments in 
highways, Mr. Speaker, a children’s hospital, finally a 
replacement hospital up in North Battleford. That’s where those 
dollars went. 
 
And as for the legislation, Mr. Speaker, for years after that ’08 
election, that member as the Finance critic would call on this 
government to move to summary financial budgeting. Well The 

Growth and Financial Security Act was based on the old NDP 
[New Democratic Party] approach of a general revenue fund 
budget and a summary budget and so, Mr. Speaker, the 
legislation has outlived its usefulness. It’s no longer reflective 
of summary budgeting. Mr. Speaker, we’ve gone to summary 
budgeting just as members opposite wanted us to do and the 
new legislation to replace the one he’s referencing will reflect 
that fact. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the auditor didn’t say 
repeal and scrap the legislation. She said fix it, and you’re not 
following it, Mr. Speaker. From a government that wasted 
billions of dollars on project that’s been mismanaged after 
project that’s been mismanaged. 
 
Well you know close to a decade ago he was a lot more poetic. 
Quoting an African proverb he said, it doesn’t matter if you’re a 
lion or a gazelle. When the sun comes up, you’d better start 
running. Well, Mr. Speaker, problem is he ran the wrong way. 
They’ve increased debt to over $14 billion, to record highs, up 
from over $7.9 billion since 2009, referenced in his own budget 
book. He should read that. And the rainy day fund which was 
supposed to be here for tougher times has been incredibly 
drained — $1.4 billion drained, gone — by that government 
before, of course, oil price fell. 
 
You know, they hid the facts. Now he’s playing shell games. 
He’s using fuzzy math that just doesn’t add up and he’s denying 
reality. Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party’s cuts have real 
consequences to real people. So will the Premier admit that he 
overspent, wasting billions on mismanaged projects in good 
times and now it’s Saskatchewan people that are left to pay the 
price? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure who’s writing the 
questions over there for the Leader of the Opposition. Maybe 
it’s one of the individuals they’ve recruited from Thomas 
Mulcair’s office in Ottawa to work now here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. But he should proofread his questions before he 
raises them in the House because, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan think $6 billion in tax 
reduction is a waste of money. And I don’t think the people of 
Saskatchewan believe that building hospitals and schools and 
spending $8 billion in infrastructure investment — an area of 
neglect left by members opposite — I don’t think Saskatchewan 
taxpayers think that is a waste of money. 
 
And I don’t think Saskatchewan taxpayers agree with the NDP 
that taking $2.7 billion of revenue from a growing economy and 
paying off the operating debt, paying off the credit card of the 
province of Saskatchewan that we inherited from those 
members opposite and governments previous, and governments 
previous — I don’t think they think that’s a waste of money. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we just had an election campaign in this 
province where these things were debated. What was on full 
display for the voters in this province was the record of this side 
of the House in terms of what we’ve done with the growing 
economy, and the record of members opposite who presided 



356 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2016 

over decades of people leaving this province, who presided over 
infrastructure deficit the likes of which we’ve never seen before 
and we will not see in the future, Mr. Speaker, because we are 
taking steps to address those things now in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Management of Health Care System 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, let’s get back to the facts. 
Crucial to a strong health care system are of course physicians. 
So we asked the government how many salaried doctors we had 
in 2014-15, a simple question. They said the information would 
“. . . be available from the Canadian Institute of Health 
Information in September of 2016.” A bit of an eyebrow-raising 
response. So we asked for the number of physicians for 
2015-16. They replied with, that information will be available 
from the Canadian Institute of Health Information in September 
2017. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need to wait a year and a half to know how 
many physicians there are? And this government pawns their 
responsibility off to a national organization? Does the 
government really not have this information? How can they 
justify not sharing this information even if it’s legally required? 
And how can they seriously talk about transformational change 
in the health care system if they can’t even collect simple 
information? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, at the risk of pre-empting the Government Whip, who 
is going to be tabling those answers in about 18 minutes, Mr. 
Speaker, the latest numbers I have are 2,375 physicians in the 
province. Mr. Speaker, in 2007 it was 1,742 overall. That’s the 
physician numbers. If the member opposite is looking for the 
more detailed information, again 17 minutes and 54 seconds 
she’ll have the answer. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, seniors’ care is one place where 
that transformational change is really needed. A recent study 
demonstrated that taking seniors off antipsychotic drugs could 
not only save the health care system millions of dollars but also 
prevent thousands of falls. Inappropriate use of antipsychotic 
drugs in long-term care is 4 per cent higher in Saskatchewan 
than the national average. Mr. Speaker, one in three dementia 
patients is on an antipsychotic despite having no diagnosis 
requiring the drug. 
 
There have been some improvements in one Regina facility but 
still no action in the rest of the province. The Ombudsman has 
made many recommendations to improve seniors’ care and 
again they were implemented in only one facility. The rest of 
the province is still waiting. 
 
Is this what we will see with antipsychotic drugs — the 

government will boast about one centre and fail the rest of the 
province? When will Saskatchewan seniors get the care and the 
dignity that they deserve? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Thank you to the member for the question. Mr. Speaker, I want 
to first thank the member for recognizing the work that has been 
done already in early days in terms of reducing the amount of 
psychiatric medication that seniors in our care are prescribed, 
even without a diagnosis, Mr. Speaker. We are committed to 
reducing that number. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would say that the work that the member has 
indicated in seeing some reductions in those numbers, Mr. 
Speaker, is the work of quality improvement. We’ve used lean 
principles, Mr. Speaker, which I know the member opposite has 
a difference of opinion in terms of those tools that we’ve used, 
but it has been successfully applied in an early sense, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And so what our work is to do is to work with our regional 
health authorities to look to see what has worked in the facilities 
that we have implemented that and then implement it across the 
province, Mr. Speaker. And I know that our senior leadership 
team throughout the entire province is certainly very committed 
to that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, they’re not taking action on 
chemical restraints, so what about physical restraints? The 
national average for restraint use in long-term care is 8.7 per 
cent. Mr. Speaker, there are Saskatchewan health regions where 
the rates are as high as 29 per cent — 29 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
Almost one in every three long-term care residents is restrained. 
Some of our most vulnerable citizens are literally being 
shackled. How is that okay? What an awful experience, Mr. 
Speaker. And I can hear them over there mumbling about 
shackling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is what happens in some of our long-term care 
facilities. We know that Saskatchewan has no minimum care 
standards, and we hear time and time again that long-term care 
is understaffed. Well, Mr. Speaker, these are the consequences. 
These are the consequences of a lack of standards, of 
underfunding, and of understaffing in long-term care. Our 
mothers and fathers, our grandmothers and grandfathers are 
being shackled to their beds or wheelchairs because there aren’t 
enough staff. To the minister: how is this okay? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I want 
to thank the member for her question. Mr. Speaker, this is 
something that I know that we have as a ministry and as a 
government, and our partners and the regional health authorities 
and the affiliates, take these issues very seriously. But I do want 
to correct the premise of the member’s question. We do have 
standards when it comes to long-term care, Mr. Speaker, in this 
province and that all of our facilities, whether they be 



June 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 357 

government owned and operated or operated by affiliates or 
profit or non-profit organizations, are required to follow the 
standards, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I will also mention to the member — and I know that she knows 
this very well, although she missed it from the premise of her 
question — that this government has each and every year made 
a commitment to adding additional staff into long-term care to 
the point, Mr. Speaker, where we are nearly 800 full-time 
equivalent workers higher than we were under the members 
opposite for roughly the same number of residents, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve also made a commitment that we want to 
see a reduction in administration, and that in turn will go 
directly into front-line care in long-term care, Mr. Speaker. So 
we are working our way to address these issues that she has 
mentioned. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Support for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We continue to see that 
it is the old and the young that face the consequences of this 
government’s poor decisions. Yesterday education 
professionals protested in P.A. [Prince Albert] after the 
Saskatchewan Rivers school board cut 11,000 hours of staff 
time. That is 11,000 hours that our kids will no longer receive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that school boards are in a tough 
position. We know for many boards this budget will mean 
fewer teaching assistants and increased class sizes. Last week 
we heard the Education minister say that school boards need to 
find savings, but at what cost? We have heard about graduation 
rates and reading levels that are lagging terribly behind. Gone 
are the days when the Sask Party would talk about improving 
graduation rates, about improving math and literacy. Gone are 
the days that they would talk about investing more in learning. 
Now schools are struggling to put teachers in front of 
classrooms. 
 
The minister may think it’s okay to make lofty goals and not 
reach them. When will the minister finally give students the 
support that they need? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the 
members opposite, it appears that we have a growing pattern 
from that side of the House of starting off the preambles of their 
question with erroneous information. So, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
correct the member opposite. Yesterday the member opposite 
said, and I quote: 
 

The Education Minister says that it’s the teachers who 
need to start looking for more savings. He said that the 
school divisions should “sit down with a blank piece of 
paper” and then listed off . . . things that they could do 
without. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I need to set the record straight. In the scrum on 

June 2nd, I stated, and once again I quote: 
 

The challenge that I would say to all the school divisions is 
sit down with a blank sheet of paper and say, ‘How many 
things we can share with another school division? Can we 
do [with] a common set of payroll? Can we [go] do things 
where . . . [there are] common buying. How many 
superintendents do we really need? Can we have the 
principals do more of the management, more of the 
administration?’ 

 
Mr. Speaker, nowhere did I say the teachers need to start 
looking for savings. Nowhere did I list things the divisions 
could do without. We know that the members opposite have a 
very long history of misquoting members. So, Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to give the member opposite the opportunity right now to 
stand and correct what she said yesterday. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, yet again not a lot of responsibility 
taken by the minister. 
 
Continuing on with more folks who are faced with the 
consequences of this government’s mismanagement, yet again 
last week 10 employees from the regional intersectoral 
committees were cut by the Ministry of Education. These RIC 
committees, which have demonstrated considerable success, 
brought together school divisions, health regions, First Nations 
and Métis groups to work on poverty reduction, affordable 
housing, and early childhood development. In February these 
committees helped to develop the government’s poverty 
reduction strategy. Since then, no action has been taken. That 
poverty reduction strategy has seen no action and no funding 
put towards it. 
 
We heard the Minister of Social Services say we need to put 
more actionables into those strategies and actually get the work 
done. When the government says actionables, do they really 
mean cuts? Mr. Speaker, how are these cuts justifiable when the 
Minister of Social Services herself says that action is needed? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it is the intention of this 
government to sit down with its partners, the STF 
[Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation], the SSBA 
[Saskatchewan School Boards Association], SASBO 
[Saskatchewan Association of School Business Officials] leads 
and try and make sure that we have the most effective and the 
most efficient way of ensuring that front-line resources remain 
committed to our classrooms, remain committed to our 
students, so that we can see the continuing improvement in their 
reading scores, in their math scores, and in their graduation 
rates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, under the NDP there was no willingness to set a 
target. We’ve set targets and when we meet those targets, Mr. 
Speaker, it is our intention to sit down with our partners and 
look at raising those targets so that we can continue to have the 
excellence that we strive for in this province because our 
students and our teachers deserve nothing less. 



358 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2016 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Children in Provincial Care 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, speaking of facts that 
contradict what the government claims, at the end of April the 
Minister of Social Services was asked about the number of kids 
in care and she said, “We are one of the few provinces, if not 
the only province, that has brought down the number of . . . 
[kids in] care.” Mr. Speaker, not only did the number of kids in 
care in Saskatchewan last year go up, not down, we saw other 
provinces — Alberta for example — actually bring down the 
numbers of kids in care. 
 
So the Sask Party’s record on this is certainly not sitting on the 
imaginary pedestal that the minister has created. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that fact was clearly written in the report the minister 
was referring to. Did the minister read the report before 
speaking to it? How can the people of Saskatchewan trust she is 
taking this issue seriously if she doesn’t even care enough to 
read the report she is given? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Certainly, Mr. Speaker, and if the 
member opposite would have read the whole transcript from 
that interview she also would have seen that I referenced that 
the children were coming up, the number of children coming 
into care was coming up. We are watching it very closely. So I 
did acknowledge that the number of children coming into care 
was increasing. 
 
Again, the NDP are taking just certain words out of a quote and 
using it out of context, Mr. Speaker, not including the entire 
interview. We had plateaued the numbers and brought them 
down in around 2012 and the interview, it was expressed that 
we are recognizing the numbers are coming up. 
 
In the Children’s Advocate’s report he was talking about the 
accelerating apprehensions, Mr. Speaker. Again in that same 
interview I explained that apprehensions does not equate 
necessarily into children coming into care. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And thank you to 
the minister for acknowledging that the kids in care is 
increasing because we all know that the kids in care have 
increased. We also know that the Children’s Advocate is very 
concerned about how the government deals with kids in care, 
some of the most vulnerable in our society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today again we see that this government is failing 
kids in care. The auditor reported that the information reported 
into the Linkin system about the care providers of children is 
not always complete. The auditor stresses that could “. . . 
impact the safety of those children.” Mr. Speaker, social 
workers don’t have all the information they need about the 
people looking after these kids. We have to do better for these 
kids. 
 

To the minister: why are we not keeping proper information 
about the people looking after these children? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I found it very special that a member 
from that side of the House is even bringing up the Linkin 
system. When the NDP were in power, they promised an 
electronic system to track children in our province, and they did 
absolutely nothing, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we could track a 
library book better in our province than we could our own 
children. It was just a paper file system and as families moved, 
quite frankly the paper didn’t necessarily move with them, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We now have a Linkin system, and it’s due to this government, 
Mr. Speaker. We have increased the budget for child and 
protection, Mr. Speaker, by over 200 per cent from what the 
NDP . . . So that was our commitment to children in care, unlike 
the NDP who absolutely promised but did nothing. There was 
21 children in one foster family home when the NDP were in 
power. And if she wants to read the Children’s Advocate report, 
she needs to read A Breach of Trust and she’ll see what legacy 
we inherited when they were government. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
[14:15] 
 

Mental Health Services for the North 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, they had eight years and over 
$100 billion to figure it out, so stop blaming the NDP and start 
providing your own leadership. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all remember the tragic events that occurred in 
La Loche on January 22nd. It’s a reminder that we must do 
better when it comes to mental health services in northern 
Saskatchewan. We’ll continue still to hold the Prime Minister 
and his promises to account, but here in Saskatchewan we need 
some leadership from this government and a willingness to put 
the right supports in place so we don’t see the same kind of 
tragedy happen again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard about how only one psychiatrist is 
serving the North, and she is paying out of pocket to fly to La 
Loche and other northern communities. How is that acceptable, 
Mr. Speaker? The people of La Loche need more consistent and 
permanent support. These are good people, Mr. Speaker, that 
deserve support. 
 
So to the minister or to the Premier: will they do the right thing? 
Will they fulfill their obligations to the people of La Loche and 
northern Saskatchewan to ensure that they get the supports that 
they desperately need? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, this government is 
definitely listening to the people of the North including La 
Loche. In fact, Mr. Speaker, only a few days prior to the tragic 
events of only a few months ago, I travelled up north to 



June 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 359 

personally visit with four communities up there, especially with 
La Loche. We heard a lot of what the community had to talk 
about, and they had some really good suggestions which were 
actually acted upon fairly quickly, that are coming to 
completion. We also heard some of the challenges that they do 
have when it comes to mental health and supports when it 
comes to health in the North, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I can report again, the members across, they use 
information that’s either outdated or factually incorrect, Mr. 
Speaker. In fact when it comes to psychiatric supports of the 
North, specifically around the La Loche area, there is in fact 
two psychiatrists serving that area as well as one that is 
accessible through Telehealth, through remote presence 
technology, Mr. Speaker. So this government is paying 
attention. We’re committed to supporting our friends and 
neighbours in the North. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Crime Prevention and Correctional Facilities 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Today the auditor reported that the Ministry of 
Justice did not have effective processes to lead the building 
partnerships to reduce crime initiative. This initiative involves 
the Ministry of Justice, the Hub, and the COR [centre of 
responsibility] programs. Certainly these programs are 
important, considering that our crime rate is over double that of 
the national average. 
 
But this government is failing. They failed on intersectoral 
work and poverty reduction, and they’re failing on crime 
prevention. The auditor highlighted that this government needs 
to provide more support and the necessary tools to these 
programs because right now they aren’t. 
 
The Minister for Corrections and Policing often brags about 
these programs, but now we find that her government is not 
doing what they need in order for these programs to run 
effectively. How can the Minister of Corrections and Policing 
rely on these programs to bring down crime rates if the 
government is not giving them the support they need? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, we are committed to the 
building partnerships to reduce crime initiative and of course 
welcome the auditor’s recommendation for improvement. 
 
We underwent a cross-ministry program review on this 
initiative last year, and many of the same recommendations 
have come out of the review. We have undertaken a further 
review, Mr. Speaker, of the initiative and in particular the COR 
model which is the analysis model, and how to best support it 
from the provincial perspective. 
 
This work continues and, we expect, once finalized will help to 
meet many of the recommendations made by the Provincial 
Auditor, Mr. Speaker. We are committed to demand reductions 
in our system, in our communities, Mr. Speaker, and we will 
continue to use research and analysis and defined outcomes to 

measure our success. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, we seem to have a hard time 
getting straight answers from the government today, including 
the Minister of Corrections and Policing. First, she said last 
week, “As of today, there are no offenders in gymnasiums.” 
When I asked about it in yesterday’s question period, Mr. 
Speaker, she didn’t answer the question. Later, she suddenly 
recalled in her budget speech that her government converted “a 
gym into a 32-bed dormitory in Regina Correctional Centre.” 
But there’s more, Mr. Speaker. When asked about the closure of 
the Buffalo Narrows correctional centre, she said, “We have 
opened a facility which is very, very close to . . . reopened a 
facility called Besnard which is very, very close to Buffalo 
Narrows.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, Besnard is 248 kilometres from Buffalo Narrows 
on a gravel road. How is that very, very close? Why won’t this 
minister just tell the truth to the people of Saskatchewan when 
asked about the issues in her own ministry? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
gymnasium that the members opposite refer to was converted to 
a dormitory. It probably would be about six or seven years ago, 
Mr. Speaker. It is no longer a gymnasium. It was converted to 
provide for more bed space for the inmates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has added over 380 adult bed 
spaces and invested over $60 million in our correctional 
facilities since 2007. We’ve added 200 new jobs in Prince 
Albert for the newly opened, I guess it’s Prince Albert 
Correctional Centre. 
 
From 1998 to 2003 the NDP overcrowding within their youth 
facilities, what did they do? Well they put youth in Prince 
Albert Correctional Centre, the north Sask unit. Mr. Speaker, 
we are not doing that and that’s the legacy of the members 
opposite. 
 
From 1996 to 2006 crime in Saskatchewan increased by 17 per 
cent while the national crime rate dropped by 11 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there’s one thing we know for sure and 
that is if we continue to do the same thing over and over again, 
we will get the same results, and that is more and more people 
in our correctional system, Mr. Speaker. We are putting a lot of 
money and effort into demand reduction so that we can reduce 
the numbers of people in our correctional facilities. Thank you. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 59 through 64. 
 



360 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2016 

The Speaker: — The Whip has tabled questions no. 59 to 64. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon University. 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave for an 
introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon University. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you I’d like to introduce Monica Gordon, sitting in the west 
gallery. Give a wave. Okay, sorry. Monica works at Ag-West 
Bio which is Saskatchewan’s bioscience industry association 
that works with investors to help bring research to market. It’s a 
terrific Saskatoon university company, Mr. Speaker, doing great 
things in our province. After session the folks from Ag-West 
Bio will be holding a reception for all of us MLAs and I’m 
looking forward to that. Monica was also a tireless member of 
our campaign team. She accomplished all of the tasks that we 
asked of her and she accomplished them very quickly and 
efficiently. I want to thank her for her endless help on our 
campaign and for all she does at Ag-West Bio. Mr. Speaker, I 
would ask that you and all members welcome Monica to her 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — I request leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — I’d like to briefly join with the member 
opposite and recognize and to thank and welcome to their 
Assembly the leadership from Ag-West Bio. We’re looking 
forward to meeting with them later here today. We’re looking 
forward to the reception, and we’re thankful for their efforts 
within our province throughout the year. So I ask all members 
to join with me in welcoming these folks to their Assembly. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that the Assembly approves in 
general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by 

Ms. Sproule.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s always a privilege to enter into the debate in this 
Chamber. This is one of the first times I’ve had the opportunity 
to stand in this place and speak on kind of the viewpoints that I 
have after coming off the last election. I know for many years I 
stood down in between the member from Humboldt and the 
member from Regina Northeast. In fact I think the carpet may 
be worn out in that spot. I was glad that it was replaced with the 
green carpet because there was a hole in the red carpet, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But it is an opportunity, my first opportunity to stand in this 
place and respond to the budget. I did not respond to the Speech 
from the Throne but I certainly had an opportunity to listen to 
many of the new members which, first of all, congratulate all 
the members for being elected and re-elected. Many of the same 
faces from years gone by but also many new faces on both sides 
of the aisle. Definitely a number of . . . I believe 14 new faces 
on this side, and I’m amazed at the composure and the great 
delivery of speeches, whether it was a Speech from the Throne 
and now the budget speech, and how they’ve got a grasp of 
what the government is trying to do and the direction that the 
government is trying to go. 
 
I also would commend the members on the opposite side, even 
though I don’t know if they have quite as good of a grasp on the 
direction, which direction this government is going. But, Mr. 
Speaker, it is great to see new faces in this place. It’s extremely 
important that there are new faces in this place and new ideas, 
Mr. Speaker, and certainly the election allows that to happen. 
 
I have a number of thank yous, as everyone would do after a 
general election. It happens once every four or four and a half 
years where you get to come into this place and thank the 
people that allowed you to be re-elected. In my case, I can’t 
believe it’s a fifth time, way too many times. Since ’99 it’s my 
fifth election. And I heard many that spoke here over the last 
couple of days, whether it’s the reply to the budget or the reply 
to the Speech from the Throne, saying that you just can’t do it 
yourself. So many of the occupations that we take on or the 
directions that we take on in life are because of our choice. And 
we work hard to make those successful, and we’re kind of 
individuals often and the successes are quite often derived from 
our own personal effort. But many have said in this House, and 
I would agree completely, that when you enter politics it is a 
different animal, it’s a different beast in that you really rely on a 
lot of people around you to help you be re-elected or elected in 
the first situation. 
 
And for some that go through a nomination race, that starts 
early, to have a team around you to win that nomination race. 
And in many situations and especially, I would say, on this side 
of the House, that nomination race was probably the toughest 
race that you’ve had over the last year. Winning the nomination 
for a Sask Party constituency, and especially in a rural 
constituency but even contested constituencies in the cities, 
would be the toughest race. And congratulate those, all of those 
that had entered their name, put their name forward for a 
nomination, and especially for those that were successful. 



June 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 361 

I’m no different. Even after five elections, although maybe the 
crowd isn’t quite as large around you, you soon realize when 
you have a constituency, whether it’s urban or rural, there’s a 
lot of area to cover. You can’t do it yourself and you tend to 
rely on a number of people if you’re to be successful. I too am 
the same. I had a great campaign team and I want to thank John 
Saltasuk as my campaign manager, who works in this building, 
also is from Gray, within my constituency. He did a great job. 
I’ve had, as I said, the opportunity to run in five elections. He’s 
been the first victim to actually be my campaign manager twice. 
I usually have a campaign manager once and then they’re gone 
and I have to find someone new. But John has been gracious 
enough to accept that role over the last two elections and is a 
large reason why I get to stand here today and talk on behalf of 
the people of Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Also working with John there was really two other people that 
were instrumental. Nicole Entner-McCullough who is my 
constituency assistant. For the four years or eight years leading 
up to this past election, was the office manager and really 
makes sure that I’m going in the right direction, handled so 
many calls through the eight years within that office, but more 
importantly, through the 27 days of this campaign, ran our 
office that was located in Pilot Butte, and I do need to thank 
her. 
 
As well as Dwaine Entner who is my business manager. 
Although John has been the first person that has been my . . . 
only person that’s repeated as far as my campaign manager, 
Dwaine Entner has been my business manager for I believe four 
of the five elections that I’ve been involved in and has done a 
very good job. You know that if you’re going to get reimbursed 
for an expense that you may have put out, that expense would 
have to be legitimate because he watches those books like a 
hawk and those dollars like a hawk. So those are the three main 
people. 
 
I had many others, of course, that helped. Bill Missal, who has 
been there since 1999, probably my main fellow to go around 
door knocking or go from community to community. Many 
others that helped during this election, Phil . . . And I’m not 
going to go through all of them or their last names, but Carson, 
Jordyn who’s in this building of course as a summer student, 
Jamie, and many others within the constituency that have 
contributed to my success. 
 
[14:30] 
 
One other thing I do want to briefly touch on is this was an 
interesting election because of course there was redistribution 
since the 2011 election, and there has been some change in the 
boundaries in pretty much all of the constituencies, mine not 
being any different. And so I want to say that to the member 
from Lumsden-Morse, I believe it is, he was the beneficiary of 
some of the best territory I had. Avonlea and Rouleau and 
Wilcox and Briercrest, anything south of Regina on the west 
side of No. 6 highway went into that constituency. Also the 
member from Moosomin received some prime territory around 
the Francis area. I certainly miss those areas and had the 
opportunity to represent, well Francis for the 16 years that I’d 
been elected and Avonlea and Rouleau areas for the 12 years 
previous since the previous redistribution. 
 
But I had the opportunity to pick up some prime real estate 

from my good friend, Regina Wascana Plains MLA. Pilot Butte 
is in my constituency. We were able to have our campaign 
office in Pilot Butte. We did a lot of door knocking in Pilot 
Butte, and I would say that again we were able to win every 
poll in that community, in large part to the work that was done 
previously by the member from Regina Wascana Plains was 
certainly a benefit and very, very fortunate. 
 
I also want to just briefly touch on family. You don’t get here 
by yourself and family is extremely important, not only for 
every member I’m sure in this House, myself as well. Cindy is 
still a registered nurse working at the General, probably 
working a little bit more than she wants, looking forward to 
retirement — not too soon, I hope, but relatively soon. So she is 
still minding that, and we’re finding it a little different. Of 
course our house is pretty empty. We have two sons and they 
seem to be . . . Well I’ll tell the story. When I was door 
knocking . . . It didn’t take long when I was door knocking in 
communities and especially in new areas, I’d walk up to a door 
and I would knock on the door and I’d say what my name was 
and I’m representing the Sask Party. They really could care less 
about policy. They could really care less about platform. All 
they were really worried about how was Mark’s femur, how is 
Mark doing. And that was the first question. 
 
I knew that name recognition was very important in politics, 
that last name recognition is very important. I didn’t realize first 
name recognition was even more important. I think if you could 
have had Mark on the ballot, he would have done even much 
better than myself. But both boys are doing well. They both 
have broken legs. Mark broke his femur in LA [Los Angeles] in 
a competition, and a month later Craig broke his right leg, his 
tib and fib, and they’re both healing well, walking and 
recovering and will probably be on the snow this summer 
somewhere in the world and are doing well. It was nice to have 
Mark home for the election again. People would tend to watch 
the results come in but, more importantly, wanted to talk to him 
as far as what his plans were in the future, not what his dad’s 
plans were. Anyway that’s the thank yous, and again we don’t 
get here by ourselves. We get here on the backs of many others, 
and I’m no different and very fortunate. 
 
I had the opportunity to listen to the replies from the Speech 
from the Throne and now the replies to the budget, and it 
shocks me. I guess it doesn’t shock me. I’ve had the opportunity 
over sixteen and a half years to listen to it. And I remember the 
first couple of times when I was in here listening to the reply to 
the Speech from the Throne when we sat on the other side of 
the aisle, and even today, yesterday, last night, and through the 
whole course of my being in this House, how you could have a 
Speech from the Throne, for example, and have two 
diametrically opposed positions that come from that very same 
speech or how you could listen to a budget speech which the 
Minister of Finance delivered last week and have two 
absolutely . . . [inaudible] . . . as far as what the opposition has 
to say and what the government has to say on the same speech. 
 
The only benefit that I would say that is certainly nice now, and 
perhaps when we were in opposition it was a little different 
because the numbers were closer, we get to listen to five 
speeches that are positive regarding the Speech from the Throne 
or the budget compared to one from the opposition. So that is 
the only benefit when you listen to what the opposition has 



362 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2016 

to say. 
 
I want to touch on, in the time that I have, a little bit of what 
I’ve heard from the opposition, and then I want to touch on 
what I’ve heard from this side, and especially the Minister of 
Finance. 
 
But I have been quite I guess not surprised. The new tactic of 
the opposition is to say that we’ve been in power for a decade 
and, you know, don’t . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Nearly a decade. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Nearly a decade. Eight and a half 
years is nearly a decade, I guess, to the opposition. It will soon 
be a decade. In fact I think there’s a very good chance that their 
seats in the opposition may last for another decade, Mr. 
Speaker, or even nearly a decade, if that’s their new tactic. 
 
And I remember sitting on that opposite side and how at times it 
could be a little frustrating because quite frankly you’re pretty 
much only negative. You only oppose. I’ve heard very seldom a 
positive word come from that opposition for eight years, eight 
and a half years — nearly a decade. Now I wouldn’t want to tell 
the opposition how to do their business because quite frankly I 
think they’re doing a very good job of opposition. That’s why 
they have 10 members, Mr. Speaker, and I wouldn’t want to 
suggest they change their tactics whatsoever. I think they’re 
doing a very good job. 
 
They’re very negative. They opposed pretty much everything 
that’s happened in this province for the last eight and a half — 
nearly a decade, Mr. Speaker. They’ve opposed pretty much 
any of the initiatives that we’ve had in health care, any of the 
initiatives that we’ve had in Highways, any of the initiatives 
that we’ve have through Social Services, through Education, 
they’ve opposed pretty much every one of those. And I would 
continue to say, keep doing the fine job that you’re doing 
because, Mr. Speaker, it’s fitting those members very, very 
well. 
 
Last night I was supposed to be in the House, and thank you to 
the Whip for allowing me to not be here. I was just not feeling 
well so I was at home. And you know, last night on TV there 
was the Blue Jays playing that didn’t do so well against the 
Detroit Tigers. My Pittsburgh Penguins happened to win, which 
was really good, Mr. Speaker. I was pretty happy about that. 
But what really depressed me is I found myself going over to 
the legislature channel. Can you believe that? I was watching 
the legislature channel when there is a hockey game on and a 
baseball game on. I couldn’t believe it, quite frankly. I had a 
headache after watching, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I have to talk about the one speech that I heard. Many from 
this side were very, very solid, but one speech, and it just struck 
me, and I guess maybe that’s what kind of drew me to watching 
for a while longer, was the member from Riversdale. She was 
speaking and she said last night, she was talking about how 
terrible things are in the province and how terrible the health 
care delivery has been, and really not a positive thing within the 
whole speech. And she was commenting on our members and 
how we have reinforced, you know, the messages that were 
delivered by the Minister of Finance and many other of the 

speeches. 
 
And she said, and I just found that so strikingly interesting, she 
said, just because — meaning us as government — just because 
you say it over and over and over again doesn’t mean it’s true. 
 
And you know, I found that really interesting because her 
speech was the same speech she has given over and over and 
over again in eight years of opposition. Now just because she 
said it over and over again for the past eight years does not 
make it truth. But I don’t want to tell the opposition what to do, 
because again I think they’re doing a very good job, and I 
would suggest that they continue to use those speeches over and 
over again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I found it really curiously interesting today that 
the member would stand on her feet and actually talk a little bit 
about seniors’ care because, you know, for eight years we heard 
that seniors’ care was in . . . well pretty much anything, any 
subject that the opposition talked about, it’s either a crisis or a 
scandal. 
 
You know, I remember the temporary Leader of the Opposition 
talking about the smart meters and how the Saskatchewan Party 
bolted exploding meters to people’s houses. Talk about 
hyperbole. Now I continue to say, continue to do what you’re 
doing because it’s working well, but bolting exploding meters 
to people’s homes was how they described the smart meters. 
 
I remember case after case . . . And I will tell you that long-term 
care needs to improve in this province. Most everyone would. 
My mother is in long-term care. I’ve been in a facility in Moose 
Jaw every week for the last year, year and a half, at least once a 
week, and at times the care could be better. 
 
But day in and day out leading to the election, long-term care 
was in crisis. It was a crisis in long-term care throughout this 
province. And I’m not saying that there aren’t situations that 
they brought forward that were absolutely legitimate. And as a 
government we are embarrassed; we need to do better and we 
need to strive to do better. And the Minister of Health talked 
about it today. 
 
But how could it be in crisis for a year or two or three years 
leading up to an election? We have an election on April the 4th, 
and today was the first day they’ve asked a question on 
long-term care. If it was a crisis for a year or two, and we’ve 
been in the House, and that’s the first question on long-term 
care, you’ve got to question yourself: is anything that they say, 
is there any credibility in most every issue that they raise? 
 
I remember the Leader of the Opposition now talking about 
IPAC [International Performance Assessment Centre for 
geologic storage of CO2] and how it was such a scandal. It was 
scandalous. And then it was dropped like a cold potato, like a 
hot potato, Mr. Speaker. They just don’t follow through because 
the hyperbole from the opposition side . . . I mean there is, you 
know, and I’m not going to . . . Well maybe I am going to pick 
on a member or two. A member that would be new in this 
House that would ask a question and say, there was a drill to 
evacuate a school, a practice drill because the school was going 
to fall down around. Absolutely wrong, Mr. Speaker. They 
come in day in and day out with hyperbole. 



June 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 363 

And what happens — and again I don’t want to tell the 
opposition what to do because they’re doing very, very well in 
opposition and what they’re doing — but when every issue that 
you raise is a crisis, and every issue that you raise is a scandal, 
guess what people start to think of the opposition’s issues that 
they raise? It’s, quite frankly, no credibility. 
 
And that’s what people have, I believe, come to see in the 
opposition, that every issue is overcooked, is over exaggerated, 
Mr. Speaker, to try and make the point. And what happens is 
the general public, quite frankly, have dismissed the opposition 
for any credibility because, Mr. Speaker, it goes over issue to 
issue. And I had a whole number of them here — whether it’s 
smart meters, whether it’s lean, whether it’s long-term care, Mr. 
Speaker — I could go on and on just on the issues that the 
opposition raise day in and day out in this House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But that’s not, that’s not why I’m here. I want to talk a little bit 
about the budget, Mr. Speaker, and I want to commend the 
Minister of Finance on a great job of delivering the budget last 
week. I’ve had the opportunity to be on the government side 
now for eight and a half years, and I really would say, just from 
my perspective, budget speeches’ successes and the delivery of 
a budget and how the response is towards the budget in large 
part is due to what’s in the budget. But even in larger part is the 
credibility of the minister that delivers that budget, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We have been very well served on this side of the House, 
whether it was minister Gantefoer for the first number of 
budgets, minister Krawetz over the last number of budgets, and 
now this new Finance minister, the member from Regina 
Northeast, in the delivery of this budget. The credibility, Mr. 
Speaker, has not dropped. In fact, not that it’s gone up, but it’s 
been at a very, very high level each and every budget. And that 
not only comes because of the credibility of the Minster of 
Finance, but also the credibility of the members that sit on 
treasury board. 
 
I have been fortunate enough not to be named to treasury board, 
Mr. Speaker, in the eight and a half years, because I understand 
the amount of hours that are put in day in and day out by 
members on treasury board, and what a great job that those 
members do. They’re not easy decisions, but it is truly a team 
that is delivered by the Minister of Finance that really brings 
those decisions across the line. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would say, you know, it’s interesting again 
listening to the opposition. They’ll find fault, and that’s what 
opposition does as far as the budget speech. What they’ll 
identify is where cuts are, and we should never make those cuts, 
as well as then each and every day come into the House and 
expect more and more spending. You can’t have more and more 
spending and reject any cuts that were made. It is just not, Mr. 
Speaker, financially viable. And so there has to be some tough 
decisions, and those decisions were made, whether it’s in the 
Ministry of Health, for example. 
 
I remember the last time that the senior drug plan was raised 
from $15 to 20. It was not an easy decision, and there were 
seniors that were not happy at that point. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve had to adjust that again. Opposition would say that’s just 
absolutely unfair and it shouldn’t be happening, as well as then, 

don’t ever look at where some of the expenses are but continue 
to add. And I think it was $5 billion worth of platform 
commitments that they made in the last general election. I don’t 
know how they ever expected to ever balance a budget under 
commitments like that. 
 
I do have to say though that I don’t think there’s a member on 
this side that is happy or satisfied that as a government that 
we’re in a deficit position. Absolutely no one on this side would 
be. They shouldn’t be. There is no way that we should accept 
the fact that going into the deficit is an okay position to be in. 
The Minister of Finance, treasury board ministries have done 
everything that they could to get this as close to balance. And 
it’s not balanced, absolutely not, when you have a hole in 
revenue of $1 billion, Mr. Speaker. There is few governments 
that could bring that into balance within this particular budget 
year. 
 
[14:45] 
 
But you have the . . . And the people have the commitment of 
this government that it will be brought into balance as soon as 
possible, preferably next fiscal year, Mr. Speaker. That is 
extremely important because I am no political historian, but I 
can tell you through the ’80s, running deficits was the status 
quo. Running deficits on all parties — whether it was the NDP 
in Ontario, whether it was Conservatives here in Saskatchewan, 
whether it was the Liberal Party, Mr. Speaker, in provincial 
politics, whether it was the Conservative Party federally. Now 
we have a Liberal Party federally, we have provincial parties, 
Mr. Speaker, that are saying it’s okay to run deficits. It is not 
okay to run a deficit budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The members opposite continue to want us to spend, spend, 
spend, you know. And I guess that’s again the role of the 
opposition but, from a government’s perspective, being in a 
deficit position is not acceptable. We have done everything in 
our power to get that as close to balance as we possibly can in 
one fiscal year and into balance next fiscal year, Mr. Speaker. 
Because I can tell you that, you know, overspending may 
appease — whether it’s in education, whether it’s in health care, 
social services — may appease for the short term. But there 
comes a day where that has to be paid back, where there has to 
be a reckoning, Mr. Speaker, and that’s why we’re working as 
hard as we can to control spending. 
 
A 2 per cent increase in spending, Mr. Speaker — I believe it’s 
2.3 within the health regions — is very, very tough to manage, 
absolutely. Now it would be easy to continue to increase set 
spending into the 5, and 6, and 7 per cent range. It isn’t 
sustainable, Mr. Speaker, and that’s why we need to do 
everything in our power to make sure that this budget gets into 
balance as soon as possible. You know, a plan to balance a 
budget by saying we’re going to balance it in eight years is not 
a plan. It’s not a plan at all, Mr. Speaker. That’s why you need 
to be disciplined. That’s why if you look at the four pillars of 
this budget, you’ll see that everything that we’ve talked about in 
this budget is to work towards being in balance over the next 
fiscal year. 
 
Having said that, you continue to need to invest in your 
infrastructure. Record investments with an infrastructure — 
whether it’s highways, whether it’s building schools, whether 



364 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2016 

it’s hospitals, Mr. Speaker — are crucial for the long-term 
viability of the province. Having said that, year over year, 
operational costs need to be brought into check, and that’s what 
this government is doing. Investments into infrastructure is a 
different thing, Mr. Speaker, and every government across 
Canada is looking at that as an investment within the future. But 
operational deficits are not acceptable, even though the 
opposition would certainly have us go into a deeper deficit by 
the spending that they are wanting to see happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we look at what the opposition did when 
they had the opportunity, when they were short of revenue, 
what was the first thing that the opposition — that the NDP; I 
shouldn’t call them the opposition — what the NDP party 
would do the first time that they were in any sort of issue as far 
as revenue, they’d raise taxes. And I forget exactly how many 
times they raised the taxes . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — 21. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Ah, it’s coming back to me — 21 
times they raised taxes, Mr. Speaker, in this province and had 
no problem doing it, had no problem doing it.  
 
In fact I remember one of their Finance ministers right after a 
provincial election talked about . . . You know, they like to say 
that the budget, we should have released it before. Harry Van 
Mulligen, remember for those that had been in here a while ago, 
Van Mulligen, he went through an election. And as soon as the 
election was over, they went through a budget right after the 
provincial election, and what did they do? They raised the PST 
[provincial sales tax]. And what was Harry Van Mulligen’s 
response in the media? It just wouldn’t have been popular to 
talk about it during the election campaign even though they 
raised the taxes 21 times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget has no tax increases. This is not the 
time to raise taxes. Having said that, you know, we’ll have to 
have a look into the future. We have held the education portion 
of property tax at a level rate for about seven years, Mr. 
Speaker. It has a significant impact on property prices and on 
the ag community as well as overall within the province. 
 
We’ve controlled spending. I’ve touched on that. You know, 
the Minister of Health would say he would just dream of a 
budget increase like the former Health minister. I don’t know 
what you’re talking about, quite frankly. Dream of an increase 
. . . Mr. Speaker, but I as the minister, former Minister of 
Highways, would dream of having a $5 billion budget. Wow, 
that’s an amazing amount of money. But controlled spending is 
extremely important. Investing in people, investing in 
infrastructure, Mr. Speaker, you’ve seen that in spades. I’m not 
going to get into number over number because so many of my 
colleagues up and down these government benches — and it’s a 
long ways up and down this government bench, Mr. Speaker — 
have done a very good job of identifying where the increases 
are compared to what we used to see under the former 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, save it to say that we’ve only been a newly elected 
government for the last number of months and the budget was 
brought in, Mr. Speaker. People in Saskatchewan, through the 
campaign, knew times were tough. They didn’t expect lavish 

spending. They certainly were hoping that there weren’t tax 
increases, but I don’t know if we would have surprised too 
many if there would have been a tax increase. Mr. Speaker, 
people in this province are extremely intelligent and know 
where the finances of this province would be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I don’t believe, Mr. Speaker, in what the opposition says 
that anything was hid from the general public. Absolutely not. 
They had a very good idea of where this province was and 
chose one party to navigate our province through the drop in 
revenues through renewable resources, that drop and also then 
controlling the spending relative to the finances of the province. 
And I think that’s why you saw . . . Well I would say that the 
government had a large part to do with it and past record of a 
government of eight years — nearly a decade, to the opposition. 
 
And also the leadership of our Premier, Mr. Speaker. No one 
has more credibility across this province or across Canada than 
the Premier of Saskatchewan, and his leadership I think came 
through in spades, Mr. Speaker. And I don’t know if . . . I think 
we could quite easily do a poll on this side that we’re all very, 
very thankful that we went into and through the election with 
the leadership of our Premier, Mr. Speaker.  
 
It’ll be interesting to see what happens into the future with the 
opposition. They have a strong leader there right now, whether 
he lasts. That chair has been a bit of an ejection chair out of this 
Chamber, Mr. Speaker. And I would say that if he would like to 
stay in this House, I would move over one to the left or one to 
the right or, you know, if you wanted to come on over to this 
side, Mr. Speaker. You know, actually there’s no room in the 
inn on this side, Mr. Speaker, but I’m sure we could find a spot 
over there for him. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, I have taken more than my 20 minutes. I 
want to say that I am very impressed and will be supporting the 
budget. I cannot support the amendment, Mr. Speaker. I look 
forward to the vote at the end of the budget process because, 
Mr. Speaker, I believe what the budget has is what the people 
want. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Stonebridge-Dakota. 
 
Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The budget brought 
down by the Minister of Finance last week has, not surprisingly, 
generated much discussion and debate. Those discussions 
extend of course to our respective constituencies, and over the 
weekend I met and chatted with a number of Saskatoon 
Stonebridge-Dakota residents at barbecues and coffees and the 
like. 
 
One conversation stays in my mind. Discussing the budget, a 
constituent told me he felt real concern, as he put it, about the 
state of things all around us. Think about it, he said. Next door 
in Alberta — so long our more affluent, successful brother — 
there are changing fortunes, great upheaval. Then there’s 
go-for-broke Ontario. A runaway deficit culture also in Ottawa. 
Even south of the border there’s unprecedented fractiousness, 
uncertainty of outcome. My friend said he was truly worried, 
but at least, he said, it was a relief to live in Saskatchewan on 
what he called an island of sanity. 
 



June 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 365 

An island of sanity, Mr. Speaker, despite unprecedented drops 
in oil and potash prices that have led to a $968 million drop in 
resource revenue. Last year there were also disastrous forest 
fires up north that of course had to be financially reckoned with, 
no question, and thank goodness weren’t even more 
devastating. As a result, yes there have had to be some 
sacrifices in this budget: realignments, some tough decisions. 
Yet due to the wise stewardship of this government and of the 
Minister of Finance, an island of sanity we remain — no mean 
feat. For one, no new taxes, which is a singular achievement 
considering the current economic climate. And despite this 
climate, there have been decisions to invest in the things that 
matter to the people of this province: long-term, tangible, real 
things such as schools and hospitals. 
 
There are increases to the Ministry of Agriculture’s funding by 
7.5 per cent; $27 million too for crucial agricultural research to 
support improvements in productivity and to enhance exports. 
 
The highways budget tops $1 billion and includes a three 
million, seventy million dollar surge to fix highways across the 
province. As part of $128 million in municipal infrastructure, 
10 million will be put toward the Saskatoon north commuter 
parkway bridge. 
 
In and adjoining my constituency of Stonebridge-Dakota, work 
continues on twinning Highway 16 between Saskatoon and 
Clavet, a crucial commuter and commercial connector. Passing 
lanes have been announced in this budget for Highway 15 
between Saskatoon and Humboldt, and repaving Highway 11 
south of Dundurn, which is great news. As well, pre-budget, our 
government with its partners, the city of Saskatoon and the 
federal government, announced a new overpass on Boychuk 
Drive and Highway 16 — another exciting, necessary 
investment. 
 
And of course, work continues on the joint-use school in 
Stonebridge. I got to tour it recently. It looks amazing as work 
continues on the other — on budget and on time — 18 joint-use 
schools across the province to keep things moving, to keep 
Saskatchewan strong, an island of sanity. 
 
Surely, Mr. Speaker, the guiding rule of any government in 
tough times, in any times, is first and foremost, primum non 
nocere, to do no harm. Caution, the responsible husbanding of 
finances, are often discredited as no can do — thin gruel, 
boring. There’s always pressure to spend or tax up a storm. I 
remember in the years following the crisis of 2008, the late 
federal Finance minister Jim Flaherty was mocked for saying 
that he wanted to remain cautious, to stay the course, that the 
economy was still too volatile for radical shakeup. He was 
borne out. 
 
To do no harm is the only honourable course, and in 2016 we 
need only look around us for the effects of the opposite. In BC, 
industry and wealth creation have in too many quarters borne 
. . . become the enemy, while pipeline and liquid natural gas 
projects have to go through so many consultative impediments, 
companies may simply give up and start to look elsewhere. In 
many cases, they already have. 
 
The BC Carbon Tax Act meanwhile was much heralded at its 
inception, but interestingly it’s not going so well. What could 

go wrong when the original designers assumed the tax would 
simply keep rising far above the current $30 per tonne to closer 
to $300 per tonne by 2050? The problem is, not only have 
emissions started to inch up, but the majority of British 
Columbians quite simply don’t want to pay any more. 
According to recent findings by Innovative Research and 
others, they oppose a higher tax, and these include a great 
number of the BC Premier’s own liberal voters. 
 
Unsurprisingly for the majority of Canadians right now, jobs 
and economic growth are the top concern. Sound familiar? 
Those are the top concerns here in Saskatchewan too. Next door 
in Alberta the government recently posted a $10 billion deficit. 
Meanwhile its brand new Bill 20 is taxing the purchase of all 
fossil fuels, including gas and natural gas. As one commentator 
put it, raising the price of everything for Albertans comes at the 
worst possible time. And the 100-megatonne limit on carbon 
emissions is still to come. Do no harm, Mr. Speaker? 
 
In Manitoba, a $934 million deficit with no plans to balance for 
eight years. In Ontario, dysfunctional Ontario: utility rates sky 
high; a sweeping latest green plan that will severely impact 
manufacturing, let alone the average Ontarian; again, slipping 
credit ratings, more debt per capita than even California. The 
list goes on. Or Newfoundland where the money simply appears 
to have dried up, so why not just double the price of gas? And 
of course the federal government, shifting deficit forecasts, 
massive spending announcements that seem to emerge, then 
morph by the day. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Clearly none of these jurisdictions has heard of the Laffer curve 
— Mr. Speaker, no laughing matter — the very simple 
economic theory that increasing tax rates in all forms beyond a 
certain point will simply be counterproductive, not only for 
people and for their motivation to work and make work and 
spend but for governments to raise further tax revenue. There is 
a point beyond which you simply cannot go. 
 
Following the onset of the terrible forest fires in Fort McMurray 
last month, we all recall how the markets, even the media, got a 
bit skittish about oil companies having to curb or in some cases 
cease production altogether around Fort Mac. When were things 
going to get back on tap, they asked. There were the oil execs 
meeting with the Alberta Premier, honourably reassuring her 
and fellow Canadians that the resource that fuels our schools 
and roads and hospitals was going to be back on tap as soon as 
possible, producing millions of dollars for our economy every 
day. 
 
Which got me to thinking. I’ve read only one book by Ayn 
Rand, The Fountainhead. A friend of mine in university urged 
me to read it. But it suddenly came back to me how, as I recall, 
the key captains of industry just up and disappear one day. In 
effect, they go on strike. The economy, fictional but not 
unrecognizable, has simply become unworkable, so regulated 
and counter to what they want to do and achieve and build, that 
they simply quit. What if the oil and resource executives in 
Alberta and in this province ever did the same, I thought. Not 
that we ever want that but, if they did, maybe then finally, not 
only the radical proponents of the Leap Manifesto but just the 
casual haters of the oil sands, of any industry, they might 



366 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2016 

finally, finally realize that it really is the economy, stupid. 
 
And you have to wonder, has there ever been a time when the 
one major solution to wealth creation — responsibly produced 
of course always, and what should always be subject to scrutiny 
and transparency — has there ever been a time when that one 
solution is so treated with contempt, as with pipelines for 
example, that it becomes the public enemy? 
 
Only here in Saskatchewan, on this island of sanity, has there 
been one official voice, that of our Premier, echoed by not only 
our government but by the people across this province in favour 
of this great fueler of all our livelihoods, arguably of our way of 
life. I’ve always thought a bobble-head of the Premier sitting 
atop a pipeline, holding a little Canadian flag would sell like 
hotcakes. Maybe next fundraising cycle. 
 
What could we accomplish if we work together as one country 
to build the pipelines we need? It is the height of 
disingenuousness for our colleagues across the aisle to talk 
about not having built any, when we simply can’t without 
partners. That’s one problem with being an island. We’re 
landlocked. We need help. We need co-operation. We need to 
treat this issue, and for our federal counterparts to treat this 
issue, as the single greatest economic unifier of our country 
today — a modern-day trans-Canada railway or Trans-Canada 
Highway. It should be whatever it takes for the peace, order, 
and good government of this country. 
 
Of course that’s not the only challenge to good government or 
governance facing us today, Mr. Speaker. There has come to be 
an enervation, a languor, a lack of vigour, a loss of common 
sense in the running of many public bodies and administrations 
in so many areas. I’ve heard it again and again at the door, how 
so many have gone outsourcing crazy. Too many school 
divisions, health regions, civic administrations, post-secondary 
institutions can’t take a step without hiring someone from the 
outside for what should be in-house administrative decisions, 
spending at times millions of dollars on risk assessments for 
example, for the most predictable of risks. What could go 
wrong in a school gym, in an ER [emergency room]? Get six or 
seven or ten teachers, nurses, and doctors, parents, ordinary 
citizens together around a table, and you could figure it out and 
move on. 
 
Last I heard the Conservative British government scrapped 
outside consultants and saved millions. Where they can, public 
administration should do the same. Take the leap. Take the risk. 
Our parents and grandparents and great-grandparents were 
builders and visionaries of projects long before all the managers 
came along and the missions and the visions and a hundred 
strategies for every one course of action. And they did just fine, 
often much better.  
 
I know they wouldn’t approve of all the travel to far-flung 
conferences by managers of this or that, often with spouses in 
tow to dovetail on a personal holiday when many would have 
difficulty answering two simple questions when they got home. 
One: specifically how did that conference, for example, help the 
organization as a whole? And most of all, how did it help 
students or patients or the people of this province? I believe 
these are questions that every superintendent, health region 
manager, city planner should be obliged to answer on the public 

record. After all they are stewards too — stewards of public 
money. 
 
Maybe it’s also time to bring in question period in all public 
bodies which the public can tune in to watch so that there’s 
more heckling. It’s healthy to have to think on your feet 
sometimes. The fact that we’ve become so closed, so tending 
toward in camera this and closed committee that, isn’t good for 
democracy. It’s definitely not good for shedding light on public 
spending decisions. 
 
Quite simply, Mr. Speaker, it is time for a philosophical shift in 
how we regard the entitlement to spend. That’s a big part to my 
mind of what we are calling transformational change. We’ve 
got to get back to trusting our instincts; to being spending and 
tax ombudsman, all of us, and asking the three or four people 
we know that personally have basic common sense — mother, 
spouse, best friend, colleague — would you spend $1 million 
on that? Would you hire another manager or send three people 
to that conference? 
 
We’ve got to be compassionate and not be afraid to be about 
promoting that spirit of austerity in the way we run things. 
Wear it like a badge of honour so that we can focus on the front 
line, the people on the ground, whoever they are. It’s the 
backroom boys, the managers, the risk assessors who so often 
suck the energy out of a place. 
 
Quite simply, Mr. Speaker, we must never forget the immortal 
words of Huey Lewis and the News, “It’s hip to be square.” It’s 
hip to be cautious when it comes to saving public money. 
 
As we all know the big Brexit vote in the UK [United 
Kingdom] is coming up in a couple of weeks. Polls are close. If 
only the framers of the European Union had asked their closest 
common sense acquaintances a few key questions such as, is it 
wise to have two EU [European Union] capitals? Do we want to 
try to dismantle national tax structures, immigration structures, 
policing, and aim to create a united states of Europe run by 
bureaucrats? Is that a good idea? Good public spending. 
 
When this is all over — because I believe the dissolution of the 
EU in its current form will occur and I predict the Brits will 
vote with Boris Johnson to leave — the dollar figures, the 
waste, what has been poured into bureaucracy since the 
formation of that union as it moved away from what it should 
be and should have been, which is a standard trade union, to 
some kind of grand plan governed predominantly by 
non-elected bureaucrats who went on a lot of conferences, when 
we learn what it all costs we will never recover from the shock. 
Those Eurocrats should be the ones trying to recruit our 
Premier. 
 
Last Thursday, Mr. Speaker, I was pleased to attend the 
University of Saskatchewan convocation — always moving 
affairs. It always gets me when a young man or young woman 
crosses the stage and someone yells out, I love you, or as 
happened on Thursday from someone’s dad, way to go, 
pumpkin. These were hard-working, committed students who 
were graduating on Thursday from vet med and nursing and 
dentistry. One woman, I noticed, had her little daughter with 
her, a young mother with a young child getting a dentistry 
degree. Way to go. And one wishes them so well. We all wish 



June 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 367 

them so well. 
 
The Dean of Dentistry introduced the young woman, Stefani 
Shnier, who won the award for outstanding achievement in 
dentistry. And he said, look at that radiant smile. Still, it hasn’t 
been much in evidence these past four years, more like a 
clenched jaw because Stefani was always working so hard. 
Meanwhile, he said, Stefani will be happy to return to her 
hobbies because for the last four years her hobbies have been 
studying. Doesn’t that say it all? That’s the spirit. And that’s the 
reality of grit and determination and achieving success. Your 
fellow classmates know it. The entire row of dentistry students 
stood up for you. 
 
We hope, Stefani, you will find a job here, a future here, that 
you won’t leave as so many did in the past, that you can raise a 
family here and enjoy success and a fair tax structure. That your 
government will not become overly bureaucratized and watch 
its spending, and, when it does spend, that it will spend on the 
things that will make your everyday life better, and better for 
your children. Because we want to have you and we will work 
to keep you and to do no harm. That’s what we aim for and that 
was the aim of the Minister of Finance’s budget that was 
brought down last Wednesday. 
 
I am proud to support the budget without amendment. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 
to be able to stand and enter into debate on the budget motion 
set before us. This budget is very rational and it is going to 
make sure that the government makes a decision that reflects 
the value of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the delay in the provincial election for six 
months because of federal election announced to be held on 
October 19, 2015, government knew March is the budget 
month, which ended up in the writ period. We did not hide the 
budget, not at all, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of Finance and the 
Premier have been very transparent throughout the entire 
process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let us have a brief look on the contemporary 
economic challenges in Canadian economy where 
Saskatchewan resource revenue were reduced by more than $1 
billion. Mr. Speaker, this has had a huge impact on both the 
Saskatchewan economy and the government’s revenue. But the 
Saskatchewan economy is strong and is already starting to 
rebound. 
 
In order to ensure that Saskatchewan government is able to 
provide the service to the people of this province need and 
invest in needed infrastructure, the Minister of Finance 
announced that there will be small deficit of $434 million. 
Government has been working for a better life in Saskatchewan, 
better life for families, better life after graduation, better life for 
small and big businesses, farmers, and all people in 
Saskatchewan. We kept Saskatchewan people informed about 
our financial situation and will continue to do so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we value taxpayers’ money and decided not to 

raise taxes and negatively affect the economy. This contrasts the 
NDP who seems to want to spend way more but they say that 
we are spending too much. They are not making any sense, but 
we know their record. Mr. Speaker, their record is raising taxes 
21 times in 16 years. Mr. Speaker, I would like to remind this 
House that during the election, the NDP campaign platform, 
which they have claimed was fully costed, actually had $595 
million in un-costed promises. Mr. Speaker, while we respect 
taxpayers’ money, it is obvious that NDP do not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are committed to keeping taxes low and more 
money in the hands of taxpayers. The NDP have a different 
mentality. Mr. Speaker, here is what former NDP Finance 
minister Harry Van Mulligen said, and I quote: 
 

Why don’t parties want to talk about tax hikes during 
elections? Well I don’t know. I suspect that anyone who 
talks about tax hikes is not likely to be very popular during 
the course of an election campaign. 

 
This budget contains no tax hikes, Mr. Speaker. Our 
government, the other way around. We have paid down debt 
and lowered the stifling taxes from previous NDP governments. 
Since 2007 nearly $6 billion in tax reductions, and the money 
went back where it belongs — to families, individuals, 
homeowners, businesses, and farmers. Mr. Speaker, our 
government made Saskatchewan one of the lowest personal and 
business tax burdens in Canada, according to the recent 
Conference Board of Canada report. 
 
Saskatchewan’s 2016-2017 budget will keep Saskatchewan 
strong by controlling operational spending and investing in 
people and infrastructure. To emphasize again, this year the 
budget contains no tax increases and no new taxes, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, to review, the budget forecasts total revenue of 
$14.02 billion and total expenses of 14.46 billion for a projected 
deficit of about $434 million in 2016-17. This is a manageable 
deficit and includes record investments in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we talk about keeping Saskatchewan strong, 
many objectives pop up in mind. It is one serious job. I was 
sitting at home the other day and my son asked me one 
question, Mr. Speaker, I would like to share with the House. He 
asked me, “Dad, what would you think the number one priority 
when you say keep Saskatchewan strong?” I asked him, “What 
would you think the number one priority should be?” He said, 
“I think health and education.” I asked, “Which one is the 
number one? You told me two.” He said both were, in the 
opinion, number one. Mr. Speaker, we take both number ones 
seriously and we will keep that way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes to build communities and nations 
for Saskatchewan’s future, our students from schools and from 
universities have many rights. And here is the NDP, close 176 
schools and make classrooms crowded. And, Mr. Speaker, 
where did the staff and the teachers go? Here was thousands of 
jobs lost. 
 
Here is our government budget, the 2016-2017 budget: continue 



368 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2016 

to keep Saskatchewan strong by investing $2.2 billion in pre-K 
to grade 12 [pre-kindergarten to grade 12]. The operational 
funding to the school divisions in 2016-2017 is $1.8 billion, an 
increase of $16.6 million over the last year to support pre-K to 
grade 12 education and overall average increases of 34 per cent 
in school division operation funding since 2007 and 2008. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of Education’s total capital funding 
allocation for 2016-17 is 391.4 million, which is the largest 
budgetary capital allocation for school in our province’s history. 
Mr. Speaker, $310.5 million for the joint-use schools project 
including $293.536 million to continue construction on the 18 
new elementary schools, nine joint sites. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the election campaign in Regina Pasqua 
constituency, I have seen many happy faces. People have a 
good level of . . . on this government. While now there will be 
another new school in Harbour Landing in 2017, it is not only 
one school, Mr. Speaker. They’ve got one hockey rink beside it 
and a couple of basketball courts as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it will close to 1,000 students admitting in this 
school. That will reduce the number of students per class from 
Ethel Milliken School, Dr. Perry School, Deshaye Catholic 
School, and Grant Road School. So we are working on crowded 
classes created by NDP by closing 176 schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when schools are built closer to homes, kids spend 
more time with parents which is a quality time for both parents 
and for kids — more time to play hockey or football. Mr. 
Speaker, we are investing $41.9 million in advanced major 
capital projects already under way, $33.4 million, a 24 per cent 
increase for schools, Mr. Speaker, $4.6 million for emergent 
funding and 1 million to support facility assessments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am not only talking about pre-K to grade 12 
education but also advanced education. The 2016-17 budget 
will maintain strong investment in our province’s 
post-secondary institutions and students. Over the past nine 
years the province has invested more than 7.3 billion in 
post-secondary education. Operating grants to the province’s 
post-secondary institutions this year are virtually unchanged. 
Saskatchewan post-secondary schools continue to receive 
strong support, including 475 million for the universities of 
Saskatchewan and Regina and their affiliated and federated 
colleges, 156 million for Saskatchewan Polytechnic, 
Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies, and Gabriel 
Dumont Institute, and 29 million for Saskatchewan’s regional 
colleges. 
 
The government’s strong commitment to students is also 
reflected in the range of programs aimed at helping them save 
and pay for the schools. Advanced Education’s budget provides 
more than 53 million in direct support to students, including 
32.5 million for the Student Aid Fund to provide students 
grants, bursaries, and loans; 14.3 million for scholarships 
including the Saskatchewan advantage scholarship; and 6.5 for 
the Saskatchewan advantage grant for education savings. This 
budget provides nearly 26 million in capital for advanced 
education and training with an estimate of 170 million to be 
provided to this sector over the next four years. This year the 
province will continue to provide 23.6 million to 
post-secondary schools for preventative maintenance and 

renewal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as my kids look for post-secondary institutions to 
attend in these upcoming years, because of our government we 
have great options right here in our province. We also need to 
point out that advanced education is better off under the 
government, as when the NDP were in power they only 
increased funding for post-secondary institutions by just 20 per 
cent over 16 years, an average increase of just over 1 per cent 
per year. Mr. Speaker, that is a big contrast to our government 
investment of 7.3 billion in post-secondary education since 
2007, a 59 per cent increase over nine years. When you include 
the graduation retention program, low taxes, and great services 
across government, it is obvious why over 85,000 people have 
moved to Saskatchewan since we formed government and our 
graduates no longer have to look for work elsewhere. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had experience speaking to a few doctors during 
the campaign and here was the one question I used to ask from 
health officials. After lengthy discussions, I asked that, do you 
think this government needs to improve the health system? Well 
I do not get any answer. Then I made it easier for them: well 
would you think that the government is doing wrong? They 
said, the government is doing everything right and we are happy 
with the government. Mr. Speaker, it is not only the doctor 
officials I spoke. It was the IT [information technology] people 
and the businessmen. There, everyone was satisfied what the 
government is doing and we will keep it this way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I often ask constituents how they feel about our 
health care system. They’re also happy with that. They say that 
they are impressed with it and, although there is still lots of 
work to do, they think we are going in the right direction. Mr. 
Speaker, health was a priority in our budget. 
 
With the record investment, along with a commitment to make 
sure we are providing great value for the taxpayers, the health 
budget will be $5.17 billion invested in health infrastructure, 
improving access to care, reducing wait times for surgery and 
diagnostic service for Saskatchewan people. The 2016-17 
health budget is an increase of $57.4 million over 2015-2016. 
There has now been a 50 per cent increase in the health budget 
since 2007. 
 
A special commissioner will be appointed to recommend 
options for fewer health regions, for more effective and efficient 
delivery of province-wide service. The name of the 
commissioner will be announced in the coming days and is a 
part of the transformational change initiative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, regional health authorities will receive 3.4 billion 
for operating funding, an increase of 2.3 per cent over funding 
provided to regional health authorities last year and 56 per cent 
increase since 2007, including 20 million in additional funding 
to reduce surgical wait times. The demand for surgery 
continued to rise in Saskatchewan with an estimated 3 per cent 
more surgery needed in 2016-17 compared to 2015-2016 
surgical funding in 2016 and ’17. 
 
The Saskatchewan Cancer Agency is also receiving more than 
$167 million in funding in this budget, and that’s up $9.8 
million from the last year. The substantial increase in funding 
will help pay for the addition of 15 new cancer drugs that were 



June 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 369 

approved last year since 2007. 
 
The health budget includes $500,000 to fulfill the government 
campaign commitment to expand its robotic telemedical for 
northern communities. This project allows health care 
professionals to connect with the patients remotely and provide 
real-time assessment diagnoses and patient managements. 
 
The budget is also reducing regional health authorities’ 
administration expenses by 7.5 million, and that will be 
reinvesting funding into the front-line staff in long-term care 
homes. This is equal to 5 per cent reduction in general 
administration costs to be determined as a part of RHA 
[regional health authority] budget finalizing in the coming 
months. 
 
The capital investment total is 71.4 million in 2016-2017, 
including a 25 per cent increase, to a total of $34.7 million for 
capital maintenance across the province. Capital funding is also 
being provided for the power plant upgrade at Saskatoon Royal 
University Hospital, electrical renewal project in the Regina 
General and Pasqua Hospital, and completion of construction at 
the Kelvington integrated care facility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of my constituency applaud the 
government for these investments. And although the NDP 
seems to talk a lot about health, they never seem to offer any 
solution. While they talk we have been making the changes 
required to keep the Saskatchewan health care system strong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a good budget, and it keeps our election 
promises and keeps moving Saskatchewan forward. 
 
I would like to thank the Minister of Finance for the hard work 
in creating the budget and the Premier for his continued 
leadership in our province. Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the 
budget moved by Minister of Finance, seconded by the member 
from Regina University, and will not supporting any 
amendment in it. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister in charge of 
Advanced Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
thank you for recognizing me to enter into this debate on our 
budget here that was tabled in this Assembly here by our 
illustrious Finance minister just a few short days ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to maybe get something on the record 
right away in the event that I might not remember it at the end. 
But I will be supporting this budget that was tabled the other 
day, Mr. Speaker, and I will not be supporting any of the 
amendments that were made. 
 
As is customary too, Mr. Speaker, I would like to just 
acknowledge a few people that work with me each and every 
day, whether it be in the constituency of Rosthern-Shellbrook, 
in our constituency office there. We have Ms. Sally Fitch, Mr. 
Speaker, that you know answers the phone and talks to all of 
those individuals that call our office with different concerns and 
questions, Mr. Speaker, and she treats each and every one of 
them in a fair and courteous manner. And I want to thank her 
for the effort and the smile that she brings to work each and 

every day. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, also in our office of . . . We have our office in the 
Minister of Advanced Education’s office here in this building, 
Mr. Speaker. I want to thank our staff that work so very hard to 
keep me in the appropriate place and the place that I’m 
supposed to be going, Mr. Speaker, with more often than not 
the right set of notes in front of me, and briefing notes and 
information. And I want to thank each of them in our office 
right here. We have Michelle and Jane in the front of the office. 
I want to thank them for keeping me organized, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have Megan and Kris, our ministerial assistants in the office 
of Advanced Education, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank them for 
their efforts. Gary Hutchings, my chief of staff, Mr. Speaker. 
And our summer student, our summer student Molly Waldman, 
who I am sure is wondering what kind of an office environment 
she has landed herself in. But we have a lot of fun up there, Mr. 
Speaker, and I want to thank them for the effort that they bring 
to work each and every day. 
 
And last but not least, Mr. Speaker . . . I’ve got a couple left, 
but my family, Mr. Speaker. And as members in this Assembly 
know, this is not a single . . . You do not serve in this Assembly 
alone, Mr. Speaker. You serve on behalf of the constituents in 
your constituency. But you serve because your family will 
allow you. They allow you the time and they make sacrifices as 
well. I think they’re sacrifices. They might think it’s quite nice 
to have me away some days. Mr. Speaker, nonetheless each of 
us, our families, I think it’s fair to say, make some degree of 
sacrifice so that we may serve on the behalf of our constituency 
and the province and this Assembly to bring the views forward 
for people across the province. So I do want to thank my wife, 
Krista, my daughter Taryn, and my son Carter for that. 
 
And lastly, Mr. Speaker, the constituents of 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. As we know, our boundaries changed this 
last election. My boundaries were no different in the 
constituency of Rosthern-Shellbrook. We expanded into the 
community of Glaslyn, the RM [rural municipality] of Parkdale, 
Mr. Speaker, down to the First Nation communities of 
Saulteaux and Moosomin in around Cochin area, Mr. Speaker. 
And we’re now about three hours, just over three hours from 
corner to corner in our constituency. We’re consisting now, and 
I’m just going off memory, I think five towns. We’d be up to 12 
villages now, Mr. Speaker, five First Nations, and 15, 16, 17 
rural municipalities that we service in that area, Mr. Speaker, 
and we represent, I represent in this Assembly on their behalf, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to thank each and every one that I run across 
through our municipal meetings, through our travels throughout 
that constituency for the input that they provide me. And 
sometimes they feel like maybe they’re, you know, providing 
negative input or positive input, but the fact of the matter is, Mr. 
Speaker, is that I represent their views down here in this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and I thank them for taking the time to 
guide me with the concerns that come from our area, Mr. 
Speaker, up along the forest fringe in the constituency of 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 



370 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2016 

Mr. Speaker, with respect to the budget that was tabled here the 
other day, I think it was important and I thought it was quite 
special actually, to have three previous Finance ministers in the 
room when that budget was tabled, Mr. Speaker. I thought it 
was indicative of not just the importance of any budget, Mr. 
Speaker, but maybe indicative of the importance of this budget 
when you have about $968 million missing on the revenue side, 
Mr. Speaker, due to some of the natural resource challenges that 
we’ve had over the course of the last number of months, Mr. 
Speaker, and looking into the future. 
 
And I think it was important to acknowledge the work that my 
treasury board colleagues had done along with the Finance 
minister, Mr. Speaker, led by the Finance minister in many 
cases, on doing what we can to close that revenue gap, Mr. 
Speaker, and the consultation that we had with our entire 
caucus, Mr. Speaker, as the budget comes together. It just 
doesn’t come together by one or two people, Mr. Speaker. It 
comes together by an entire governing entity, Mr. Speaker, and 
this budget was no exception. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
thank each and every member of the Saskatchewan Party 
caucus for their input on what I think is a very important budget 
as we move into the days and months ahead. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have, as we’ve said, a situation where we have 
some challenging fiscal times here in the province, Mr. 
Speaker. And it’s important I think for each of us, Mr. Speaker, 
in our areas and around the province to have a look in the 
mirror at the programs that we offer as a government on behalf 
of the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We invest, and 
that’s what governments do is invest the people of 
Saskatchewan’s dollars, Mr. Speaker, back into their 
communities, back into the services that are available to 
families, Mr. Speaker, available to communities right across 
this province. And this is an opportunity I think for all of us to 
represent our constituencies and their interests, Mr. Speaker, as 
we go through this process with largely less revenue this year 
than what we’ve had in previous years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and with respect to the budget and with respect to 
the challenges that we had on the revenue side of the budget, I 
think it’s important to remember, Mr. Speaker, that in this 
budget there was no tax increases that were present in the 
budget, Mr. Speaker. That was a commitment that was made in 
the election, and it’s a commitment that was kept upon the 
releasing of this budget. Mr. Speaker, this budget continued to 
control spending to ensure that we are able to be sustainable 
into the future with the programs that are viewed as being core, 
Mr. Speaker, to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And it continues to invest in people, Mr. Speaker, and that’s no 
more notable than in the files such as Health, Mr. Speaker, the 
file that I’m responsible for, in Advanced Education, with our 
post-secondary partners across the province of Saskatchewan. 
And it continues to invest in infrastructure, Mr. Speaker, which 
has been an important cornerstone of this government, Mr. 
Speaker, with $8 billion invested in infrastructure over the last 
eight and a half years, Mr. Speaker. And that continues with 
investment in infrastructure in this budget that was tabled here 
by this Finance minister just last week. 
 
With respect to infrastructure, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s 
incumbent on us to . . . investment, I guess, in people and 

infrastructure, but to look no further than the investments that 
have been made with respect to health care, Mr. Speaker. And 
that’s very relevant in the constituency of Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
There’s been investments in infrastructure made in the 
community where I live with one of the 13 long-term care 
facilities up and running there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s been investments in people made, Mr. Speaker, and 
medical professionals. And some of the 650 more doctors that 
we have working across the province of Saskatchewan are 
working in the constituency of Rosthern-Shellbrook. Mr. 
Speaker, we have nurse practitioners that were not present a 
decade ago that are now commonplace in many of the rural 
communities across Rosthern-Shellbrook, Mr. Speaker, the 
constituency of Rosthern-Shellbrook, as well as nurse 
practitioners that are present in communities across the 
province of Saskatchewan. And I think it’s incumbent to 
mention that our health care and how we deliver health care, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, is changing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in our constituency we have a couple of health 
regions that cover areas across the broad and vast area of 
Rosthern-Shellbrook, the first being the Saskatoon Health 
Region, Mr. Speaker, and the second being the Prince Albert 
Parkland Health Region. And to a lesser degree, we would have 
the health region out of North Battleford into the RM of 
Parkdale and in that area, Mr. Speaker. But we have the 
Saskatoon Health Region, Mr. Speaker, which has experienced 
since 2007 with its operating grants, Mr. Speaker, an increase of 
just over 68 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that is indicative of this government’s 
commitment to investing in people and investing in 
communities, investing in things like the surgery wait time 
initiative, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that we can take jurisdictions 
such as Saskatchewan, that was noted for having some of the 
longest surgery wait times in the Dominion of Canada, to some 
of the some of the shortest surgery wait times in our nation, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s through investments like we have in the 
Saskatoon Health Region, the $28 million that we invested in 
the surgery wait time initiative, Mr. Speaker, but also through 
increases in operating investments to our health regions like the 
Saskatoon Health Region of 68 per cent, the P.A. Parkland 
Health Region, Mr. Speaker, an increase of over 74 per cent in 
that same time period. Mr. Speaker, these are significant 
increases that affect just not the community of Prince Albert, 
but communities in the surrounding area, communities like 
Shellbrook, Blaine Lake, Spiritwood, Mr. Speaker, 
communities in the constituency of Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to the Saskatchewan economy and in 
particular with respect to what I call the spinal cord of our 
Saskatchewan economy, Mr. Speaker, is agriculture. And 
agriculture is the main economic driver, I think, in many parts 
of the province of Saskatchewan, but in particular in the 
constituency of Rosthern-Shellbrook. And in many cases, Mr. 
Speaker, we talk about exports and we’re at a record export 
level now with agriculture at 15.3 billion tonnes. But much of 
that export, Mr. Speaker, is due to producing more, to increase 
the agronomics as the member from Melville-Saltcoats talked 
about, increase genetic varieties that farmers are able to utilize 
through research that has happened right here, Mr. Speaker, at 
the College of Agriculture at the University of Saskatchewan, 



June 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 371 

Mr. Speaker, and research that has been leap-frogged off of in 
the industry. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there’s also increases in value of our exports 
coming through value-added production, if you will. And one of 
the unsung heroes here in the province of Saskatchewan is what 
we do with some of the canola we grow, Mr. Speaker. And if 
you go back a number of years, there wasn’t very many acres of 
canola grown. Now it’s substantial, and it’s a staple crop here in 
the province of Saskatchewan. It’s a dominant crop where I live 
up along the forest fringe. But, Mr. Speaker, last year we grew 
just under 9 million tonnes of canola, 8.8 million tonnes of 
canola. Mr. Speaker, 1.3 million tonnes of that canola was 
crushed into oil right here in the province of Saskatchewan. It 
was crushed in communities like Nipawin, like Clavet, like 
Yorkton, and communities such as Lloydminster, Mr. Speaker, 
and that canola oil was transformed into $1.4 billion worth of 
exports right here in the province of Saskatchewan. It created 
jobs. It created exports, Mr. Speaker. And it’s a real success 
story of agriculture in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we export our products, we need an avenue to 
get those products to market, whether it be rail, Mr. Speaker, 
whether it be our highways across the province. And this budget 
here the other day brought us record investment in highways of 
$1.15 billion, Mr. Speaker. In the constituency of 
Rosthern-Shellbrook, there’s a number of items in that budget 
that directly affect us, or indirectly, Mr. Speaker. Overpasses at 
Warman and Martensville, Mr. Speaker, most of our 
constituency goes to Saskatoon through one of those routes. 
 
We have a major highway, over $13 million worth of work 
happening to Highway 3, Mr. Speaker, in the Holbein and 
Crutwell area along with some channelling and some turning 
lanes, acceleration lanes at the busy intersection of 55 and 3, a 
much-needed project, Mr. Speaker, and one that we’re very, 
very happy to see in this budget. 
 
Another high point, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll get no argument from 
the member from Biggar-Sask Valley on the work, on the 
improvements that are going to be done to Highway 340 as it 
goes between Hafford and Radisson, I believe, is where it 
dumps out onto the 16. It’s a major commuter highway for 
individuals living in that area, Mr. Speaker, and it’s going to see 
some much-needed investments. It’s one of our famous thin 
membrane surface highways in the province of Saskatchewan 
and, Mr. Speaker, it’s going to see some much-needed attention 
this year. And that, Mr. Speaker, is part of our $30 million 
investment in our $70 million campaign commitment in 
highway surge funding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 376 is a gravel highway coming out of the 
Mayfair, Rabbit Lake area. And that’s an area, Mr. Speaker, 
with another TMS [thin membrane surface] highway where 
we’ll use the gravel highways, if you will, to bring the export 
products out, the cattle into the PFRA [Prairie Farm 
Rehabilitation Administration] pasture in that area, as well as 
the agricultural grain and whatnot that’s grown in that area. A 
pretty broad area to get it out to market. Mr. Speaker, that as 
well is going to see some much-needed investment in surge 
funding, in some of the surge funding that was committed to by 
this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 

There’s been significant investment in years past. And I can 
think of some of the work that was done to Highway 3, Mr. 
Speaker, in years past — necessary work. I can think of some of 
the work that was done and paid for by this government to the 
bridge in Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker, the Diefenbaker bridge in 
Prince Albert with almost $5 million invested just a few years 
ago, Mr. Speaker. Another in excess, I believe, of $1 million in 
this current year, Mr. Speaker, doing some work to that. I think 
of Highway 11 between Saskatoon and Prince Albert, the 
highway that allows those exports to come out of Prince Albert 
to the southern markets, Mr. Speaker, and that investment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can’t help but think of an evening that I spent 
with the member from P.A. Carlton and the member from Sask 
Rivers, Mr. Speaker, the member from Batoche during the 
campaign when we had the opportunity, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 
debate some relevant issues in Prince Albert and in that 
particular area. And, Mr. Speaker, I remember the members 
opposite and their previous leader that is not here now but, Mr. 
Speaker, where he’d come up into the community of Prince 
Albert a number of times, a number of times to announce the 
fact that they’re going to build a brand new bridge in Prince 
Albert, Mr. Speaker. I think maybe four times. I may be 
mistaken, but I think he was there four times to announce that 
project. Am I right? 
 
[15:45] 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in the later days of the campaign, all parties 
are required to come out with a document, Mr. Speaker, that 
explains how they’re going to do what they say they’re going to 
do. Well, Mr. Speaker, that document had come out and it was 
missing a number of items, one of them being a road to 
Wollaston Lake, but another one, Mr. Speaker, it was missing, 
was how they were precisely going to pay for another bridge 
crossing in the community of Prince Albert. So without having 
a proper document, Mr. Speaker, that explained how they were 
going to pay for what they say they were going to do, Mr. 
Speaker, one of the candidates that evening in that discussion 
— I believe it was one of the opposition candidates for 
Saskatchewan Rivers if I’m not mistaken — explained that 
probably the casino in Prince Albert could pay for that bridge, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I think it’s incumbent, Mr. Speaker, to explain that the name 
of that bridge is not the casino bridge. It’s the John Diefenbaker 
bridge, Mr. Speaker, and it’s this government that continues to 
invest in the repairs, the necessary repairs to that bridge, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s been this government that is committed to a 
funding method that we use with other communities, Mr. 
Speaker, in the construction of a new bridge, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
been this government that has invested and invested heavily in 
Prince Albert and the region around Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker, 
in the Pineview Terrace, Mr. Speaker, and the highways that I 
had mentioned. Not to mention, Mr. Speaker, has invested in 
the present bridge that is there and the necessary repairs to that 
bridge as it is a gateway to the North. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Casino money. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Casino money, yes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d be remiss if I didn’t enter a couple of 



372 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2016 

comments with respect to municipal revenue sharing. As I said, 
we deal with a number of municipalities across the constituency 
of Rosthern-Shellbrook, and like my friend from Carrot River, I 
want to definitely enter in a couple of comments on some of our 
communities and what’s happened with their municipal revenue 
sharing. 
 
We have, Mr. Speaker, the community of Spiritwood since 
2007 is up 124 per cent. Mr. Speaker, we have the community 
of Hafford, up 141 per cent in their municipal revenue sharing 
since 2007. Blaine Lake’s 138 per cent; Rosthern, 146 per cent; 
the community of Shellbrook, 164 per cent increase. Mr. 
Speaker, some of the cities in and around the area that are 
important to our constituency with people that are working in 
the cities, living in the rural areas, North Battleford, up 162 per 
cent, Mr. Speaker; Saskatoon, up 173 per cent; and Prince 
Albert, up 156 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to this, and I’ve talked about some of 
the highways investments and some of the other investments in 
those communities, but in Rosthern-Shellbrook, in addition to 
over doubling the municipal revenue sharing by time and a half 
in many cases, Mr. Speaker, we’ve invested in water plants in 
Spiritwood. We’ve invested in sewage treatment plants in the 
communities of Medstead and Shellbrook, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 
invested in a fire hall at Rosthern. We’ve invested enormously 
in a community rink affordability grant, Mr. Speaker, most 
notably in the community of Rosthern. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while doing that, we’ve taken an education 
budget, K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] education budget, 
from just less than $1 billion to now over $2 billion, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I would be remiss if I did not mention my previous seatmate 
from Canora-Pelly that I got to sit with in the last session 
previous to the election, Mr. Speaker. Each and every day in 
here, him and the previous member from Regina Lakeview 
would exchange in a debate — a one-sided debate albeit, Mr. 
Speaker — and I’ll never forget, I’ll never forget these words, 
Mr. Speaker: there’s been $1 billion invested in schools, 40 new 
schools, 25 renovation projects. Mr. Speaker, I can’t hear out of 
this ear but I do remember that and I think it speaks, Mr. 
Speaker, to the importance of K to 12 education to this 
government, Mr. Speaker, with that type of investment and a 
number of schools under construction as we speak. 
 
A couple of quick comments with regards to the file that I am 
responsible for, Mr. Speaker, and a file that I greatly enjoy 
working in. $7.3 billion, Mr. Speaker, that’s the amount that has 
been invested in post-secondary education since 2007 by the 
Saskatchewan Party government. Mr. Speaker, that’s a 59 per 
cent increase over the record previous. Mr. Speaker, our 
operating investment with our universities is up 53 per cent. Mr. 
Speaker, we are pleased in this budget to maintain that level of 
operating funding to our post-secondary partners, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are pleased to maintain our student supports to each of 
those students that attend our post-secondary institutions, Mr. 
Speaker, student supports that are up some 350 per cent since 
2007. Things like the Saskatchewan advantage grant for 
education savings, Mr. Speaker, that allow families to invest in 
their children’s education as soon as they show up actually. Mr. 

Speaker, things like the Saskatchewan Advantage Scholarship 
which is $500 to each and every student that attends 
post-secondary or undergrad degrees, Mr. Speaker, for four 
years. The graduate retention program, the $20,000 tax 
incentive, Mr. Speaker, was enhanced — our first campaign 
promise that’s kept — enhanced with the first home program, 
Mr. Speaker, allowing $10,000 of that tax incentive to be 
utilized by those people that choose to stay in a community in 
Saskatchewan and start their careers here. They’ll have $10,000 
available to purchase their first home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a commitment of this government when it 
comes to post-secondary education, almost half a billion dollars 
in investment in capital across the province of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, at our post-secondary institutions: investments at 
the Academic Health Sciences Building; the international 
vaccine centre; the Weyburn campus, Mr. Speaker; the Trades 
and Technology Centre out in Yorkton of which I was to the 
grand opening just under a year ago; the integrated science lab, 
Mr. Speaker; at St. Peter’s College; the Saskatchewan Energy 
Training Institute at Estevan, Mr. Speaker. There’s been 
numerous renovation and additions at our regional colleges, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We’ve completed a Research and Innovation Centre at the U of 
R [University of Regina]. There’s a Faculty of Sciences 
upgrade, Mr. Speaker, and the list goes on and on and on. 
Almost $100 million in preventative maintenance renewal at the 
University of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, almost $38 million at 
the U of R, Mr. Speaker, and almost $13 million at Sask Poly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing . . . I could go on a little while longer, 
but in closing, Mr. Speaker, I do want to talk about where we’re 
going as a government in the post-secondary education sector, 
Mr. Speaker, and the conversations that we have with our 
post-secondary partners, whether it be a regional college, Mr. 
Speaker, whether it be one of our technical institutes, Mr. 
Speaker, or our universities. But we want to sit down and ask 
questions, Mr. Speaker, and collaborate with our partners in the 
post-secondary system. And these are questions that we often 
ask now, but, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to intensify our efforts 
in asking those questions around things like accessibility, 
accessibility to our institutions on the student’s behalf, Mr. 
Speaker, and on our community’s behalf. The responsiveness, 
Mr. Speaker, we want to talk with our institutions about the 
responsiveness that we have to our communities, to our 
economy, our responsiveness to not just Saskatchewan but the 
nation as a whole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need to talk about the sustainability of our 
institutions so that what we have now we can enjoy now and 
into the future, Mr. Speaker, for our children and our 
grandchildren. and, Mr. Speaker, the accountability of our 
institutions, the accountability to those that are investing 
through tuition in their education, but also accountability, Mr. 
Speaker, to members of Saskatchewan that invest, and they 
invest heavily in post-secondary education in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and all the while, Mr. Speaker, retaining the 
quality of education that we have come to expect and receive 
from our post-secondary education system.  
 
And we saw four members that were receiving a scholarship 
here yesterday, Mr. Speaker, to further their studies at the 



June 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 373 

University of Saskatchewan in the College of Ag and 
Bioresources. And that story can be told many, many times 
over, Mr. Speaker, the quality education that they’re going to 
receive from that institution. 
 
So in closing, Mr. Speaker — I got about seven minutes in there 
— that I would like to indicate that I will be supporting this 
budget that was put forward here last week by our Finance 
minister, Mr. Speaker. I will not be supporting the amendment. 
And I look forward to the next number of days and months 
ahead, Mr. Speaker, in the province of Saskatchewan. Thank 
you. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Prince Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for allowing me to 
respond to the budget presented by the Minister of Finance. I 
was very disappointed with this budget, Mr. Speaker. I 
understand as a province we are dealing with reduced resource 
revenues, but it is wrong for this government to place the 
burden of their financial mismanagement on the backs of the 
citizens of this province. 
 
In fact this government explains the deficit budget on the fact 
that resource revenue has decreased, but how did they explain 
having five deficit budgets in the eight years they have served? 
And this was while they had a resource boom, record revenues, 
and proceeded to spend all the rainy day funds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again this budget has very little for residents 
in Prince Albert. In fact I would call this budget a bad news 
budget for Prince Albert. I was hoping for more and actually 
was expecting more, since during the election campaign the 
Saskatchewan Party gave the impression that they were going to 
start making Prince Albert a priority. But this budget makes it 
evident that Prince Albert is still not their priority. 
 
There was no mention of this government putting money 
towards expansion or rebuilding of Victoria Hospital even 
though it is well known that Victoria Hospital can no longer 
meet the needs of the city, surrounding communities, and 
northern communities. Whatever happened to the $2 million 
spent to begin planning for the renewal of Victoria Hospital in 
2014? Where’s the plan? What is going on? There was no 
money set aside in the 2015 budget and none in this budget. The 
residents of Prince Albert deserve some answers and some 
action from this government. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, there was no mention about a second bridge 
for Prince Albert. Prince Albert is the gateway to the North, Mr. 
Speaker, and the northern part of our province is rich in 
tourism, mining, forestry, agriculture, and many other 
industries. Residents have concerns about safety since trucks 
carrying dangerous goods go through the city and pass 
residential areas to cross the bridge, and if there was an accident 
it could have extreme consequences. Also when there is 
construction on the bridge, it can cause extreme wait times. Just 
this spring is no exception with people waiting up to 45 minutes 
to cross the bridge on weekday peak times, and just this past 
May long weekend some people waited almost two hours to get 
across the bridge. What if there was an emergency? When is 
this government going to take the concerns of Prince Albert 

residents seriously? 
 
Mr. Speaker, when northern Saskatchewan is doing well Prince 
Albert benefits, and this budget ignored the issues of the people 
in the North and did not provide any real support. The closing 
of Buffalo Narrows correctional centre will have a major impact 
on that community and is a huge blow for the North and job 
security in the North. It is no surprise that unemployment is 
extremely high in the North. So instead of investing on job 
creation, this government chooses to create more 
unemployment. These families invest in the businesses in the 
community, and if they choose to stay in the community, they 
will have very limited job opportunities. 
 
Direct mention of the city of Prince Albert was only discussed 
twice in this budget. There was a mention about revenue 
sharing and then a mention of the cuts to the park funding 
which will eat up most of the increase of the revenue. Cuts to 
the Pehonan Park will be devastating to Prince Albert. Mr. 
Speaker, just two weeks ago in my maiden speech, I was 
describing Prince Albert Northcote and how it stretched along 
the riverbank and included city parks. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
Pehonan Park is entirely in Prince Albert Northcote. It includes 
the riverbank which historically was the gathering place for 
First Nations and Métis people and is still a gathering place for 
residents in the community. The riverbank in Prince Albert is 
very beautiful and community members were working on a plan 
to do more development alongside the riverbank in hopes to 
encourage tourism and more residents using downtown 
businesses. With cuts to this funding, what will happen to the 
plan? 
 
Pehonan Park also includes the well-known Little Red River 
Park just outside the hustle and bustle of the city. Little Red 
River Park is a beautiful park which is used by children and 
families for get-togethers, special occasions, picnics, 
playgrounds, hiking, walking, and biking trails, downhill and 
cross-country skiing, and sledding. It is a park used all year 
round and is a great location for all people to gather but also for 
families in Prince Albert that have limited budgets. This 
funding helped with operating and capital costs, but now all the 
costs will be placed on the backs of the residents of Prince 
Albert. 
 
Cuts to parks impacted five small cities that can’t afford more 
cuts from this government. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to tell you a 
little bit more about the four other parks that are facing cuts by 
this government. According to the Tourism Saskatchewan 
website, Battlefords River Valley is: 
 

Rich in natural and cultural history, . . . [which] provides 
visitors with a vast panoramic view of the parkland. . . . [is] 
a popular hiking and cross-country skiing area with over 
130 different trees, shrubs and wildflowers, and an 
abundance of wildlife. Recently extended North Shore 
Trail offers 15 kilometres of scenic hiking, skiing, [and] 
mountain biking. 

 
According to the city of Swift Current website the Chinook 
Parkway: 
 

. . . provides over 20 kilometres of hard-surface trail 
alongside the Swift Current Creek to bike, roller blade, or 



374 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2016 

walk on. This wheelchair accessible trail is full of wildlife 
ranging from meadowlarks and beavers to muskrats and 
deer. 

 
[16:00] 
 
According to the Wakamow Valley website, Wakamow Valley 
is a park for all seasons with 20 kilometres of great trails, 
walking and hiking paths, park grounds, playgrounds, picnic 
areas, cycling, canoeing, and kayaking. 
 
According to the city of Weyburn website the Tatagwa Parkway 
is 180 acres along the Souris River. It is an urban conservation 
park that has walking and biking trails, picnic tables, and park 
benches. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, doesn’t these parks seem amazing and such 
gems to have in cities for residents and tourists to use? These 
parks help beautify cities, promote tourism, and provide 
residents safe places to get exercise. Since this government has 
made a decision to scrap the active families benefit, isn’t it 
important for them to ensure that everyone has access to options 
for healthy activities? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand that tough decisions need to be made 
when times are tough, but budgets are all about priorities. And 
this government has clearly shown that they have messed-up 
priorities when they make a decision to raise prescription costs 
for children and seniors. When they say that they will earn $9 
million a year by increasing prescription medication, what they 
mean is that families and seniors will be paying for this 
government’s financial mismanagement. Sick children and 
seniors should not have to pay for the government’s mistakes. 
Some seniors are already making tough decisions due to the 
increased costs of living. While canvassing, I met many seniors 
that had to decide which medication to buy because they can’t 
afford all the medication prescribed to them. Now this 
government is asking them to pay more. 
 
Seniors have also been asking to have a seniors’ advocate or a 
minister responsible for seniors’ issues so that they have 
someone to consult with when issues arise. This government 
needs to consider having an advocate for seniors. 
 
I was happy to see that this government was going to invest in 
reducing surgical wait times, but what is the long-term plan? 
This government has been underfunding health for far too long 
and if investments are not provided with secure, stable funding, 
then surgical wait times will continue to be a problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has also underfunded education 
which has resulted in cuts to staff, cuts to staff in schools, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when my daughter was in her early years 
of school, she struggled with learning concepts. A concerned 
teacher made a referral to have her tested, and it was discovered 
that she had a memory issue. So with extra help from an 
educational assistant, my daughter learned how to manage and 
graduate high school with honours. Mr. Speaker, my worry is 
that, with cuts to staff, will students slip through the cracks? 
Will they get the extra support they need for them to be 
successful? 
 
Not long after the Minister of Finance announced the 2016 

budget, the Minister of Education started making 
announcements of cuts, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of Education 
cut funding to 10 positions on the regional intersectoral 
committees. Mr. Speaker, the regional intersectoral committee 
works on a variety of different issues including working on 
poverty reduction, affordable housing, and early childhood 
development. These workers address gaps and barriers to 
services for marginalized populations. There were many more 
cuts to families, Mr. Speaker, and these cuts affect the most 
vulnerable people in our communities that need more support 
not less. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government talks about having more people 
working in the province but yet has decided to cut the 
employment supplement to families that have children over the 
age of 13. The supplement helps the recipients with the costs of 
raising a family and transitioning from social assistance into the 
labour force. Children don’t get any cheaper to raise once they 
become teenagers; indeed, the reverse is likely true as their food 
and clothing costs rise. Therefore it makes no sense to have the 
cut-off age for this supplement at 13 years. 
 
Also the loss of the employment supplement includes the loss 
of health benefits. The majority of families who qualify for the 
employment supplement do not have benefits from their 
employer. Successful applicants for the employment 
supplement also receive basic health benefits to offset these 
costs. The 2,400 families impacted by being cut from this 
program will also lose their health benefits These families do 
not have extra money to spend on glasses or dental work and, if 
they do need these services, they often have to decide between 
paying bills or groceries. 
 
If we want families to stay employed we need to provide them 
the support they need to stay employed or else there will be no 
incentive. When the Minister of Finance announced these cuts, 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite clapped, Mr. Speaker. They 
clapped when they heard 2,400 low-income families, many 
being single-parent homes, will have less money to spend on 
their children’s needs. They clapped when they heard 2,400 
families would go without health benefits. This, Mr. Speaker, 
this is a clear example of how the Sask Party government treats 
the most vulnerable in our community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, prior to being elected to represent the people in 
Prince Albert Northcote, I was employed as a mental health and 
addiction services worker. I promised my co-workers that I 
would advocate for mental health services because mental 
health clients have been ignored for far too long. Mr. Speaker, I 
was upset that this budget did not address more funding for 
mental health services, especially for Prince Albert and northern 
communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think members here are familiar to the 
unfortunate incident that happened in La Loche just a few 
months ago. Political leaders attended in the community and 
left residents under the impression that mental health services 
would be a priority to help community members deal with 
trauma related with the incident, but also because La Loche, 
like many other northern communities, has a high number of 
suicides. These communities need stable funding and 
permanent positions placed in the community. Having workers 
coming in and out of the community and asking clients to retell 



June 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 375 

their story is at times more traumatic. Mr. Speaker, suicide is a 
preventable death, and we need to do a better job at helping 
address the underlying issues that lead people to be in those 
hopeless situations. 
 
And I can’t help but feel frustrated when I see millions of 
dollars spent on mismanaged projects like the Regina bypass. 
And don’t get me wrong, Mr. Speaker. I am a huge Roughrider 
fan and long-time season ticket holder and regularly make trips 
from Prince Albert to Regina for home games. But seeing 
millions of dollars spent on a new stadium, when I have seen 
first-hand ceilings leaking in Victoria Hospital, this really 
makes me question this Sask Party government’s priorities. 
 
Talking about misplaced priorities, Mr. Speaker, the cuts to 
low-income families, children, and seniors seem to be the 
contrary to this government’s plan to address poverty, the 
mental health and addiction action plan, and recommendations 
from the Children’s Advocate. I did not see any extra funds 
invested for poverty reduction, mental health and addictions, 
and recommendations from the Children’s Advocate. This 
government spends a lot of money investing into developing 
these plans, but they need to follow through with them. 
 
The Children’s Advocate, Bob Pringle, talked about the 
struggles of the foster care system. Kids in care are increasing 
and the availability of foster care homes is decreasing. The 
Ministry of Social Services needs to create a formal recruitment 
and retention plan for foster homes. The ministry also needs to 
provide supports for existing foster families and work with 
other ministries to make sure appropriate services are available 
for children in care that have a range of issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, unfortunately there are far too many Aboriginal 
children in care, and as a government we need to work harder to 
provide support for families. The Truth and Reconciliation calls 
of action have many practical suggestions on helping reduce 
Aboriginal youth in care. Are these calls of actions being put in 
place? Is this government committed to reducing the number of 
Aboriginal children in care and, if so, what are they doing and 
what programs are you committing to? 
 
More cuts are being implemented to community-based 
organizations, and the budget indicates that this government 
plans to cut 24 full-time jobs in the department of Social 
Services. How are these cuts helping the families most in need? 
In tough times, how can the government justify cuts to these 
important agencies? 
 
Mr. Speaker, since this government took office, the enrolment 
on social assistance programs has been increasing. Food banks 
are struggling with the increase of people needing support, and 
almost half of the users of the food bank are children. How can 
this be? How can this be when we’ve seen such a strong 
economy in our province in the past eight years? Despite 9,000 
fewer jobs today than a year ago, this Sask Party budget has cut 
job creation and training programs. These cuts include 
apprenticeship programs, job skills training, adult basic 
education, and literacy programs. 
 
This government wants individuals requiring social assistance 
that are physically able to work to be enrolled in the transitional 
employment allowance program. Most people prefer to be 

working, but how is this government planning on making 
employment possible or successful if they are not addressing 
the high unemployment rates, child care subsidies, and the cuts 
to the programs already mentioned? If this government does not 
invest in these programs, they are setting people up for failure, 
which isn’t positive for the worker or the workplace. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, obviously this budget is hurting families and 
seniors here in Saskatchewan, and this is only the start. The list 
of broken promises continue to grow with this government, 
whether it’s the active family benefit being cut or seniors and 
children paying more for prescriptions. Mr. Speaker, this 
government has failed to deliver opportunities to young people, 
fairness and affordability for families, and dignity and security 
for seniors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do not agree with this government making 
seniors and families pay for their mistakes. Therefore, Mr. 
Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Biggar-Sask Valley. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you very much, Mr. deputy of Chairs. 
It’s a great pleasure to be speaking to the budget. I’d just like to 
recognize a few people and thank a few people too before I get 
into the bulk of the speech. 
 
First, I’d like to thank my constituent assistant, Janet, who staffs 
the office in Biggar. She does a wonderful job. She’s been with 
me for the last four years. In the future we plan on opening 
another office, probably in Hepburn, where she’ll travel one day 
a week out to Hepburn because the constituency of Biggar-Sask 
Valley has gotten quite large, and we feel it necessary to service 
that part of the constituency as well. Also I’d like just to say hi 
to Janet’s daughters: Jessica and Jade and Madison. As 
government caucus Chair, I think I should also thank the caucus 
staff: John, the chief of staff and all of the staff that work with 
him. They do an outstanding job. 
 
Obviously, Mr. Speaker, we need to recognize the Premier and 
all the dedicated leadership that he provides to our government 
and to our caucus, and also the Finance minister who has done 
an outstanding job, works very long hours, and has had a lot of 
help of course with the civil service naturally, his staff in the 
Finance ministry. 
 
But the work also is done by caucus who brings forward the 
issues that they see at the doorstep or in their constituency 
office and also, you know, the ministries that bring forward all 
the information that is relevant to making a budget. And of 
course treasury board who work very, very long hours working 
on the budget with the Minister of Finance and cabinet, and of 
course the Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are talking about transformational change, and 
transformational change will keep our province moving in the 
right direction, providing funding for core services for the 
citizens of Saskatchewan. So that’s an important theme to 
remember as we move forward in the future. 
 
Yes, we are running a deficit, as much as we did not want to run 
a deficit. But when you lose nearly $1 billion in revenue 



376 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2016 

through dropping oil prices and royalties from the mining 
sector, and mainly the potash, it was really very difficult to 
balance the budget this year. 
 
[16:15] 
 
But we will be balancing the budget next year, and it’s very 
important that we do for a number of reasons. Just take the 
example of the provinces around us — Alberta, Manitoba’s new 
government, Ontario, other provinces, and the federal 
government — who are running deficits. And as I said, you 
know, sometimes it’s necessary to run a deficit. But the 
difficulty that those provinces and the federal government have, 
there’s no end in sight. When will they have a balanced budget? 
 
And the credit rating agencies notice this. And they recognize 
Saskatchewan, our government, that we have a plan in place; 
that yes, we’re running a deficit this year, but next year it will 
be balanced. And that goes a long way to keeping 
Saskatchewan strong. 
 
What do we mean by keeping Saskatchewan strong? Well it 
was very prominent in the last election campaign. Keeping 
Saskatchewan strong means no new taxes, controlling spending, 
investing in people, investing in infrastructure. And I think it’s 
worthy to read into the record in my presentation what that 
means. 
 
So no new taxes means, since 2007, nearly $6 billion in tax 
reductions to families, individuals, homeowners, businesses, 
and farmers. We’re among the lowest personal and business tax 
burdens in Canada, according to a recent Conference Board of 
Canada report. Our government is controlling spending: a 
modest expense growth of 2 per cent from last year. Regional 
health authorities reduced administration expense by $7.5 
million to reinvest in front-line staff and long-term care 
facilities; changes to programs and services to ensure 
sustainability and manage costs; beginning a government-wide 
exercise — a transformational change, as I just mentioned — to 
ensure high-quality public services delivery in the most 
effective and efficient way. 
 
It’s interesting. I was at a conference and I spoke to, not a 
member from the Manitoba government but a bureaucrat that 
was there, concerning energy. And I spoke to him about the 
recent budget that was brought down. His comment was, it was 
the cost of health care that had exploded in Manitoba. I believe 
he said it was over 10 per cent year-over-year increases in the 
cost of health care. Well there’s no government that’s going to 
be able to withstand those kind of increases in costs. 
 
And I think, you know, that’s what our government has been 
really keeping the health costs under control as much as 
possible. And you know, part of our discussion in 
transformational change is obviously in the areas where we 
spend the most money — health care, education, and those 
areas that we have to continue supporting people that need it, 
need the care, need the supports — but we also must recognize 
that we must keep spending under control. 
 
The other item under keeping Saskatchewan strong is investing 
in people, additional funding to reduce wait times for surgery 
and diagnostic services, continued investments to support 

seniors at home or in long-term care. These are things that 
people talked and were raised during the election campaign. 
And we’ve responded: funding to cover the 15 drugs added to 
the formulary for cancer treatment; increased support for people 
with disabilities, for K to 12 classrooms; 199 previously 
approved child care spaces will be available; and funding for 
the new first home program to assist eligible students with the 
down payment for their first homes. So it’s important that we 
look at keeping spending under control but we also look after 
people’s needs. 
 
Now personally why is it important to keep Saskatchewan 
strong? Well just look at my own particular case, our family 
and friends. It’s important to keep Saskatchewan strong and 
keep investment in this province, and jobs. You know, my 
children and grandchildren live . . . you know, keep them 
working and prospering in Saskatchewan. My wife, Cindy, is an 
educational assistant. She met this young lady in the school 
system, and her name was Desiree. And right now Desiree 
Hinse and Reno Poitras and their baby Zane, who happen to 
live with us now, have their struggles and continue to work 
through them. But Des is working locally, and the family is 
getting back on their feet. 
 
My daughter Lacey and her partner, Nick, and his daughter 
Surayya, they just recently purchased a house in Regina, and 
they’re expecting their first child in early July. Also my 
daughter Alex who is working on getting her degree in social 
services out of the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] in 
Saskatoon, and my son Marshall works in the service sector in 
Saskatoon, so that’s the reason why I want Saskatchewan 
strong. And that’s my personal reasons why I want a future for 
my children and grandchildren to live and work in 
Saskatchewan, and not like what had happened in the past years 
under the NDP when the young people left Saskatchewan, 
mainly for Alberta but around the world, to find jobs because 
there were no jobs and no future working in Saskatchewan. 
 
I think it’s important that I read into the record some of the 
initiatives that our government has brought to Biggar-Sask 
Valley, not only in this budget but in the past years. Under 
revenue sharing, the town of Biggar, revenue sharing increased 
from just over $208,000 in 2007 to just under $500,000 in 
2016-17, 139 per cent increase. And I can assure you the town 
of Biggar has used that money wisely. It’s gone into 
infrastructure. Infrastructure’s such an important thing to keep 
up, and they’ve done a good job of spending money every year. 
And that additional money that our government has given to the 
municipalities has really helped keep their water and sewer and 
treatment plants and streets up to a high level. 
 
The village of Borden, Saskatchewan in 2007 received just 
about $25,000, and in this budget just over $58,000, 136 per 
cent increase. The town of Langham in 2007 received $115,000 
and in this past budget 157 per cent increase of nearly 
$300,000. 
 
A lot was talked about and brought up during the election about 
education, and particularly Prairie Spirit School Division. And 
again this needs to be put into the record. Operating increase for 
Prairie Spirit School Division has been 33.3 per cent since 
2007, while their enrolment has only gone up only 3.5 per cent. 
Total operating funding is $105.5 million. We’ve been there for 



June 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 377 

Prairie Spirit School Division and the school divisions around 
this province. 
 
Sun West School Division, which part of my constituency is in, 
operating increase since 2007 is 26.1 per cent, enrolment 
growth of 6.4 per cent; total operating funding is $55.4 million. 
 
Other investments in Biggar in 2008: Biggar & District Daycare 
Project, $368,000. That’s where little baby Zane goes to 
daycare and it’s so important to have daycare in the 
communities around the province when parents are working or 
they’re single parents. 
 
Borden 2010, Borden School, a roof project of $200,000. Total 
pre-K to 12 school capital allocated since 2007, $1.5 million. 
Seventy childcare spaces since 2007. 
 
Under the health care, Saskatoon Health Region has had a 68.6 
per cent increase since 2007-2008, a total operating funding of 
$1 billion, year-over-year increases of 4.7 per cent to the 
Saskatoon Health Region. The Heartland Health Region has had 
47 per cent increase since 2007-08, total operating funding of 
$94.6 million and year-over-year increase of 2.9 per cent. 
 
In the Biggar & District Health Centre, there was an addition to 
the Biggar hospital, replacing the 60-bed Biggar Diamond 
Lodge nursing home. The project’s scope included 54 long-term 
care beds with a total shareable cost for the project of $22.9 
million. The provincial share was $18.3 million. The balance, 
which made up the $22.9 million, came from the communities 
in and around Biggar. 2015 as I had said, the Biggar Diamond 
Lodge replacement, $18.3 million. And there has been a 43 per 
cent increase to Heartland Health Region since 2007 in the 
town of Biggar. In Langham, a 61 per cent increase in funding 
too, from the Saskatoon Health Region since 2007. 
 
Other initiatives in the constituency, Radisson swimming pool 
reconstruction, $110,000 in 2008. Under Parks, Culture and 
Sport, Langham Community Hall got an update of $68,000 in 
2008. Social Services, 2014, rental construction initiative and 
corporate income tax rebate, which CPP Developments Inc. 
added 24 units, $142,000. 
 
Now under highways, the budget of 2016, just over $15 million 
including repaving on Highway 12 south of Hepburn; a grade 
and pave on Highway 305, Highway 12 to Dalmeny; median 
preservation, Highway 16 near Maymont; spot improvements to 
Highways 340 and 376. And as my colleague from 
Rosthern-Shellbrook, we share that thin membrane from 
Radisson to Hafford, Highway 340, it’s going to be greatly 
appreciated to speed up the improvements on that highway. 
And of course 376 which runs from Asquith to Maymont. And 
so that’s part of the surge money that’s been allocated in the 
budget. 
 
In the Biggar area, Highway 4 grade raise south of Biggar, $1.4 
million; Highway 14 bridge replacement for Eagle Creek, and 
$1.9 million for mill and fill repair on Highway 14. In the 
Langham area on Highway 16, repaving west of Langham, 
eastbound lanes; $400,000 on the Borden bridge slope 
stabilization work, and constituency wide, 2015-16, total 
spending of $13.1 million; repaving Highway 16 west of 
Langham, $3.3 million; grade and pave Highway 305 from 

Highway 12 junction to Dalmeny, 8.3 million; engineered seal 
west of Denholm, $1.3 million. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the tax record of the Saskatchewan Party, 
again this budget contains no tax increases. Since 2007 nearly 
$6 billion in tax reductions to families, individuals, 
homeowners, businesses, and farmers, among the lowest 
personal business tax burdens in Canada according to the recent 
Conference Board of Canada report. 
 
Now under the NDP, the NDP government raised taxes 21 
times during their 16 years in power, including raising the PST 
four times and the gas twice, a gas tax twice, raised the PST 
after the 2003 election after saying they wouldn’t. And a quote: 
 

Why don’t parties want to talk about tax hikes during an 
election? I don’t know. I suspect that anyone who talks 
about tax hikes is not likely to be very popular during the 
course of an election [year] . . . 
 

That was said by former NDP Finance minister, Harry Van 
Mulligen, January 14th, 2014. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, again just some province-wide numbers 
concerning the education budget. This budget continues to keep 
Saskatchewan strong by investing $2.169 billion in pre-K to 12 
education system. The operating funding to school divisions in 
2016 and ’17 is $1.89 billion, an increase of 16.6 million over 
last year to support pre-kindergarten to grade 12 education and 
an overall average increase of 34 per cent in school division 
operating funding since 2007-2008. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have been there for health care, education, 
and infrastructure. You know, there’s an ongoing list that I 
could read into the debate here today concerning the work done 
on highways. But I think I spoke to most of what was done. 
Really, the main ones for the constituency is the surge money 
that’s going to go into 376 and 340. The people out there will 
very much appreciate that added investment in those thin 
membrane highways and they will certainly . . . I will be talking 
to them in the coming days and months about the investment in 
their area. 
 
[16:30] 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to say that I will be supporting 
this budget and I will not be supporting the amendment brought 
by the NDP. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to rise today to enter into the debate regarding the budget 
speech. This was a difficult budget for the government this 
year. But I believe that while it’s a tough budget, it’s a fair 
budget. 
 
Yes, not everyone got what they wanted, which is normally the 
case with every budget — not everybody gets what they want. 
But when you’re in opposition, you can promise everything that 
everybody wants because there’s no responsibility incumbent 
on the members of the opposition. 
 



378 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2016 

That’s right, the former member for Esterhazy . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Saltcoats-Melville, that’s right. And his 
quote certainly applies to today’s members of the opposition. 
It’s not what we would have hoped for, for a budget. We would 
have hoped to have been able to have flossy candy for 
everyone, but the budget did not allow that, Mr. Speaker. When 
you are in a situation where the price of oil has dropped by over 
50 per cent, the price of potash has dropped dramatically, the 
price of uranium has dropped . . . Only in the agricultural field, 
Mr. Speaker, has the economy been relatively stable. 
 
Part of what you would have heard from my colleagues already 
is this budget is about transformational change, and indeed it is. 
However we see one institution in the province where there is 
no change and that is amongst the NDP opposition, Mr. 
Speaker. Their rhetoric and their tune is similar to what it was 
throughout the 1980s. It has been that way since 2007. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it was even that way in the time when they were in 
government. I remember them making the accusations that the 
former Conservative Party that was in government at the time 
was going to close every hospital in the Wood River 
constituency. There had been no plans to do so. However, when 
the NDP formed government in the ’90s, they closed four of the 
five hospitals in the Wood River constituency. So what we see 
from the opposition, Mr. Speaker, is no change. 
 
Well revenues are dropping. Expenses do not, Mr. Speaker; 
they continue to rise and go up on a regular basis. 
 
And in fact over the past year, based on the supplementary 
budgetary appropriation, there were a number of ministries into 
which new funding was provided. A total of 184 million 
additional dollars were provided to the ministries above what 
had been budgeted for: $44 million for Government Relations 
which deals with municipal and First Nations, Mr. Speaker; $34 
million that went in to the social service area, Mr. Speaker; and 
an additional $80 million to the Environment to fight the forest 
fires, Mr. Speaker, something that while we budget for some of 
it, no one could have predicted the amount of costs related to 
the forest fires in Saskatchewan in 2015-16 budget year. The 
fact is we almost ended up in the situation where La Ronge had 
to be evacuated. Luckily that did not happen, but there were 
those people who were evacuated for their own safety out of the 
smoke, Mr. Speaker, and that is reflected in part of the costs for 
social services. 
 
We have seen in this budget, Mr. Speaker, an increase to health 
of $233 million, a 1.6 per cent increase, and yet in listening to 
the members opposite, that is nowhere near what they would 
have put in. In fact the Finance critic demanded that 6 per cent 
be added to the budget. Well what does that mean? How much 
money are we talking about at a 6 per cent increase in health? 
That would have meant $632 million increase or almost $400 
million difference, Mr. Speaker. If you look at the budget, you 
will see that there was only an increase in spending of $336 
million. Included in that was a 41 FTE [full time equivalent] 
increase. So if you take the NDP’s proposal, just on health, to 
increase that budget, you would now be looking at 800-plus 
million-dollar deficit. 
 

But the members opposite have not only been concerned just 
about Health, but every other ministry as well. They have 
demanded increases for urban parks. They have demanded 
increases for education. Across the . . . Child tax credits. 
Everything that government touches, they have been demanding 
an increase for. So how much under the NDP’s proposal would 
be the actual deficit? One billion, 1.2 billion, 1.5 billion? 
Because they never give those numbers, Mr. Speaker. They 
have lots of condemnation, but no information, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So if they were even of the mind to roll that deficit that they 
would have provided back a bit, would they be like the former 
Finance minister Harry Van Mulligen, and implement a 9 per 
cent sales tax to pay that down? That would certainly be of 
benefit to those communities that live along any of our borders 
because they would no longer have any shoppers in those 
communities as they go outside of the province, as has 
happened in the past. Or would they be raising the price of the 
fuel tax, doubling it perhaps? Now that would have a significant 
financial increase, but it would also have a very dramatic, 
negative impact on our economy. 
 
While they have lots of condemnation and demands, they 
provide no solutions, Mr. Speaker. They simply are like the 
child standing at the bottom of the stairs, demanding more, 
more, more, and having no concerns either where the cost 
comes from or their . . . [inaudible] . . . Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I look over the budgets, I look at the health 
one and, as I said, they are proposing a $630 million increase in 
that budget, in a budget that is already over $5 billion. And I 
think if you talk to most economists across the country, they 
will admit that health is not sustainable at these growth rates. 
 
It doesn’t matter whether you’re talking to someone from 
Saskatchewan, you’re talking to someone from Ontario, British 
Columbia, or any place else across Canada, the increases in 
health care are not sustainable for provincial budgets unless the 
provinces want to do away with all of the other things that the 
provinces provide. And I don’t think any one of us in this 
Chamber or any one of us across the province want government 
to be solely funding education without providing any support to 
any of the other government services. Education, social 
services, highways, agriculture — whatever it may be, Mr. 
Speaker, we all want to maintain those services in a realistic 
manner, in an affordable way, Mr. Speaker. And for those who 
have missed the yellow tabs, you can see that they’re still here. 
 
I look over the regional health services, Mr. Speaker, that affect 
each and every one of our constituencies. Sun Country Regional 
Health received an increase of $4 million. That’s a significant 
increase, Mr. Speaker, and services are being maintained in the 
Sun Country region, which is part of the area I represent. 
 
But I think there is a more significant number here which 
affects each and every one of us across the province, and that’s 
the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency which received a $10 million 
increase. You know that is a benefit and function of the 
province of Saskatchewan that we are maintaining and we are 
recognizing that importance to the citizens, to the individuals, 
Mr. Speaker, in our province. 
 
And I’d like to note that every one of the regional health 



June 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 379 

services received an increase this year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now one of my favourite departments is Highways because we 
have lots of highways in Cannington. And the highways budget 
increased by $306 million, Mr. Speaker — $306 million. I 
remember the first budget from the NDP government while I 
was sitting in this House was less than $200 million. I believe 
the total budget that year was 160 million. And our roads over 
that next period of time certainly showed that lack of 
investment by the government opposite. And now they’re 
demanding that we increase and increase. The budget this year, 
the appropriation this year is $1.47 billion. That is almost 10 
times as much as it was the first budget that I was in this House, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I know that the members opposite think that they have 
been here in opposition for a decade or more, Mr. Speaker. Well 
it’s been a decade — if it is, it’s actually eight and a half years, 
but using NDP calculus — a decade that they have seen benefit 
after benefit given to the people of Saskatchewan: better 
highways, better schools, better health care. 
 
You know, I mentioned earlier the closure of four out of five 
hospitals in the Wood River constituency. This happened across 
the province. Regina lost one of its three tertiary care hospitals. 
Now they closed it because it had asbestos, but they opened it 
again as a SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 
and Technology] college. So they couldn’t afford to take the 
asbestos out for health, but they can afford to take it out for 
education. 
 
I think it was more what the reporters used to like to have the 
terminology used “Roy’s rural revenge” because the Plains 
hospital was a hospital that was utilized more by rural residents. 
It was easily accessible by rural residents, much more so than 
the General Hospital, and the Plains hospital actually had 
parking. You could even park there. And a helipad, absolutely. 
But it no longer exists as a health care facility. It is now an 
educational facility because they couldn’t afford to take the 
asbestos out for health. 
 
[16:45] 
 
So we have significant construction across the province for 
highways and infrastructure. The municipal side of our 
governance is still receiving their 1 per cent of the PST, which 
is a significant increase in what was provided previously. They 
have been able to build their needed roads, their needed grids. 
They can afford to put in bridges and culverts as needed, Mr. 
Speaker. And even more important than that is the knowledge 
that that funding continues based on one point of the PST. It’s 
not funded at the whim of the government that could raise it or 
lower it, as the case may be, as was the case in the past under 
the former administration. 
 
We have seen the proposals by the Minister of Highways on the 
new surge, $70 million worth of investment in highways over 
the next four years. Each one of us, I am sure, hopes that some 
of that money will come to our constituencies to improve the 
roads in our area. I certainly hope that will be the case. But I 
know that each dollar of that 70 million will be spent in a place 
that needs it appropriately, that is in difficulty and needs to have 
those roads upgraded to maintain the economy of 

Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the last point I want to make on this is 
agriculture and property taxation. Under this government, we 
saw a significant reduction in property taxes for agriculture, for 
residential, and some drop for the commercial operations. 
Those monies go to supplement the money provided by the 
grant to the municipalities from the 1 per cent of the PST. 
 
And there was always a request by agriculture to reduce that tax 
burden, especially the education portion of the tax. Tommy 
Douglas said it was unfair, the taxation levels that were applied 
to agriculture when he was premier. Those NDP premiers after 
that point also agreed that that taxation level was unfair. And 
the fact is the last NDP premier in this province, Lorne Calvert, 
said it’s unfair, and the status quo is not on. 
 
Well not one of those members, in roughly 47, 48 years of the 
64 years of government from 1944 until we formed government 
in 2007, reduced that tax. They all promised it. They all talked 
about it. They all said it was unfair that the status quo was not 
on, but not one of them made a change in it. 
 
When we formed government, we made that change. We 
reduced the tax levels on agriculture. We reduced the education 
tax level on residential property. And we reduced the taxation, 
education taxation, on business. This budget, Mr. Speaker, is 
also one without tax increases. The people of this province, Mr. 
Speaker, know how to utilize their own money and they need to 
have the opportunity to keep it in their pocket and spend it 
appropriately for their family and their business. And 
government should interfere the least amount possible. I know 
across the other way, that’s not their philosophy. 
 
We see what’s happening across the country, Mr. Speaker. 
Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario, the Maritimes are running huge 
deficits. This government as well is running a deficit — $434 
million. But this government, unlike the others, has a plan to get 
out of deficit next year. Those other provinces have not put 
forward any plan whatsoever to reduce that deficit or get rid of 
that deficit in any kind of reasonable time period. 2024 is not a 
reasonable time period. Even the federal government is running 
huge billion-dollar deficit with no plan to reduce it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the only province with a plan to eliminate 
their deficit. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the 
motion presented by the Minister of Finance. I will not be 
supporting the opposition’s amendment. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm River. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — [Inaudible] . . . to enter into the budget debate. 
I didn’t enter into the Throne Speech debate. There just wasn’t 
enough. So I want to say to the new members that the speeches 
were very excellent, very good. I remember my first one in ’99 
wasn’t half as good as the many ones that I’ve heard here, and I 
was very, very impressed. 
 
I also want to . . . I don’t know if my CAs [constituency 
assistant] are watching. It’s getting close to 5 o’clock but, you 
know, they’ve been with me since, almost since ’99. One of 
them for sure — Donna has been, and Lavonne’s been there for 



380 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2016 

10 years. And they’ve did excellent jobs as my CAs. If they’re 
listening, it’s one of the reasons I still keep getting elected 
every year. They do the work and I get to come up here and just 
make speeches. 
 
But as we talk about the budget, this was . . . I’ve been here for 
many years, not as many as the member that just spoke before 
me, but this is one of the more difficult budgets that I’ve seen, 
that we’ve worked on. But it shows to the character of 
government. We were faced with some choices. You can either 
run a small deficit with a plan to get out, or you could just 
automatically raise taxes, fees, put people out of work, you 
know, affect the economy in Saskatchewan that is a little bit on 
the fragile side considering the oil industry, the hits that have 
been there. 
 
You look at what’s happened with both the provinces next door. 
You know, I’ve got some friends and relatives in Alberta and 
they’re suffering. There is a lot . . . Unemployment is up. The 
food bank use is up. There’s a lot of vehicles being sold. 
There’s houses even being sold now, you know, so we did not 
want to do anything that would affect the economy and try to 
keep as many people working as we possibly can. And when 
you raise taxes you’re going to affect that, whether it’s 
businesses having to lay off some people, or just an added cost 
to people that are just wondering from day to day if they’re 
going to have a job, if they’re affected in with the oil industry. 
Even the mining industry, as we move along too, it’s gone 
through a slight little bit of a price decrease, so you know 
they’re not spending as much as they would if the potash prices 
were higher. 
 
So like I say, with this budget there were some difficult 
decisions. But still when we were door knocking, what I heard 
on the door, this budget reflects a lot of that. It reflects that 
people said, don’t raise taxes. You know, if you have to run a 
deficit, you run one for one year or two years with a plan to get 
out. They understand that we’re working with close to $1 
billion less in revenue. That’s a big hit to any treasury, and still 
only to run a small deficit compared to what the rest of the 
country is doing, I would say, speaks to the diversity that we 
have in this province that have picked up some of the decline in 
our natural resources. 
 
I mean, we’ve been lucky; ag is doing quite well. I can 
remember when I first got elected, agriculture was struggling. 
Grain prices were low. We had . . . 2000, 2001 I think were 
very dry years. Cattle prices were very good for about a year or 
two and then BSE [bovine spongiform encephalopathy] hit, and 
that hit the cattle industry very, very hard. And my constituency 
being an agricultural constituency, cattle and grain, it was a big 
hit. I remember we were in opposition and we had a lot of calls, 
a lot of worried people, especially when the border was closed 
for a few months to all kinds of beef. And then it finally opened 
up to certain cuts and that got the markets slowly coming back, 
but it took years and years and years to recover from that. 
 
And I’m glad that, you know, that the cattle industry and the 
grain industry is doing well, being that my constituency is 
basically that. I have some mining on the edge, no oil. So we 
basically go strictly on ag. When it suffers my phone rings a lot. 
 
Right now the only time . . . I get still some calls on highways 

in the spring. That’s always been an issue, but we are putting 
money into it which we always have and always increase the 
budget. I mean in Arm River right now that’s probably one of 
the bigger concerns that I heard when I was door knocking, was 
highways. 
 
My constituency is seeing I think $36 million being spent in it 
this year on construction which is . . . a lot of it is on No. 11, 
but it also deals with work on Highway 42 which was started 
last year on the highway by Dilke, which needed some work. 
There’s work being done on that. There’s continuing work on 
No. 15 by Semans, and also a little bit of grade work still being 
done on 15 by Kenaston. And also I believe, you know, then 
your maintenance on 19 and 44. Them highways always need 
some attention. 
 
But you know the residents, when you’re going around, I mean 
they understand. At least they can see that you’re spending 
more every year and they can see some things being done. On 
Highway 15 we’ve made that a wide-load corridor and we’re 
doing work on it. And they’ve seen that we’re . . . All through 
the ’90s and the years we were in opposition there was no major 
work done on any of our highways in my constituency. All that 
was done was basically just barely filling potholes. And you 
know, that reflected in the vote and the change in government 
in 2007. Even in ’99 when I first ran, that was a very big issue 
was highways. 
 
And also health care is always an issue in rural Saskatchewan 
when it comes there. And you know we increased, every year 
we’ve increased the budget. I know since we were first elected 
we’ve increased it dramatically. This year not as much, but over 
the years there’s been major increases to health care. I mean I 
can look back on Watrous long-term care facility. That was one 
of the first ones that was built when we were first elected and I 
know Watrous had been asking for that for 12 years I think. 
They had already had their money in place for at least eight 
years and waiting every year for the government to commit. So 
that was one of the first things we did when we formed 
government was build 13 long-term care facilities. And you 
know that shows a commitment to rural Saskatchewan which 
also shows in the number of seats that are still going on our side 
compared to their side. 
 
You know even this budget, even as difficult as it is, I still when 
I go back home hear lots of positive remarks about our 
government and what we’re doing and what we’re trying to do. 
As long as they can see that you’re trying to work within your 
means . . . Because one of the things they don’t want is the 
runaway spending that, you know, is happening in other 
provinces and runaway budgets where basically you’re going to 
carry that debt for 10, 15, 20 years. 
 
I mean you look at what we’ve did with debt. Through our good 
years we paid down the general revenue by almost $4 billion. 
That was pretty substantial to be able to do that in a short period 
of time. So people know that when the revenues come — and 
they will on the oil industry when they come back — you know 
we will be investing more in education, more in health, more in 
highways and also on debt reduction. 
 
Those are the key issues that people look at as what they expect 
from their government and their budget. I know that there was a 



June 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 381 

few hits on it, but you know that’s part of being government. I 
can remember when they ran . . . 
 
The Speaker: — It being 5 p.m., this Assembly stands recessed 
until tonight at 7 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 351 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 351 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 351 
  Ottenbreit .................................................................................................................................................................................. 351 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 351 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 352 
  Bonk ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 352 
  Olauson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 360 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 360 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 352 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 352 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Yorkton Resident is Miss Teenage Saskatchewan 
  Ottenbreit .................................................................................................................................................................................. 353 
 Prince Albert Pride Week 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 353 
 Saskatchewan Resident is One of Canada’s Outstanding Principals 
  Bonk ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 353 
 Remembering Firefighters Victor Budz and Dennis Guenter 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 354 
 Brothers Receive Honorary Degrees 
  Ross ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 354 
 Heart Garden Opens 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 354 
 Group Home Opens in Esterhazy 
  Kaeding ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 354 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Government’s Fiscal Management 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 355 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 355 
 Management of Health Care System 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 356 
  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 356 
 Support for Education 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 357 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 357 
 Children in Provincial Care 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 358 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 358 
 Mental Health Services for the North 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 358 
  Ottenbreit .................................................................................................................................................................................. 358 
 Crime Prevention and Correctional Facilities 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 359 
  Tell ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 359 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Merriman .................................................................................................................................................................................. 359 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 360 
  Eyre ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 364 
  Fiaz ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 367 
  Moe ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 369 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 373 
  Weekes ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 375 
  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 377 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 379 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


