






















































Hansard: May 01, 2017


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 80A  MONDAY, MAY 1, 2017, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 

 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 

Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 

 

 

 
 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 

Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 

Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 

Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 

Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 

Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 

Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 

Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 

Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 

Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 

Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 

Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 

Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 

D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 

Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 

Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 

Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 

Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 

Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 

Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 

Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 

Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 

Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 

Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 

Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 

Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 

Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 

Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 

Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 

Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 

Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 

McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 

Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 

Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 

Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 

Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 

Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 

Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 

Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 

Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 

Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 

Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 

Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 

Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 

Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 

Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 

Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 

Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 

Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 

Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 

Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 

Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 

Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 

Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 

Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 

Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 

Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 

Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 

 

 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 11 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2347 
 May 1, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to introduce some very special guests to the Legislative 
Assembly. Seated in your gallery, first of all, are the senior 
international officers, Melinda Carter and Amy Standish. And 
accompanying them on his first official visit to our province is 
His Excellency Bálint Ódor, ambassador of Hungary to Canada. 
 
The ambassador is accompanied by Mr. László Sinka, deputy 
head of mission and trade commissioner for the embassy of 
Hungary. The ambassador has a very busy schedule today in 
Regina. He met with the Ministry of Agriculture and the 
Economy, with the Lieutenant Governor, and yourself, Mr. 
Speaker, and myself. And later today, he’ll travel to Saskatoon 
for meetings with the Greater Saskatoon Chamber of 
Commerce, Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership, and 
with various research facilities at the University of 
Saskatchewan, including the Canadian Light Source. 
 
During his visit, we are exploring several areas of mutual 
economic interest and potential future collaboration between 
our two jurisdictions. Our exports to Hungary last year were 
primarily the agricultural products. Saskatchewan in turn 
imported mostly transmission and agro parts from Hungary. 
And we see room for growth in our trading relationship with 
Hungary, so we look forward to strengthening it. 
 
The ambassador’s visit is thus timely. It fosters a conversation. 
We need to have greater co-operation between Saskatchewan 
and Hungary; in having that conversation, we look at some 
historical ties of our province. The Hungarian settlers were 
nearly 28,000 Saskatchewan residents, and they can all trace 
their ancestry back to Hungary. Esterhazy, Wakaw were all 
settled by Hungarian immigrants. 
 
So traditions are part of our Saskatchewan mosaic, and a 
growing relationship with Hungary will be an important part of 
Saskatchewan’s future. Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members of 
the Assembly join me in welcoming this very valuable 
delegation. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I too would like to introduce and recognize 
the ambassador. We had a chance to meet in my office earlier 
today and shared some of our shared heritage, such as I’m part 
Hungarian as well. And we will be touring the Kaposvar 
Church in my hometown area of Esterhazy on Sunday with the 
ambassador, and I look forward to learning a little bit more 
about my heritage and the great connection between Canada 
and Hungary. So I’d like everyone to please welcome him to 
Saskatchewan again. 
 
While I’m on my feet, I’d like to introduce a couple of other 
people in my gallery: Conni and Ron Larson, who is also in the 

Speaker’s gallery up there. Conni works in my office back in 
Saskatoon. 
 
Joining with them is our returning summer student for the 
second year now. We’re very lucky to have Cherrise Esplin, 
who is studying business at the U of R [University of Regina], 
also back working during the summer in the Speaker’s office. 
So could everyone once again please welcome them to their 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d just 
like to join with the Speaker and the member opposite in 
welcoming His Excellency Bálint Ódor, ambassador of 
Hungary to Canada, and certainly Mr. László Sinka, the deputy 
head of mission and trade commissioner for the embassy of 
Hungary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the ties between Saskatchewan and Hungary are 
deep and abiding, and certainly the very founding of this 
province was a time that had seen many people come from 
Hungary to here in Saskatchewan. And then certainly after 
1956, there was a great wave of emigration that we in 
Saskatchewan benefited very much from. So those ties are 
historical and abiding. And it’s good to see these individuals 
here today in the gallery and good to hear about that further 
work of building a connection between Hungary and 
Saskatchewan so that we might benefit together.  
 
So I join with the Speaker and the minister in welcoming these 
important individuals to our Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Bonk: — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to welcome the 
ambassador, Bálint Ódor, and László Sinka, the trade 
commissioner from Hungary. 
 
Hungary is a place that is also very near and dear to my heart. I 
spent nearly a quarter of my life in Hungary. And having 
married a Hungarian, I’m not allowed to forget how nice it is. 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Hungarian.] 
 
So I’d like to ask all my colleagues to welcome these special 
guests to our legislature. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to also 
welcome a special class that we have from Grenfell School 
today. This is 24 grade 7 students from Grenfell High School. 
And I’d like to just say a special hello to a few of my cousins I 
have. Arianna Osiowy is here, and Michaela Drinnan, and Ty 
Lowenberg And they’re accompanied today by Ms. 
Giambattista or Ms. G., as they call her. And also 
accompanying them are chaperones Karen Lowenberg, who’s 
also a cousin of mine, and Leah Wilde. So I’d like all my 
colleagues to welcome them to their legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
University. 
 



2348 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2017 

Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. It is my pleasure to introduce Phyllis Hallatt, president 
of Child Find Saskatchewan, who has joined the legislature 
today, and accompanying her is Colleen Whitedeer. If you 
wouldn’t mind just giving a wave to everyone. 
 
Child Find Saskatchewan was first established in 1984. This 
organization works across our province to educate and advocate 
for the protection and rights of children and youth. Child Find 
Saskatchewan, along with their network of volunteers across 
our province, works hard to highlight issues related to missing 
children. When I was a summer student working for Canada 
Customs at the border, that was my job, was to coordinate the 
Child Find activities at that time. 
 
They promote the message that a missing child is everyone’s 
responsibility and all children have a right to be safe. I would 
like to thank Ms. Hallatt and the many individuals involved 
with Child Find Saskatchewan for making a difference in our 
community, and I ask all members to join me in welcoming 
them to their Legislative Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the minister opposite in welcoming Phyllis Hallatt and Colleen 
Whitedeer from Child Find Saskatchewan, I’m sure, here in part 
to pay homage to Missing Persons Week and the important 
work that you do through your organization, helping to find the 
lost children of our community. So I’d like to ask that all 
members join me in welcoming them to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. I’d like to join 
with the minister and the member opposite in welcoming 
Phyllis Hallatt here today. As many of you know, the Ministry 
of Justice has a long-standing relationship with Child Find, and 
so we’re happy that we can continue that relationship to support 
the very good work that they do. And as is already mentioned, 
Mr. Speaker, accompanying Phyllis is Colleen Whitedeer. 
 
I attended the Missing Persons Week ceremony this morning at 
the MacKenzie Art Gallery, and Colleen gave a very, very 
moving comment, a moving history of the fact that her brother’s 
been missing for almost three years now, Mr. Speaker. And it 
reminds us how important it is to listen to the stories of family 
members who, people have gone missing so that we can work 
to help alleviate some of those tragedies in the future, Mr. 
Speaker. So I’d like to welcome both these individuals to their 
legislature as well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to add my 
welcome to Colleen Whitedeer and Phyllis Hallatt as well. I’ve 
had a chance to get to know Colleen over the last few years and 
been very impressed with her advocacy and activism. We hear a 
lot about missing and murdered indigenous women and girls, 

which is so extremely important, but I know that Colleen has 
also brought forward the voice of concern over the men from 
those communities that are missing, and even walked from 
northern Saskatchewan all the way to the legislature to bring 
that in the past, and so I value that advocacy and congratulate 
her and welcome her today. 
 
And while I’m on my feet I also want to welcome Mr. Guy 
Caron. Guy is a Member of Parliament and a leadership 
candidate for the federal NDP [New Democratic Party]. He is 
the member for Rimouski-Neigette—Témiscouata—Les 
Basques, which is a pretty long name so I had to write it down. 
But I’m very pleased to see you here today. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker, for allowing me to introduce him, et je le souhaite 
bienvenue ici à la législature et bonne chance dans la course à la 
chefferie. Merci. 
 
[Translation: And I welcome him here to the legislature, and 
good luck in the leadership race. Thank you.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave for an 
extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to you and through you I would like to take this opportunity to 
recognize the recipients of this year’s Agriculture Student 
Scholarship. The Saskatchewan Agriculture Student 
Scholarship is an important part of the Ministry of Agriculture’s 
initiative to support the future of youth within the agriculture 
industry. 
 
Each year the Government of Saskatchewan recognizes four 
young people for their passion and dedication to agriculture. 
This year’s applicants were required to submit a video or essay 
based on their own personal food story. There were many 
excellent videos and essays submitted by young individuals 
from across the province. Much consideration went into 
selecting the 2017 finalists. 
 
This year’s winners are bright, innovative, and represent the 
future of agriculture. It’s young leaders such as these four who 
will drive the future success of the industry. Their passion to 
share their own personal agriculture stories with others is 
inspiring. I’m confident that they each have a very promising 
future ahead of them. 
 
I ask the scholarship winners to please stand as I announce their 
names. Amanda Mitchell of Bracken, Saskatchewan. Amanda 
has been awarded the grand prize scholarship of $4,000 to put 
towards her agricultural studies. Amanda’s winning video 
submission tells the story of a piece of bread, describing her 
farm’s role in wheat production from seeding to harvest and 
beyond. Amanda will be attending the U of S [University of 
Saskatchewan] in the fall to study agronomy. 
 



May 1, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2349 

Our three runner-up winners of this year’s scholarship were 
each awarded $2,000 to put towards their agricultural studies. 
And the winners, in no particular order, are Brayden Fraser of 
Churchbridge, who will be attending the U of S in the fall to 
work toward a Bachelor of Science in agribusiness; Rachael 
Enns of Osler, who has enrolled in the animal science program 
at the U of S; Dena Lamb of Regina, who will also be attending 
the U of S to work toward degrees in crop science and food and 
by-product science. 
 
Brayden is passionate about food security and wants to learn 
how to maximize food production in an efficient, economic, and 
environmental friendly way. Rachael cares deeply for animals 
and wants to improve animal care and production by looking at 
housing, nutrition, and breeding. Dena understands the impact 
that agriculture has on the world and wants to help find a way to 
grow enough food to feed the growing population in a way that 
respects and cares for the environment. 
 
Thank you to each of you for your work and dedication to your 
education and to the agriculture industry. I ask all members to 
join me as I congratulate these four individuals on this 
tremendous accomplishment. I wish you all the best. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I’d like to compliment the Minister of 
Agriculture on asking for extended leave before his extended 
introduction. I would hope that all members would follow his 
lead in the future as well, asking for extended leave. 
 
I recognize the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 
like to join with the minister opposite in congratulating these 
four brilliant young students on their success in the video 
competition. Certainly I think having a commitment to 
agriculture, to food, to animals, to the environment, that’s going 
to make our province stronger. And it’s with your kind of 
commitment and your interest in what’s going to happen in the 
future, that’s going to make a difference for agriculture in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So we’re very proud of you and just really want to thank you 
for doing the work you needed to get into the competition, but 
also in your upcoming studies at the university. It’ll be an 
exciting time and I think, you know, you are going to be the 
future of agriculture in Saskatchewan, so I think we’re on a 
good track here. So on behalf of the official opposition, I would 
like to join with the minister opposite and welcome you to your 
Legislative Assembly and wish you all the best in the future. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I would respectfully request an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this afternoon I have the pleasure of 
introducing the Saskatchewan athletes, coaches, and mission 
staff who represented our country in the 2017 Special Olympics 
World Winter Games in Austria. They are seated in your 
gallery. Why don’t you give us a wave? All right. Thanks very 
much. 
 
Today we are welcoming athletes and coaches from 
Saskatchewan, all of whom who’ve either won gold or silver 
medals at the games. First we have Ron Brandt from Saskatoon. 
Ron brought home gold from Austria in the 4 x 100 relay. 
Congratulations, Ron — there it is. Absolutely. You bet. 
 
Also seated in the gallery is Terry Livingstone. In Austria, 
Terry won the gold in the 777-metre race. Now I understand, 
Mr. Speaker, that some of our MLAs [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] were involved in a race this weekend, 
and maybe you can compare notes with them and give them a 
little advice there, Terry. Terry, congratulations on your gold 
medal win. 
 
Seated in the gallery, Mr. Speaker, we also have a number of 
athletes and coaches from the Team Canada West floor hockey 
team. Their dedication and teamwork won silver in Austria. 
With us here today from Team Canada West floor hockey team 
are Chris Anderson, Dean Boechler, Robbie Bomboir, Kyle 
Couture, Kyrren Dean, Shane Haddad, Tyler Haddad, Zane 
Lauritsen, Lee Salzl, Mike Snell, and head coach Ryan Unruh, 
coach Abigail Frasz, as well as coach Sheldon Dean. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, a couple of years ago I think the member 
from Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland, he organized a soccer 
game against the Special Olympics team. And I can’t go into 
the details now but suffice to say if anybody wants more 
information they can talk to the member from Melfort and he’d 
let them know that we soon found out how good the Special 
Olympics athletes are. We look forward to hearing of the many 
accomplishments of these athletes and that they will continue to 
have in their athletic careers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also here with us today we have Darlene 
MacQuarrie. Darlene was in Austria for the 2017 World Winter 
Games serving as the floor hockey team manager. Thank you, 
Darlene, for your amazing commitment and contribution to 
Special Olympics in our province and to the success of these 
Saskatchewan athletes. 
 
To all the athletes and coaches, thank you for your commitment 
to sport and serving as role models in our communities 
throughout the province. You have made Saskatchewan very, 
very proud. I ask, Mr. Speaker, that all members join with me in 
congratulating and welcoming these very special guests to our 
Legislative Assembly and to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. With 
leave to make a not quite as extensive introduction in response. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



2350 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2017 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Opposition House 
Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
certainly I just want to lend the voice of the official . . . on 
behalf of the official opposition, a voice of welcome and a voice 
of congratulations to this 2017 Special Olympics winter team. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m informed by the Leader of the Opposition that 
he’s got some personal experience with the Haddad boys and 
knows what the Haddad line can produce when they’re out 
there playing. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s just really great to see 
these people here at their Legislative Assembly today. 
 
The pride and the medals, the representation of Saskatchewan 
around the world, is something that you should be very proud 
of, and you should know that we’re very proud of all of you in 
terms of the players, the teachers, and the support staff. 
 
So again I just say on behalf of the official opposition, welcome 
to your Legislative Assembly, thank you very much, and 
congratulations. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the risk of 
not wanting to ask for an extended introduction, I will be as 
quick as I can. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in your gallery today is CJ Katz who is well 
known to the Assembly both as the culinary host of the 
Wheatland Café on CTV [Canadian Television Network Ltd.], 
which is in its 10th season, nearly 40 episodes per year. She’s a 
senior judge for Gold Medal Plates. 
 
She is also well known as being the candidate for the 
Saskatchewan Party for Regina Douglas Park. I understand 
she’s seriously contemplating running again, and I’m not 
wanting to single out anybody in particular, but I urge 
somebody to work very hard. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, she is also joined in the gallery today by her 
son, Aidan Katz, who works in our office, as well as his 
girlfriend, Maggie Omer-Canitz, and would ask that all 
members join me in welcoming them to their Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join 
with the Deputy Premier in welcoming CJ Katz and her family 
to the Legislative Assembly. I had the opportunity to meet CJ, 
as was already mentioned, a few times on the campaign trail, 
and it’s always great to see her and see where her career is 
taking her. Congratulations on your 10th-year anniversary. 
You’re providing some amazing culinary inspiration for all of 
us in Saskatchewan. I, in particular, am not very good in that 
department so it’s always nice to see what you’re capable of 
making as opposed to what I’m capable of making. 
 
In any event, it’s a pleasure to see you and your family here and 
I’d ask that all members join me in welcoming them to their 
Legislative Assembly. 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition opposing the Sask Party’s cuts 
to spiritual care. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that the 
government seems to have no sense of what spiritual care 
actually provided in our health facilities, otherwise they would 
not have cut it. They don’t seem to have a strong understanding 
of that role played in our health system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The petitioners point out, in this last budget the Sask Party 
eliminated funding for spiritual care, which provided spiritual 
care services within our health facilities. They point out that 
Saskatchewan will be the only province, Mr. Speaker, within 
Canada to not fund this support for patients, residents, and their 
families seeking wellness. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out 
the Sask Party hid their plan to cut spiritual care funding during 
the 2016 election, Mr. Speaker, just over a year ago. 
 
The petitioners point out that spiritual care responds to the 
spiritual and emotional needs of patients and residents and 
provides a compassionate, listening presence in times of crisis. 
The petitioners point out that spiritual care supports families, 
patients, and residents in making difficult decisions. And in fact 
I’ve heard from many health care professionals who say that 
they’re an important part of the team for supporting them in 
difficult times as well. The petitioners point out that spiritual 
care can provide for support for all families, patients, and 
residents, regardless of faith or belief, in obtaining comfort and 
support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
immediately reinstate the funding for pastoral care services 
in this province’s health region facilities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Saskatoon. I 
so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from the citizens who are opposed to 
the federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of 
Shellbrook, Leask, Canwood, Big River. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 



May 1, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2351 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I present 
a petition here today as it refers to adding passing lanes on 
Highway 7 west of Rosetown to the Alberta border. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Whereas Highway 7 from the Alberta border to Rosetown 
serves as a major industrial and commercial corridor 
between Calgary and Saskatoon and also serves as a major 
connecting highway between communities for education 
and medical purposes, as well as serving families who live 
and travel rurally; 
 
And whereas, as a result, traffic volumes on this section of 
highway continue to grow — 2015 Ministry of Highways 
stats show average annual daily traffic counts are reaching 
as much as 4,090 on portions of this highway; 
 
And whereas the communities, industries, and farms along 
this corridor have contributed financially through taxes to 
the province; 
 
And whereas the current single-lane highway is a traffic 
safety hazard, as SGI stats show that between 2011 and 
2015, along Highway 7 from Alsask to Rosetown, there 
were a total of 403 collisions resulting in 100 injuries and 
14 deaths, not to mention thousands of dollars in insurance 
claims; 

 
So therefore the prayer reads as follows: 
 
Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan take immediate action to add passing lanes 
along Highway 7 west of Rosetown to the Alberta border. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 
from Dinsmore, from Eston, and Kindersley. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’m rising on 
behalf of my colleague from Prince Albert Northcote who has 
other petitions to present as well, but she’s been calling on 
anyone to help out, anyone in this Assembly to help out and get 
support for a second bridge in Prince Albert. 
 
So the people who have signed the petition would like to bring 
to our attention the following: the Diefenbaker bridge in Prince 
Albert is the primary link that connects the southern part of the 
province to the North. With no other crossing, heavy truck 
traffic must be rerouted, adding a significant amount of cost for 
the businesses in and around Prince Albert in terms of losses or 
added expenses. The current residents, businesses, and tourists 
in Prince Albert and northern communities require safe and 
efficient transportation infrastructure that includes adequate 
bridges. 
 
The Sask Party government refuses to stand up for Prince 
Albert in this critical infrastructure issue, and local municipal 
governments have limited resources and require a second bridge 
to be funded through federal and provincial governments and 
not through a P3 [public-private partnership] model, Mr. 
Speaker. The support of the people and municipal governments 

of Prince Albert and neighbouring communities for a second 
bridge is overwhelming and has been joined by support from 
industry groups, the Saskatchewan association of regional 
municipalities, and many others across the province, and the 
need for a second bridge for Prince Albert has never been 
clearer than it is today. Prince Albert, communities north of 
Prince Albert, and businesses that send people and products 
through Prince Albert require a solution. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan ask that the 
Saskatchewan Party government stop stalling, hiding 
behind rhetoric, and refusing to listen to the people calling 
for action, and begin immediately to plan and then quickly 
commence the construction of a second bridge for Prince 
Albert using federal and provincial dollars. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the people who are signing the petition 
today come from the community of Prince Albert. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition concerning pay equity here in Saskatchewan. And the 
undersigned residents of the province want to bring to our 
attention the following: that the citizens of Saskatchewan 
believe in an economy powered by transparency, accountability, 
security, and equity; and that all women should be paid 
equitably; and we know that women are powerful drivers of 
economic growth and their economic empowerment benefits us 
all. 
 
We know the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives found 
that in Saskatoon in 2016, women earned on average 63 cents 
for every dollar that a man makes, and in Regina women earned 
on average 73 cents for every dollar that a man makes. 
According to the most recent StatsCan data, the national gender 
wage gap for full-time workers is 72 cents for every dollar that 
a man makes: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan eliminate 
the wage gap between women and men across all sectors 
where the Government of Saskatchewan has jurisdiction; 
and that we provide a framework under which this can be 
done within this term of the Assembly; and that the 
Saskatchewan government call upon workplaces within 
Saskatchewan, within the private sector, to eliminate the 
wage gap between women and men. 

 
[14:00] 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
the city of Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud today to 
stand in my place to present a petition to increase the funding to 



2352 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2017 

Prince Albert mobile crisis. Prince Albert mobile crisis unit has 
had to close its door during daytime hours, resulting in a loss of 
resource to people in distress. They’ve had to make that 
decision because of a cut of funding, Mr. Speaker. And we 
know that crisis services are required on a 24-hours basis. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, because this week is Mental Health Week, I 
think it’s important to talk about the role mobile crisis plays 
with supporting individuals with mental health concerns. The 
crisis intervention team, they are able to recognize mental 
health disorders, Mr. Speaker, and they’re also able to 
coordinate services for individuals struggling with mental 
health issues. And very importantly, they’re trained to 
implement the suicide risk assessments, Mr. Speaker, so they’re 
able to assess individuals who may be having thoughts of 
suicide and provide them the services that they need at that 
time. And so this is a critical service that needs to be 
implemented, and a 24-hour emergency service is needed in our 
third-largest city, in Prince Albert. 
 
The daytime closure of Prince Albert mobile has put stress on 
Prince Albert Police Service, Victoria Hospital staff, and other 
agencies who may not be trained and/or qualified to provide the 
counselling and intervention services to clients. I’ll read the 
prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to increase funding to 
Prince Albert mobile crisis unit so they may once again 
offer a 24-hour emergency crisis service. 

 
Mr. Speaker, individuals across this province are concerned 
about the lack of support with crisis service in Prince Albert, 
and this particular petition was signed by individuals from 
Prince Albert and Big River. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition regarding Bill 63. Those who have signed this petition 
wish to draw our attention to the following: that they are 
opposed to the changing of The Education Act of Bill 63 as it 
currently reads until the government takes part in active and 
good faith, transparent conversation with the Saskatchewan 
School Boards Association. 
 
They’re asking that there be transparency and consultation 
before any changes are made to The Education Act. They’re 
also noting that it’s imperative that the government recognizes 
that there must be an appropriate time frame in which the 
elected board members are able to convey all information of 
decisions affecting their communities. Mr. Speaker, with $54 
million in cuts being exacted from the education sector, there 
will be many decisions to discuss. 
 
And they also wish to draw our attention to this, that they wish 
the Government of Saskatchewan would recognize that local 
school boards are the voice of Saskatchewan communities, and 
decisions should remain with such elected boards. I’ll read the 
prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan repeal Bill 
63 and preserve the governance of elected school boards. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions have been signed by citizens all 
across the province. The particular pages I present today have 
been signed by those living in Weyburn. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition to ensure job security for victims of domestic violence. 
Saskatchewan has the very dubious distinction of having the 
highest rate of domestic violence by intimate partners amongst 
all Canadian provinces. One in three Canadian workers have 
been impacted by domestic violence, and for many of them, Mr. 
Speaker, the violence follows them to their workplace. 
Employers lose $77.9 million annually due to the direct and 
indirect impacts of domestic violence. 
 
Manitoba’s already enacted legislation similar to the private 
member’s bill we tabled, Mr. Speaker, and Ontario is on its way 
to enacting legislation to ensure job security for victims of 
domestic violence. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan enact 
legislation that requires all employers to provide a 
minimum of five paid workdays and a minimum of 17 
weeks unpaid work leave with the assurance of job security 
upon return for all victims of domestic violence in 
Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing the petition today come 
from Swift Current. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition calling on 
the government to restore funding to post-secondary 
institutions. And, Mr. Speaker, you and the other members may 
have seen people demonstrating from the Students Mobilizing 
Against Cuts group outside. They are among many in the 
province who are very concerned about the cuts in this budget 
to the post-secondary education sector, with colleges and 
universities losing over 5 per cent of their budgets. This is a cut, 
Mr. Speaker, that we have already seen result in job losses. It 
will likely result in increased costs, and it is compounded by the 
elimination of the tax credit for tuition and books — all of 
which are things that will make education more difficult to 
access and less affordable for Saskatchewan students. I’ll read 
the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately restore 
funding to Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions and 
stop the damaging cuts to our students. 

 
The petition today is signed by individuals from Regina. I do so 
present. 
 



May 1, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2353 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Missing Persons Week 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, this week marks Missing 
Persons Week in our province. The week is an opportunity to 
increase public awareness and encourage people to bring 
forward any information that could help our police services find 
missing people throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
It is also a week to demonstrate community support to the 
grieving families and friends that are left with no answers when 
a loved one disappears. That is why this year’s theme is 
Because You’re Not Here, a campaign that encourages anyone 
impacted by the issue of missing persons to share their personal 
stories by completing the sentence, “Because you’re not 
here . . .” 
 
Mr. Speaker, currently there are 125 long-term missing persons 
in our province. And although awareness weeks like this are a 
step in the right direction, so much more needs to be done. 
Saskatchewan is still facing an epidemic of missing and 
murdered indigenous people caused by systemic social and 
economic disparity and lack of government resources for rural 
and remote indigenous communities in our province. 
 
Truly, Mr. Speaker, of those most significant ways this 
government could make a difference is to stop the talk and 
finally follow through on implementing the Truth and 
Reconciliation report’s call to action. So, Mr. Speaker, I call on 
all members to join me today in recognition of Missing Persons 
Week, in thanking our police services for all they do to find 
missing peoples and supporting grieving families, and in 
acknowledging all the work that still needs to be done. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 

Missing Children’s Month 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 
House to note that May 2017 has been proclaimed as Missing 
Children’s Month. Missing Children’s Month is an important 
opportunity to raise awareness on behalf of missing children 
and their families. Every year, we hear of Saskatchewan 
children going missing, as well as we see the impact this has on 
family, friends, and community. 
 
This year marks Child Find Saskatchewan’s 26th annual Green 
Ribbon of Hope Campaign, which runs the month of May. 
Child Find Saskatchewan works to protect the rights of children 
and youth, as well as those who cannot speak. Green ribbons 
may be obtained by contacting Child Find Saskatchewan. We 
value the role that Child Find Saskatchewan plays in assisting 
law enforcement agencies and other partners to locate missing 
children and educate children and adults about being safe. 
 
I am proud to note in March our government provided 50,000 in 
funding to Child Find Saskatchewan. This is truly a testament 
of hope for the missing. And if you are hearing my words, 

please do not give up, as we will continue to search for you. 
And as Child Find Saskatchewan says, a missing child is 
everyone’s responsibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members join me in recognizing May as 
Missing Children’s Month and ask that we all do our part in 
bringing awareness to this important issue. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

2017 Regina Police Service Half Marathon  
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today, although a 
little bit slowly, to recognize the 2017 Regina Police Service 
Half Marathon which took place Sunday, April the 30th. I was 
happy to participate in the annual half marathon relay, along 
with the Leader of the Opposition and the member, my 
colleague, from Regina Douglas Park. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the RPS [Regina Police Service] Half Marathon is 
an initiative of the Regina Police wellness program, and it 
began in 2004 in an effort to promote healthy lifestyles for both 
members of the police service and the community. And to this 
day, the event continues to grow and attract both new and 
experienced runners. I want to recognize the winner of the half 
marathon, Adam Strueby, as well as all of the participants who 
took part in the half marathon, three-person half marathon relay, 
or the five-kilometre run and walk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, volunteers are what make events like the RPS 
Half Marathon a success, and I know I appreciated their support 
every step of the way. Whether it was words of encouragement 
or a cold drink, their efforts were outstanding. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there was a little bit of a friendly wager on 
the line here, and our team went up against the members from 
Regina University, Wood River, and Saskatoon Sutherland. 
And they gave it a good try, Mr. Speaker. But the real winners 
at the end of the day were the Regina Transition House, and 
there’ll be a donation directed to them. And so it was all in 
good fun. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to recognize our new police chief, 
Mr. Evan Bray, who completed his first half marathon. I’d also 
like to thank the Regina Police Service, all the event sponsors, 
as well as the volunteers. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 
 

Mental Health Week 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, May 1st to 
May 7th has been proclaimed as Mental Health Week. Mr. 
Speaker, we know that one in five people in Saskatchewan are 
directly affected by mental health issues. But we also know that 
indirectly it affects many more, including, Mr. Speaker, in this 
Chamber. We too are all affected in some way by mental health 
issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while progress has been made in recent years 
when it comes to mental health care, we can do more and we 
will do more. Work in our government is ongoing to address the 



2354 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2017 

recommendations in the mental health and addictions action 
plan. In 2016-17, more than 35 recommendations and 
recommended actions were being addressed by the Ministry of 
Health and partner ministries. 
 
Our government was also pleased to sign a health care 
agreement with the federal government that will see 
Saskatchewan receive $150 million for mental health care over 
the next 10 years. This funding is significant and every dollar 
will be put towards programs to improve mental health care in 
every corner of this province. 
 
We will also be celebrating a construction milestone at the new 
Saskatchewan Hospital North Battleford on Friday, May the 
5th. Sask Hospital North Battleford is now 50 per cent 
complete, is on budget, and is on track to be completed in 2018. 
And that completion date has been a long-awaited day in the 
Battlefords. 
 
During this important week, Mr. Speaker, I want to remind my 
colleagues that we all have a responsibility to raise awareness 
of mental health illness and to work to reduce the 
discrimination and stigma associated with mental health. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 

Saskatchewan Athlete Named to 
Badminton Canada Team 

 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I stand 
proud to recognize an exceptional athlete in my constituency, 
Wyatt Lightfoot. When Wyatt was just three months old, he 
was diagnosed with a type of dwarfism. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Wyatt was a very active and healthy child despite 
his diagnosis, with a love of sports that developed early on in 
his life. Mr. Speaker, being unable to play contact sports has not 
hurt Wyatt’s competitive spirit. In 2013, along with 400 athletes 
from around the world, he was one of 25 Canadians to 
participate in the World Dwarf Games, taking home 10 medals, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Wyatt learned that badminton will now be an event in the 2020 
Paralympics in Tokyo. Mr. Speaker, Wyatt shifted his focus and 
was recently named a member of the first-ever Badminton 
Canada team. Recently, Wyatt took home gold in the para 
national badminton tournament in Moncton, New Brunswick. 
 
This road to Tokyo is looking very bright for Wyatt as, this 
year, he is already scheduled to travel to Ireland and South 
Korea. And, Mr. Speaker, did I mention that Wyatt Lightfoot is 
only 13 years old? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in congratulating 
Wyatt Lightfoot on his success with the Badminton Canada 
team and wish him all the best on his quest to represent Canada 
at the 2020 Paralympic Games. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Westview. 
 

Post-Secondary Graduates Find Success 
in Saskatchewan 

 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
share some good news about post-secondary graduates 
throughout the province. The recently completed Saskatchewan 
graduate outcome survey illustrates that post-secondary 
education continues to lead to positive outcomes for students. 
Not only do the majority of students see significant benefits 
from the programs, they are also staying right here in this 
province. More than 90 per cent of respondents say that they are 
satisfied with the quality of their educational experience. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the survey also indicated that 85 per cent of 2014 
graduates are employed, with two-thirds working in jobs related 
to their program of study, and their salaries have increased 
faster than the rate of inflation. 
 
I am proud of this government’s record when it comes to 
post-secondary education and doing right by our students. The 
survey reported that two-thirds of graduates were satisfied with 
provincial government programs and services related to 
post-secondary education and training, and student debt has 
remained relatively unchanged compared to 2009-10 graduates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our post-secondary graduates continue to find 
success in Saskatchewan. With 90 per cent of the respondents 
still living in Saskatchewan after graduation, it’s clear that our 
province continues to be a great place to live, work, and raise a 
family. 
 
I ask all members to join me in celebrating the success of our 
post-secondary sector and commend our institutions for 
supporting our learners. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

Premier’s Dinner and Behaviour of Protestors 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last 
Thursday the Saskatchewan Party held another very successful 
Premier’s Dinner in Saskatoon. Over a thousand attendees 
heard our Premier outline our government’s vision for 
Saskatchewan’s bright future. 
 
There were also some people who decided to protest the dinner. 
Mr. Speaker, those individuals have every right to hold a 
peaceful protest, but they do not have the right to obstruct those 
who wanted to attend our Premier’s speech. They do not have 
the right to block traffic, to hit cars, to jump on people’s hoods. 
But that’s exactly what some of them did. Mr. Speaker, this was 
absolutely unacceptable behaviour. 
 
And what has the NDP said about it? Well they appear to be 
encouraging it or at least condoning it. If you go to the 
Saskatoon metro NDP Facebook page, there are numerous 
pictures of protesters obstructing cars and numerous statements 
from the NDP encouraging this outrageous behaviour. There’s 
even pictures of the member from Saskatoon Nutana taking part 
in the protest. 
 



May 1, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2355 

Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP encouraging this outrageous 
behaviour? And what does the NDP’s interim leader have to say 
about it? At the very least, will he have the intestinal fortitude 
to say that blocking traffic and hitting cars is unacceptable? 
And will he order the Saskatoon metro NDP to take down their 
posts encouraging this outrageous behaviour? I’m doubtful, Mr. 
Speaker, but we’re about to find out. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

SaskTel and Intent of Bill 40 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the minister responsible, 
or so-called responsible for SaskTel was unequivocal on 
Wednesday night when he said that SaskTel had not looked into 
tax implications of a sell-off. But then on Thursday, only after 
the Sask Party had rushed Royal Assent on their privatization 
bill, the minister wrote to admit that when he said “no,” and 
then “no, no,” what he really meant was yes, yes, yes, Mr. 
Speaker. There has been some preliminary work done by 
SaskTel on this front. It’s beyond belief from the Sask Party 
that has no decency and no mandate on this front. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when was the Premier made aware that the truth 
did not match what the minister said on Wednesday? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Once again, Mr. Speaker, I would say that 
this is more than a reasonable and fair question on the part of 
the Leader of the Opposition to ask. What I would again ask 
him respectfully not to do is impugn the motives of either the 
minister or members on this side, calling into question the 
decency, perhaps, of the minister in this respect. I don’t think 
that advances the debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my understanding is this: that the answer that the 
minister gave in committee was exactly as he believed to be the 
case, Mr. Speaker. And immediately upon revisiting the 
situation and information that had been provided to the 
minister’s office, he sent out a note to the critic clarifying the 
matter, correcting the matter, as I would expect we would all 
want him to do, and as I expect all of us would do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The rushed Royal Assent involved three different bills; it’s 
happened before in this session, Mr. Speaker. And so this all 
doesn’t quite fit together in the conspiratorial ways perhaps that 
the interim leader of the NDP would choose. But, Mr. Speaker, 
I want to indicate that certainly I support the minister’s efforts 
in this respect to clarify the record and clear up the matter the 
very first order of business the next day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier of 
Saskatchewan is being more than a bit precious here. Mr. 
Speaker, he said to Saskatchewan people in the last election that 
he would not privatize our Crown corporations. Of course, a 
broken promise and a betrayal to Saskatchewan people, and not 
the decency or the backbone from that Premier to let 
Saskatchewan people have a vote, Mr. Speaker. 

Last week the Minister of Justice said, “. . . once there’s a 
transaction, if there ever was one, a full analysis of that would 
take place, including what options would be available on the tax 
side.” “But until there is a transaction in front of us, we can’t do 
that analysis.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: what other secrets and schemes is 
the Premier keeping from his cabinet? What else is the Sask 
Party hiding from Saskatchewan people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well 
in terms of correcting the preamble, I want to say to the 
members opposite that as a result of Bill 40, these Crown 
corporations listed in legislation in the province of 
Saskatchewan cannot be privatized. That is entirely the point of 
the legislation. Well, Mr. Speaker, they laugh, but that is 
exactly the intent of the legislation. They now will be in 
perpetuity in majority control by the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan and the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and as to the member’s direct question, I can share 
with him and members of the House that there is no deal, and 
what the Justice minister said is exactly correct. It’s also 
consistent with what the Minister for SaskTel has said, is that if 
there ever is, if there ever is a detailed offer put before SaskTel 
or the government with respect to any Crowns, Mr. Speaker, 
before any decision is taken, the material information to that 
deal will be released to the public, Mr. Speaker. What the 
Minister of Justice said is absolutely true, Mr. Speaker. The 
bottom line is there is no deal before any of the Crowns at this 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, that’s the kind of doublespeak 
that’s making it so difficult for the people of Saskatchewan to 
trust that Sask Party government. So I’ll ask the Minister 
Responsible for SaskTel a very simple question: when did he 
learn that he was wrong when he said no, no, no work had been 
done? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 
Resources and SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
member will know that we had a very short break in between 
when SaskTel estimates were under consideration and 
SaskEnergy. I had a very brief conversation that evening with 
the CEO. I called him the next morning to confirm that in fact 
that my answer was incorrect, and I instructed my staff at that 
time to draft a letter for the member opposite. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Again, Mr. Speaker, if that’s the case, then the 
first opportunity would have been first thing the next morning, 
and we would have had that information in front of this House 
before Royal Assent and before question period, Mr. Speaker 
— not at a quarter to two, after question period. 
 
I guess I’m wondering this: his chief of staff was in the room 



2356 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2017 

when the committee sat in this Chamber, and on Thursday we 
learned that his chief of staff was also in the room and held the 
meeting with the telecommunication company. But we didn’t 
learn that from the letter to the minister. We learned that 
through the media. 
 
When I asked who was in that meeting, the minister said, “Well 
I’m not sure what the prior discussion was. I wasn’t part of that 
meeting.” Mr. Speaker, I asked who the discussion was with, 
and all the minister could say was, “Well it wasn’t with myself, 
so I’m . . .” Mr. Speaker, the meeting was with his chief of 
staff, in his office. Mr. Speaker, since it clearly was not, since it 
clearly was not, why did the minister characterize his meeting 
as some kind of a chance encounter? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 
Resources and SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I think I spoke to 
this Friday when I scrummed with the media. And I said to the 
media, and I think the member opposite heard my comments, 
that I should’ve answered the question that the member asked 
that evening in committee. I have a great deal of respect for him 
and if I had to do it over again, I would’ve answered differently. 
 
My staff did meet with a company that has operations in 
Saskatchewan to learn more about that company. It was an 
introductory meeting. I don’t think it was unusual for meetings 
that have taken place when the members opposite were the 
former government, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, these types of 
meetings happen from time to time between government 
officials, including members of a minister’s staff, Mr. Speaker. 
And so I clarified that on Friday, Mr. Speaker, and I think I 
addressed it at that time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve got two issues with what 
this minister’s related in committee and then again to the public. 
And certainly, Mr. Speaker, the minister said that work was not 
being done to investigate a sale, and it was. The minister said he 
didn’t have an official meeting, but he did. He spoke to them in 
his own office after they had met with his chief of staff, Mr. 
Speaker. So did the minister miss that first meeting because he 
didn’t want to know, or was he kept out because he’s being kept 
out of the loop? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 
Resources and SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I think the member will 
know — I believe he was a minister of the Crown at one time 
— a minister has a variety of responsibilities, Mr. Speaker, as a 
minister, as an MLA, as a member of this House, and the duties 
within this House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I do not attend every single meeting that is put in the 
calendar of members of my staff, Mr. Speaker. But I try to keep 
up to date on all of my files as best as I can, Mr. Speaker. In the 
case that the member opposite has raised, and I agree, Mr. 
Speaker, that there were things that I needed to correct based on 
the committee meeting. I did so in writing on the first point, and 
I believe I did in a public fashion, in front of the media, in terms 

of how I handled the second part of the member’s concern. So I 
believe that I’ve covered both of these points. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice needs to 
answer for his defence of Bill 40 as well. He repeated, time and 
time again, that there was no deal on the table: “We haven’t had 
any discussions with any tax advisers with respect to what any 
particular transaction might look like.” Mr. Speaker, who is the 
“we” he was talking about? And is he saying that he, the Justice 
minister, the minister tasked with pushing through the 
privatization bill, the minister who is asked to lead a committee 
to review sketchy deals, is he saying that he was kept in the 
dark? Or was he keeping the Saskatchewan people in the dark? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I answered that question in committee, Mr. Speaker. I 
wasn’t aware . . . I’m not aware of any ongoing discussions 
with respect to any tax advice or anything, Mr. Speaker. The 
way I answered that question, Mr. Speaker, in committee, was 
simply this, Mr. Speaker: any particular transaction can take . . . 
Any particular transaction, Mr. Speaker, could take any one of a 
number of forms, Mr. Speaker. And to analyze any particular 
agreement or any particular suggestion in terms of an 
agreement, Mr. Speaker, would be an impossible task, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
When there is an offer on the table, Mr. Speaker, or when there 
is a suggestion with respect to an agreement, Mr. Speaker, a full 
analysis can be done at that agreement, not only with respect to 
the tax consequences, Mr. Speaker, but the effect of that 
transaction with respect to return on equity, jobs, all the matters 
which we’ve already spoken about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about the 
privatization of our Crown corporations and a plan, a scheme of 
SaskTel, Mr. Speaker. We have a minister before this 
legislature, in a committee, saying no, no, no. He’s clarified on 
the floor of this Assembly that in fact he learned that very night 
that he was wrong, that that wasn’t true. Yet the Sask Party and 
that Premier rushed Royal Assent, brought the Queen’s 
representative, the Lieutenant Governor, into the Assembly the 
next day to pass that bill for Royal Assent instead of coming 
clean with Saskatchewan people. 
 
How can this Premier stand by a minister who knew he wasn’t 
straight in committee and didn’t take the earliest opportunity to 
be straight with the people of this Assembly and all the people 
of Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy, Resources 
and SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, again when I had a very brief discussion between the 
short break from SaskTel estimates to SaskEnergy estimates, 



May 1, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2357 

knowing that the work of the committee had to continue on, that 
there potentially was a problem with my answer, I then phoned 
the CEO [chief executive officer] the following morning to get 
his views on the matter, Mr. Speaker. At that point, it was clear 
that I was incorrect. 
 
I asked my staff to draft a letter. That letter went back to 
SaskTel to confirm that they were okay with the way that the 
letter was being drafted. We printed it off. I signed the letter. I 
think I signed two copies of the letter, and we sent it over to the 
members opposite the following day. So if the member . . . I 
guess I’m having a little bit of trouble understanding, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m sorry that it wasn’t at 10 o’clock in the morning, 
Mr. Speaker. It was the following day, though. I made an error. 
It was my error. I take responsibility for it, and I corrected it the 
next day. 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that answer is totally 
unacceptable. This is a minister of the Crown responsible for 
SaskTel, who realized that what he shared with this Assembly 
and the people of Saskatchewan wasn’t true. He learned that the 
night before; he confirmed it the next day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Did the Sask Party, at that point in time, and this Premier, did 
he afford the decency to Saskatchewan people and this 
Assembly of coming clean, that what was said the night before 
wasn’t true? No, Mr. Speaker, what he did was he rammed 
forward, brought in the Queen’s representative, and passed the 
bill for Royal Assent. It’s the kind of nonsense that we see day 
after day with the GTH [Global Transportation Hub] scandal 
that gave away millions of dollars, that ripped off nuns and 
taxpayers, Mr. Speaker, a scandal for which this government 
still hasn’t come clean. 
 
My question’s back to the Premier. It’s pretty straightforward. 
The minister has said that he found out he knew that what he 
shared with the committee was untrue. Why, as Premier of 
Saskatchewan, did he not have the decency to ensure that 
Saskatchewan people had that information before Royal Assent 
was given to that bill? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, asked and answered by the 
minister. It was the very next day that the clarification happened 
to the member, directly to the member that asked the question. 
Moreover, Mr. Speaker, there was a discussion also with the 
media as well, Mr. Speaker, so I just categorically reject how 
the member opposite has characterized this question. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Government’s Fiscal Management 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, we know and the Premier knows 
that it was the Sask Party who, in terms of the GTH, agreed to 
the CP [Canadian Pacific] land deal two years after they formed 
government — two years, Mr. Speaker. They have no one to 

blame but themselves. It was the Sask Party’s bad decision back 
in 2009 to give land, more land, away to their corporate 
buddies. 
 
And rather than learning from those mistakes, the Sask Party 
just keeps plowing ahead with more bad decisions. For 
example, spiritual care aids look after the sick and dying in our 
hospitals, but they weren’t spared the Sask Party’s axe. Their 
cuts to funeral services will force the poorest of the poor to miss 
out on the dignity of a funeral or a final viewing. 
 
The Sask Party gave away millions to massive corporations, but 
they want us to believe that we can’t afford to look after each 
other anymore. How can the Finance minister justify pouring 
billions into his mismanagement, scandal, and waste while 
cutting the dignity out from under the most vulnerable? Will he 
reverse these cuts? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank 
the member opposite for the question. Mr. Speaker, as you 
know, this budget included the largest social services budget in 
our history. The key driver of that budget was utilization 
pressure. Mr. Speaker, to continue to make sure that we keep 
pace with meeting the needs of vulnerable people that we serve, 
the income assistance area of our budget increased by 13 per 
cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
However with a $1.2 billion drop in revenue over the last three 
years, Mr. Speaker, it did mean we had to look at some of the 
extras we provide in our ministry so we could focus our 
resources on keeping the lights on, food on the table, and roofs 
over people’s heads, Mr. Speaker. To this end, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ll continue to cover burials and cremation services for those 
who are low income with a flat rate of $2,100, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the Social Services minister can 
defend all she wants, but there’s no denying that the Finance 
minister’s budget is Robin Hood in reverse, robbing the most 
vulnerable of their dignity and making it rain cash and free land 
on corporations and the wealthy and well-connected. Mr. 
Speaker, corporations get a $60 million tax cut, but the PST 
[provincial sales tax] bill that they’re hiding from scrutiny will 
hike taxes by $1 billion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re going after our towns and cities too. 
They’re ripping up decades-old agreements with municipalities 
just because they want to. Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party is 
forcing municipalities to raise taxes, cut services, and drain the 
reserves. 
 
The Sask Party used to say that they valued their municipal 
partners, but now the only values the Sask Party sees are dollar 
signs. Mr. Speaker, they’ll throw anyone under the bus to shift 
the blame and responsibility for their mismanagement, their 
waste, and their scandal and put it onto somebody else. 
 
What does the Finance minister have to say to the victims of his 
latest round of scapegoating our municipalities? 



2358 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2017 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s become abundantly clear in this Chamber over the last 
number of weeks since the budget was brought down, the 
position of the NDP on a variety of issues, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They don’t like the tax changes that have been brought in by 
this government. When we’re dealing with a $1.2 billion 
resource revenue drop-off over the course of the last three 
years, Mr. Speaker, that’s just a fact. The Finance critic 
acknowledged that last fall with respect to the downturn in the 
commodities sector in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So this government had a choice. We can continue to kick the 
can down the street and not deal with the deficit like they’re 
doing in NDP Alberta, Mr. Speaker — $72 billion in debt by 
the end of that term of that government, the NDP government in 
Alberta, by the end of their term, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re not prepared to do that here in this province. We have 
taken the income tax, Mr. Speaker, moving taxes on 
productivity and income over to a consumption-based tax, Mr. 
Speaker, to deal with that kind of volatility in our resource 
revenue sector to ensure we have the resources, to have the 
largest budget in the history of this province in social services, 
Mr. Speaker, to have record infrastructure spending in this 
province, to have investments in our health care system, in our 
education system, Mr. Speaker. That’s what we’re going to 
continue to do. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Role of School Boards and Intent of Bill 63 
 
Ms. Beck: — Almost as bad as the Education minister’s 
condescending and arrogant tone. And nothing anyone on that 
side says matches up with the hundreds of letters that I’ve 
received in my office from parents and teachers who are 
worried about the cuts that this government is making to our 
kids’ classrooms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what makes the minister feel entitled to take the 
decision-making powers away from locally elected trustees and 
give them fully to himself? Why is he going against the will of 
Saskatchewan people and plowing ahead with Bill 63 and his 
plan to take control of school divisions? Why won’t he scrap 
Bill 63? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, when we talk about Bill 
63, we give examples. School divisions that are paying for more 
than one director at the same time. It’s happening in two 
different school divisions right now. Mr. Speaker, it also 
happened in 2005. Education minister Andrew Thomson was 
asked in committee why Davidson school division was paying a 
salary, a pension, and a gratuity to the same director of 
education at the same time. Mr. Speaker, the minister’s 
response was, and I quote, “The Education Act does not provide 
any ability for the minister to intervene in individual decisions 
made by individual boards.” That was then minister of 

Education Andrew Thomson, May 10th, 2005. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 2005 when the NDP were faced with bad 
behaviour from a division, they did nothing about it. Mr. 
Speaker, we’re not going to do that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, that is the minister who time and 
time again refuses to take any responsibility for the damaging 
cuts his government is making in our kids’ classrooms. This is a 
government that provided a $60 million corporate tax giveaway 
while that minister wants to cut $60 million out of our kids’ 
classrooms. He wants to play divide and conquer. Of course I 
support publicly funded education, Mr. Speaker, and of course 
that includes both the Catholic and the public system. 
 
That minister needs to stop spreading division, and that minister 
needs to stop attacking democratically elected school board 
trustees, parents, teachers, and everyone in the system, and start 
supporting Saskatchewan education. Mr. Speaker, parents and 
teachers have been very clear: they did not want to lose their 
local voice in education. So will the minister finally take some 
responsibility for his own bad decisions and scrap Bill 63? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite talk 
about responsibility. The responsibility that they didn’t take in 
2005, we’re taking this year, Mr. Speaker. We will pass Bill 63. 
We will prevent school boards from paying two directors at the 
same time. We will set bussing limits so that we’ve got cost 
controls, Mr. Speaker. We want our resources spent in the 
classroom, not in the courtroom, not in the boardroom. We want 
our money to go to students, not to courtroom battles, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s the direction that we’re going. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite better sit down and take a 
careful look at what her position is on some of these things 
because there’s a lot of people are starting to pay a lot of 
attention to the issues that they’ve got before the House right 
now, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on April 27th, the member 
opposite said this: “I do not think it appropriate that I would call 
that court decision into question,” Mr. Speaker. Then she said, 
“We are encouraged by the Catholic school board . . . 
[inaudible] . . . decision to appeal the decision.” Where are they, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Support for Municipalities 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, the only thing worse than the 
Sask Party cuts are the ways they’re tying the hands of our 
cities, towns, and villages from standing up for the 
Saskatchewan people and themselves. The Government 
Relations minister says, no one has concerns. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association] couldn’t be much more clear. The 
Sask Party’s legislation cancels all contracts for 



May 1, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2359 

payments-in-lieu to 109 hometowns, allows the province to 
redirect millions to themselves instead, and prevents towns and 
cities from defending these contracts in court. Mr. Speaker, 
SUMA remains deeply concerned about what is being lost 
through Bill 64 and about what seems to be an intentional lack 
of clarity from the minister. Is the minister intentionally 
confusing the issue, or does she actually not understand this 
drastic cut? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, it is the member opposite 
and actually in some of SUMA’s communication that’s 
confusing the issue. There is not 109 contracts; 109 contracts do 
not exist. There is nine contracts with SaskEnergy and 10 with 
SaskPower. 
 
In fact, the city of Saskatoon does not have a contract for 
grants-in-lieu for SaskPower. It was a letter of intent. That’s it. 
There is no contract there. For the city of North Battleford, it’s 
a board minute. It’s a board decision. So all together between 
both Crowns, there’s 19 contracts. Most of them have language 
around termination. So, Mr. Speaker, when they keep saying 
there’s 109 contracts, that’s simply not true. 
 
As far as clarification, I have an email from the executive 
director for SUMA. And it says, and I quote: 
 

The minister’s letter is very clear and most helpful for our 
members to gain a better understanding of the impact the 
budget announcements will have on their operations. The 
level of detail and clarity in this letter is exactly what we’re 
looking for, and our minister hit the mark. 

 
That’s SUMA, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — It’s the Sask Party government that blew 
through an economic boom, and now they’re making 
municipalities and Saskatchewan people pay for the Sask 
Party’s mismanagement, scandal, and waste. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that Sask Party is using their own current budget 
shortfalls to permanently take these revenues from cities, towns, 
and villages. The provincial government clearly made cuts in 
this budget that they don’t fully understand. 
 
Will the minister start listening to municipalities and scrap Bill 
64? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — It’s ironic, Mr. Speaker, that that 
member opposite talks about how we blew through the money. 
Do you know who got more money and increases year over 
year over year for eight years? Municipalities, Mr. Speaker. 
Municipalities had no clue under the members opposite what 
their funding would be from year to year. 
 

Mr. Speaker, for eight consecutive years we have increased 
funding to municipalities, not just in revenue sharing, Mr. 
Speaker, but in infrastructure funding. We have given funding 
for a stadium here in Regina, for bridges in Saskatoon, and the 
list goes on and on and on and on. 
 
So that member opposite, to stand up when she represents a 
party that, when in government, there was tax revolts around 
this province, that is just too special and I will not be taking 
any, any direction from her whatsoever. 
 
[14:45] 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 70 — The Provincial Sales Tax 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 70, 
The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 70, The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 
2017 be now introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 
facilitate the work of committees this afternoon, I move that this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that this Assembly do now 
adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly now stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:46.] 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2347 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2347 
  McCall ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2347, 2350 
  Bonk ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2347 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 2348 
  Sarauer .......................................................................................................................................................................... 2348, 2350 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2348 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2348 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2348 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2349 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2349 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2350 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2350 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2350 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2351 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2351 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2351 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2351 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2352 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2352 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2352 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Missing Persons Week 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2353 
 Missing Children’s Month 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2353 
 2017 Regina Police Service Half Marathon  
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2353 
 Mental Health Week 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2353 
 Saskatchewan Athlete Named to Badminton Canada Team 
  Marit ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2354 
 Post-Secondary Graduates Find Success in Saskatchewan 
  Buckingham ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2354 
 Premier’s Dinner and Behaviour of Protestors 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2354 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 SaskTel and Intent of Bill 40 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2355 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2355 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2355 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2355 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2356 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2356 
 Government’s Fiscal Management 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2357 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 2357 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2358 
 Role of School Boards and Intent of Bill 63 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2358 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2358 
 Support for Municipalities 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2358 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2359 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 70 — The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2017 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2359 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


