






















































Hansard: March 16, 2017


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 59A  THURSDAY, MARCH 16, 2017, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 

 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 

Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 

 

 

 
 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 

Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 

Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 

Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 

Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 

Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 

Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 

Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 

Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 

Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 

Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 

Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 

Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 

D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 

Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 

Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 

Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 

Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 

Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 

Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 

Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 

Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 

Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 

Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 

Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 

Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 

Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 

Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 

Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 

Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 

Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 

McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 

Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 

Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 

Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 

Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 

Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 

Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 

Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 

Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 

Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 

Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 

Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 

Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 

Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 

Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 

Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 

Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 

Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 

Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 

Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 

Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 

Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 

Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 

Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 

Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 

Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 

Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 

 

 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 11 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1719 
 March 16, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you and to all members of this Legislative Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce two individuals seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
The first one — who’s actually not a stranger to the legislature 
anymore; she’s been here a few times — it’s my mom, Donna 
Sarauer. Give a wave. I bet she never thought that in her 
lifetime anyone would ever say she’s not a stranger to the 
Legislative Assembly. So I apologize for that. 
 
But the other individual I also would like to introduce, more 
importantly, is my grandma Bert Szautner, who is here in town 
visiting from Humboldt, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to say she’s just 
in town to see her granddaughter in the legislature, but I think 
she’s a bit more excited to see Tanya Tucker at the casino 
tomorrow. But I’m happy that she was able to make some time 
to come visit, visit me. 
 
Now my grandma has been watching proceedings at home on 
TV quite religiously, Mr. Speaker, and I warned her today that 
when you see it live, it’s a little bit more rowdy than it is on 
television. And I warned her that even I sometimes, dare I say, 
heckle on occasion, and I apologized in advance. But my 
grandma said, you know what? You do what you need to do, 
Nicole. So I’d like to thank her for that permission. And I’d like 
that all members join me in welcoming both of them to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you, I would like to introduce some special 
young guests to the Legislative Assembly here this morning. 
Joining us are 37 students from École White City School and 13 
students from South Shore elementary school with the Prairie 
Valley School Division. 
 
Accompanying the students today are their teachers Marcia 
Shelstad, Wendy Ashton, and Paul Massier, chaperones, and 
ministry officials from the Provincial Capital Commission. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the students are here today to participate in the 
ongoing educational program known as A Day in the 
Legislature. They will also have a chance to tour our historic 
Legislative Building and to observe MLAs [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly]. I want to thank you personally, Mr. 
Speaker, for participating in the panel discussion, leading the 
panel discussion later today. 
 
I invite all members to join me in welcoming our guests to their 
Legislative Assembly. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce three guests in your gallery who are visiting here 
today, not frequent visitors — I think it’s only their second time 
to the question period anyway — but my son Mac, my daughter 
Finn, and my wife Alaina. So I’d like all members to join me in 
welcoming them to their Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again to present a petition to reverse the cuts to the Lighthouse 
program. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners want to draw our 
attention to the fact that in April 2014 the minister of Social 
Services said that the Lighthouse in Saskatoon would “. . . take 
pressure off existing detox facilities, hospitals, and police cells 
while keeping people safe, especially in our brutally cold 
winters.” Mr. Speaker, they point out that on that same day, the 
minister of Health said, “We want to ensure that individuals 
with mental health and addictions issues have a safe place to 
stay,” Mr. Speaker. We couldn’t agree more on this side of the 
House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The petitioners point out that this government has repeatedly 
indicated that the Lighthouse stabilization unit keeps 
individuals out of hospital emergency rooms and jail cells. Yet 
they still made this cut, Mr. Speaker. The reality is they’re now 
trying to place the responsibility for repairing budget deficits on 
those experiencing addictions, unemployment, and poverty, and 
those who are living from day to day without proper services. 
And the petitioners don’t think that’s fair. I’d like to read the 
prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately reverse 
their recent cuts to funding that allows extremely 
vulnerable people to access the services of the Lighthouse 
stabilization unit in Saskatoon, and revisit their imposition 
of a strict and narrow definition of homelessness in 
November of 2015 which forced the Lighthouse to cut 
back its hours of essential services in February of 2016; 
and take immediate steps to ensure that homeless people in 
Saskatchewan have emergency shelter, clothing, and food 
available to them before more lives are lost. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens of 
Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to rise to present a petition from citizens who are 
opposed to the federal government’s decision to impose a 
carbon tax on the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we 
all realize the responsibility we have to be good stewards, and 
we appreciate that industry and agriculture have taken steps to 
reduce their carbon footprint. We know Saskatchewan and 



1720 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2017 

SaskPower have made significant investments in carbon 
reduction. We know that an additional tax would not reduce 
carbon at all but would only have a devastating economic 
impact on our economy. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
take the following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on this 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these signed petitions come from Moose Jaw, 
from Coderre, from Parkbeg, from Shamrock, and Regina. I do 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise in 
my place under the specific direction and request by the 
member from Prince Albert Northcote to stand in my place 
today to present a petition as it relates to a second bridge for 
Prince Albert. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker, 
that the need for a second bridge for Prince Albert has never 
been clearer than it is today. Prince Albert and communities 
north of Prince Albert and the businesses that send people and 
products through Prince Albert require a solution. And they, in 
the prayer that reads as follows: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan ask the Sask Party government to stop 
stalling, hiding behind rhetoric and refusing to listen to the 
people calling for action and begin immediately to plan 
and then quickly commence the construction of a second 
bridge for Prince Albert using federal and provincial 
dollars. 

 
And as always, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this 
petition are all from throughout our land. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition regarding the situation surrounding pay equity here in 
Saskatchewan. The undersigned residents want to bring to your 
attention the following: that the citizens of this province believe 
in an economy that’s powered by transparency, accountability, 
security, and equity; and that all women should be paid 
equitably, and that women are powerful drivers of economic 
growth and their economic empowerment benefits us all; and 
that the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives found that in 
Saskatoon in 2016, women earned on the average 63 cents for 
every dollar that a man makes, and in Regina women earned on 
average 73 cents for every dollar that a man makes. According 
to the most recent StatsCan data, the national gender wage gap 
for full-time workers is 72 cents for every dollar a man makes. 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
eliminate the wage gap between women and men across 
all sectors where the Government of Saskatchewan has 

jurisdiction, provide a framework under which this can be 
done within this term of this Assembly, and that the 
Saskatchewan government call upon workplaces within 
Saskatchewan within the private sector to eliminate the 
wage gap between women and men. 

 
And Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
the city of Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present to you a petition to increase funding to Prince Albert 
mobile crisis. Mr. Speaker, people across the province are 
concerned about the lack of funding that mobile crisis has and, 
due to the lack of funding, mobile crisis has had to close its 
doors during daytime hours, resulting in a loss of resource to 
people in distress. The daytime closure of Prince Albert mobile 
has put stress on Prince Albert Police Service, Victoria 
Hospital, and other agencies who may not be trained and/or 
qualified to provide the counselling and intervention services to 
clients. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
call on the Saskatchewan Party government to increase 
funding to Prince Albert Mobile Crisis Unit so they may 
once again offer 24-hour emergency crisis service. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing this petition — like I said, 
this is a concern across the province — so the individuals that 
signed this particular petition are from Saskatoon and Hagen. 
And I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition in support of sexual abuse prevention curriculum in 
Saskatchewan schools. Those who signed this petition wish to 
draw our attention to the following. First of all is the fact that 
Saskatchewan has the second-highest rate of sexual child abuse 
in Canada 
 
This abuse has lasting results throughout a child’s lifetime, 
including mental health concerns, depression, anxiety, and low 
self-esteem, as well as physical impacts, Mr. Speaker. Currently 
there is no comprehensive elementary or secondary curriculum 
regarding the prevention and reporting of sexual child abuse in 
Saskatchewan, and as a province we’re reminded that it is our 
shared responsibility to protect children and youth, to educate 
them, as every child has the right to be protected and safe. 
 
I will read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Government of Saskatchewan take 
immediate and concrete action to develop and implement 
Erin’s law. Such legislation would ensure that a 
comprehensive health education program be developed 
and implemented in grades pre-kindergarten through 
grade 12. 



March 16, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1721 

Those signing the petition today reside in Regina. I do so 
submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition calling for a reversal to the cuts to the 
Aboriginal court worker program. Mr. Speaker, the undersigned 
residents of the province of Saskatchewan wish to bring to your 
attention the following: that the Government of Saskatchewan 
cut the budget for the Aboriginal court worker program in the 
2016-17 provincial budget. They point out that Aboriginal court 
workers play an important role helping Aboriginal people in 
criminal and child apprehension cases. They point out that 
Aboriginal peoples are disproportionately represented in 
Saskatchewan’s correctional centres, and they point out that 
Aboriginal court workers successfully help to make our 
communities safer through reduced recidivism rates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners are also well aware that this 
government pointed to the Aboriginal court worker program as 
an example of them fulfilling their part in responding to the 
calls to action from the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, 
and how that’s just not right, Mr. Speaker: 
 

In the prayer that reads as follows, the petitioners 
respectfully request that the Government of Saskatchewan 
reverse its short-sighted and counterproductive cuts to the 
Aboriginal court worker program. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular set of petitions is signed by 
individuals from Air Ronge and La Ronge. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present a petition to ensure job security for victims of domestic 
violence. Saskatchewan has the highest rates of domestic 
violence by intimate partners amongst all Canadian provinces, 
and citizens of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, are concerned at the 
lack of support for victims of domestic abuse. One in three 
Canadian workers have experienced domestic violence, and for 
many the violence follows them to work. Employers lose $77.9 
million annually due to the direct and indirect impacts of 
domestic violence. 
 
[10:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, Manitoba has already enacted such legislation, 
and Ontario is on its way to enacting legislation that ensures job 
security for victims of domestic violence. I’d like to read the 
prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
enact legislation that requires all employers to provide a 
minimum of five paid workdays and a minimum of 17 
weeks unpaid work leave with the assurance of job 
security upon return for all victims of domestic abuse in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing the petition today come 

from Moose Jaw and Regina. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today and 
present a petition to stop the redirection of funding of the 
Northern Teacher Education Program, Inc. Mr. Speaker, the 
NORTEP [Northern Teacher Education Program] program has 
been extremely successful for 40 years, graduating teachers 
from the North, almost all of whom stay in the teaching 
profession, almost all of whom stay in the North. This program 
produces good jobs for northern people and excellent role 
models for northern youth. 
 
It’s been locally controlled and managed, but we’re hearing, 
Mr. Speaker, the plan to transfer control of this program to 
Northlands, yet we haven’t heard any convincing reason to 
change this excellent program. We have many serious concerns 
about this: concerns about access to education for people in the 
North, concern about job losses, concern about sale of 
residences and other assets. 
 
It’s not too late, Mr. Speaker, for this government to honour its 
five-year agreement and maintain NORTEP as the quality 
program it’s been for 40 years. I’ll read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan call on the Saskatchewan Party government 
to immediately restore their five-year agreement to fund 
the Northern Teacher Education Program Council, Inc. and 
continue to fund NORTEP programs in La Ronge. 

 
This petition is signed by people from Air Ronge, La Ronge, 
and Pinehouse. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Regina Lakeview 
on her feet? 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave for 
introduction of guests. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s family day here at 
the Legislative Assembly, I think, and it’s my real pleasure to 
be able to introduce three special guests in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. These are my kids, and I’m really happy that they’re 
here. I’m even more impressed by the fact that they got up 
today on their own and got themselves out of the house and 
down here, obviously with their ID [identification] because 
they’ve made it here. 
 
It is really a pleasure to have you here, and I know anyone, all 
of us here that are parents, know that there is so much that goes 
into our being able to stand in these places, and it often requires 
the sacrifice from our kids. So I want them to know that what 



1722 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2017 

we do here is in part for you, and that we miss you when we’re 
not able to be at home. I know yesterday I missed Maya’s 
Concours oratoire, but her dad put it up on Facebook for all to 
see. Maya attends École Connaught, and the minister knows 
how to get there; Nolan attends grade 9 at Sheldon-Williams, 
and Hannah is in grade 11 at Campbell Collegiate. And I 
couldn’t be prouder of them, Mr. Speaker, and I invite all 
members to join with me in welcoming them to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 
 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities 
Annual Convention 

 
Mr. Steele: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, it was a great privilege 
to be able to attend the 2017 Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities annual convention along with many of my 
colleagues. This is an incredible gathering of municipal leaders 
from corners of the province, where there was constructive 
dialogue and informal sessions and fantastic networking. Mr. 
Speaker, there was about 2,000 attendees at the convention, this 
year, that will wrap up later today. 
 
Prior to being elected to the legislature, I spent many years in 
municipal politics, served on the SARM [Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities] board, and saw first-hand 
the value of SARM convention for the elected leaders and 
administrators from rural Saskatchewan. Now as an elected 
member of the Assembly, I get to see the other side, and my 
opinion has not changed. 
 
Our government sees how important SARM is, and as usual, we 
saw the great turnout of ministers at the bear-pit session 
yesterday and throughout the week. Several ministers spoke to 
the convention attendees, including the Premier, who addressed 
everyone on Tuesday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask all the members of the Assembly to 
join me in congratulating the 2017 SARM convention 
organizers on a great convention and to acknowledge the hard 
work of all our rural municipal leaders to make Saskatchewan a 
better place. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Access to Feminine Hygiene Products in the North 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I expect that every 
member of this Assembly knows that the cost of living in 
northern Saskatchewan is often twice the cost of here in Regina. 
But some of us still fail to consider the barriers that women in 
northern Saskatchewan face when trying to access essential 
feminine hygiene products. The high cost of feminine hygiene 
products and pain relief products comes with a high price for 
women. 
 
NDP [New Democratic Party] MP [Member of Parliament] 
Georgina Jolibois says that the lack of affordability and 
availability leads many women and girls to staying home from 

work and from school. 
 
Fortunately, Mr. Speaker, a community organization called 
Moon Time Sisters has stepped up. The Moon Time Sisters 
collected donations of feminine hygiene products — in fact 
almost 100,000 of these products — to distribute throughout 
northern Saskatchewan communities. One of our former NDP 
candidates, Nicole White, is a driving force behind this effort. 
Nicole has stepped up and has set up collection points in 
Saskatoon and Regina, I know at our office and at T + A 
vintage and vinyl in the member from Douglas Park’s riding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to recognize Your Time 
Women’s Empowerment Foundation, a non-profit organization 
founded in the wake of the 2016 American election by three 
women from here in Regina: Sandy Beug, Lisa Peters, and Lois 
Vanderhooft. It was through their efforts that this need was 
originally brought to light. 
 
I would ask all members, Mr. Speaker, to join me in 
recognizing Moon Time Sisters, affiliated organizations and 
organizers for their valuable service to northern women and 
girls and for their efforts in building bridges between 
communities. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
University. 
 

We Day Celebration in Saskatoon 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I had the 
great pleasure of being a part of the We Day celebration at 
SaskTel Centre in Saskatoon. I was pleased to thank the event 
founder Craig Kielburger whose efforts to educate this 
generation on the power of “we” rather than “me” is inspiring 
for all. 
 
I was honoured to recognize Kenaston School, who raised 
$8,000 to build a school in Kenya; and Eston Composite 
School, who collected nearly 3,000 pounds of food for those in 
need in their surrounding area. Mr. Speaker, these students are 
shaping Saskatchewan’s future, and I could not be more proud 
of them. 
 
There are so many ways to get involved in local communities in 
this province, and We Day provides a platform to motivate, 
educate, and inspire all in attendance. Students who attend the 
event and take part in We schools’ activities are 81 per cent 
more likely to take action and improve the lives of others in 
their own communities and abroad. The impact they feel from 
We Day is critical as they are educated on mental health, 
reconciliation importance, anti-bullying, and making 
Saskatchewan a welcoming place for all. The students will 
carry these lessons and motivations they have gained from We 
Day throughout their entire lives. 
 
Before leaving, I was able to participate in a round-table 
discussion on northern strategies with Greg Yuel, CEO [chief 
executive officer] of PIC Investment Group, Athabasca Basin 
Development, and ERCO Worldwide. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
Craig and the We team, along with PotashCorp partners on a 



March 16, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1723 

very successful event. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities 
Annual Convention 

 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, SARM, the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities, is an independent 
association that represents rural municipal government in 
Saskatchewan. The association acts on behalf of its members 
and proudly takes the role as the voice of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the honour of attending the SARM 
convention on Tuesday and Wednesday this week at Prairieland 
Park in Saskatoon. I attended alongside close to 2,000 delegates 
and visitors. Reeves, councillors, and administrators of rural 
municipalities travelled to Saskatoon to participate in the 
convention. 
 
A highlight for me and for everyone at the convention was the 
keynote address from Jim Hopson. Mr. Hopson has been 
involved in Saskatchewan football for much of his life and 
worked as the Saskatchewan Roughriders CEO from 2005 until 
2015, and as we all know, under his guidance our team won the 
Grey Cup in both 2007 and 2013. His dedication to 
Saskatchewan football is commendable, and his words at the 
convention on leadership and team building were inspirational. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wrapped up my time at the convention last night 
attending the banquet alongside my colleagues the Leader of the 
Official Opposition and the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 
And we continue to engage with rural leaders, listening to their 
successes but also their concerns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask my colleagues to join me in thanking SARM 
and their members from across Saskatchewan in the work they 
do to build a stronger Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Westview. 
 

Dine for a Difference Fundraiser 
 

Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past 
weekend I had the pleasure of attending the fourth annual Dine 
for a Difference fundraiser in support of the AIM [Ability in 
Me] family advisory committee, along with my colleague, the 
member from Saskatoon University. 
 
Mr. Speaker, AIM is the acronym for Ability in Me, a fitting 
name for an organization that is focused on providing 
innovative and individualized programs and services for both 
kids with Down syndrome and their families. This was an 
incredible event where we heard many stories of the great work 
that AIM does on a daily basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my family is one who has seen the amazing ability 
and potential of someone with Down syndrome. My daughter, 
Deanna, has Down’s, and I understand that programs like this 
are a big part of making sure that everyone is able to discover 
their abilities. Mr. Speaker, Deanna has taught me as much 

about life as anyone else I know. 
 
The services and supports that AIM provide are a valuable part 
of the support system. And I am proud that our government has 
supported AIM with $360,000 in funding each year over the last 
two years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this House to join me in 
thanking the staff and volunteers who made the Dine for a 
Difference fundraiser a resounding success, and those at AIM 
who help students with Down syndrome fulfill their potential 
every day. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 

HomeStyles Home Show 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it was 
my pleasure to speak at the HomeStyles Home Show this past 
weekend in Saskatoon. This year the show was put on in 
collaboration with the Saskatoon & Region Home Builders’ 
Association, Fresco design interiors, and the Saskatchewan 
Craft Council for the first time in the show’s history. The show 
was an excellent showcase of quality, innovation, and an 
opportunity for homeowners to be educated on Saskatchewan 
fine arts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the event was energetic with approximately 
15,000 attendees able to browse, shop, and engage with local 
craftsmen. The Home Builders’ Association generously 
provided space for this event, giving local artists a chance to 
showcase their incredible works, many reflecting this beautiful 
province we call home. 
 
This show plays an important role to our communities, 
providing opportunity and benefits to local businesses and 
craftsmen, and visitors from outside of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the HomeStyles Home Show has shown great 
success in supporting our economic growth, helping make 
Saskatchewan even stronger. With the support of Creative 
Saskatchewan as well as SaskCulture, these artists will continue 
to thrive through events such as this, making our communities 
and our homes brighter every day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in congratulating 
the HomeStyles Home Show on a successful trade show. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Statement by Opposition Member in the House 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the member from 
Athabasca and current Deputy Leader proudly rose to his feet to 
extol the virtues of the Coquihalla Highway in BC [British 
Columbia], a project completed in 1986, Mr. Speaker. I was 
four at the time; Top Gun was movie of the year, and Kenny 
Loggins’ “Danger Zone” was the top song. 
 
Over the next 22 years, the toll on the Coquihalla Highway 



1724 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2017 

extracted nearly $1 billion from Canadians, including families 
on vacation, truckers hauling goods, and hard-working men and 
women going back and forth to work each day. 
 
And what happened over those 22 years here in Saskatchewan? 
For me, my Waldeck School was lucky enough to dodge the 
NDP axe as they closed 176 schools and fired hundreds of 
teachers. Our family and friends on farms watched as the 
callous NDP government turned their backs on rural 
Saskatchewan. In those years, the member from Athabasca was 
the Highways minister who took the top off the P.A. [Prince 
Albert] bridge but refused to put it back on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the interim leader, or better yet 
maybe the future leader from Meewasin. Are carbon taxes and 
road tolls the NDP’s plan to pay for the billions in reckless 
spending and take us back down the highway to the danger 
zone? 
 
[10:30] 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — Now we introduce the question zone. I 
recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Role of the Global Transportation Hub in Land 
Acquisitions 

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — You know, every day this week I’ve 
given a chance to the Deputy Premier to come clean on what he 
knows about the Sask Party’s GTH [Global Transportation 
Hub] scandal. He’s dodged question after question, just like the 
Premier has day after day. You know, I’m sure it’s becoming 
frustrating for many members on that side of the Assembly to 
see, day after day after day, the appointed minister stand up and 
to read the same tired lines over and over and over again. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, whether I’m out across Regina or in 
the south or in the north of our province, whether I’m meeting 
with workers or whether I’m meeting with business people, and 
even yesterday at SARM, people come up to tell me, keep 
fighting to get to the bottom of the GTH scandal. They know 
this scandal stinks, and they want more than those tired 
prepared lines. They want and deserve answers. 
 
So here’s another chance to the Deputy Premier to come clean, 
finally. So when people come to him, does he actually defend 
this scandal that wasted millions of the hard-earned dollars of 
Saskatchewan people while filling the pockets of those 
connected to the Sask Party? And finally, when did he learn that 
the original seller of the land in the GTH scandal was the 
landlord for the former minister of the GTH? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Of course the auditor has looked into this matter. The 
auditor has fully canvassed the matter. The auditor had full 
authority and full access to all of the documents and all of the 
individuals to which she requested access. By her own 
testimony to the Public Accounts Committee, she did a very 

thorough job and the government co-operated fully in all 
aspects of that report. She concluded that there was, and I’ll 
quote: 
 

In any audit, as auditors we’re always looking for red flags. 
And because this is a land transaction we did look for 
conflicts of interest. We didn’t find evidence of conflict of 
interest or indications of fraud or wrongdoing in the course 
of our work so there were no red flags there. 

 
The RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] have indicated 
they’re looking into the matter. We’re going to be fully 
co-operating with that review. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Government’s Fiscal Management 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s just really unbelievable 
that the Deputy Premier of Saskatchewan, just as the Premier 
can’t, that they can’t take to their feet and answer some pretty 
simple, basic questions about this scandal. 
 
You know, this week we’ve also seen that government, the Sask 
Party, defending their mismanaged bypass contract with a 
billion-dollar-plus overrun. And of course all the numbers are 
hidden from the contract online. The words online don’t say 
much, you know, since the dollars and figures aren’t there. You 
know, Saskatchewan people are learning that really the Sask 
Party aren’t really very good with numbers, Mr. Speaker. And 
we saw that again yesterday where the Finance minister said 
that they’ll include a 3.5 per cent cut to everyone and 
everything in the budget. And if they can’t make it work, well 
he says they’ll figure that out later. 
 
This is not how you budget, Mr. Speaker, and it’s not how you 
treat the hard-working people of Saskatchewan. The Sask 
Party’s latest attack on workers is already being challenged in 
the courts. That government’s record in the courts is nearly 
unblemished by success, and of course it’s Saskatchewan 
people who always pick up the tab. 
 
Question to the Finance minister today: will he admit that 
ramming forward their unfair cut, through ramming forward 
that cut while it’s being challenged in the courts, is a costly 
mistake? Or does he really not care what price the people and 
workers of Saskatchewan are forced to pay? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
appreciate the question from the interim Leader of the 
Opposition. And he said that we had the . . . I can’t remember 
the exact words. He said presumptuous or . . . to include a 
figure in the budget with respect to compensation across the 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is the government’s responsibility to ask the employers when 
they go into the negotiating table what the target should be with 
respect to what they’re trying to achieve at the negotiating table. 
This member ought to know that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The entire budget has forecast in it. Every expenditure line item 



March 16, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1725 

is forecast. We ask all ministers to manage to a forecast with 
respect to the health budget, the education budget. I know 
you’ve never been involved in a provincial budget. I can say 
that, I think, to the Leader of the Opposition. He’s never been 
involved in a provincial budget. 
 
Every revenue line item in the budget is a forecast, Mr. 
Speaker. What I said last June 1st when we presented the 
budget here for the province of Saskatchewan in the 2016-17 
budget, Mr. Speaker, I said we would be undertaking 
transformational change across government, that we would be 
looking at every single line item in the budget, Mr. Speaker. 
This is exactly the process that we have undertaken. These are 
the kinds of decisions this government has made to undertake 
transformational change to deal with the challenges we have 
here in the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

Provision of Cleaning Services in Government Buildings 
and Elimination of Gaming Corporation Positions 

 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, with all that sound planning, 
you’d think that the third quarter report would have appeared 
months ago. But apparently not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, earlier this week the Minister Responsible for 
Central Services presided over the . . . in the firing of 230 of the 
hardest working and most modestly paid members in the public 
service. I’m talking about those 230 cleaners, Mr. Speaker. And 
then on top of a decision like that, yesterday we’ve received 
word that over at the Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation — 
where that member is also the minister responsible — she 
presided over the elimination of four of the five positions that 
are dedicated to responsible gambling programming at casinos 
Regina and Moose Jaw. Mr. Speaker, can the minister explain 
to the House how that makes any sense? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Sask Gaming. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, earlier this week as the member 
has spoke to, we have decided to contract out 
government-owned buildings and contract it out to private 
sector for cleaning. Of these 12 companies that are said to be 
awarded the contracts, six are employee-owned companies, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Thirty government buildings in the North in Saskatchewan have 
been contracted out to the private sector for over 20 years, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, our neighbours to the east and west, the 
majority, to varying degrees, have contracted out cleaning to 
government buildings, Mr. Speaker. If the quality of 
contracted-out work is raised by the member opposite, or 
security, all we need to do is ask for the . . . from the member 
from Cumberland to . . . that his family owns a private-sector 
cleaning company that cleans government buildings, Mr. 
Speaker. Perhaps we need to ask him about the quality of 
service and the security there. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, I know the minister has been 
saving up that petty tirade, but perhaps she could answer the 

question. 
 
Yesterday we received word that, at the Saskatchewan Gaming 
Corporation, four of the five positions that go towards 
responsible gambling programming at casinos Regina and 
Moose Jaw have been eliminated by that government. Can the 
minister, who presides over a corporation where responsible 
gambling is part of their mandate, can the minister provide for 
the House some explanation of how that makes any sense 
whatsoever? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Sask Gaming. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
business decisions are being made over at Sask Gaming, and 
there’s no way that we would preside over an organization that 
doesn’t follow the legislation or take charge of problem 
gambling situations that arise, Mr. Speaker. 
 
All of this will be decided. You will see it next week when the 
budget comes down. These are budget decisions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, the Education minister said 
yesterday that his words were torqued. He said his plans to rip 
up local agreements with our kids’ teachers had been taken out 
of context. But, Mr. Speaker, there simply isn’t enough context 
to cover up the facts. 
 
The minister was clear. He wants to go after these local 
agreements and he believes that now is a good time to do it. Mr. 
Speaker, these contracts don’t all expire at the same time. In 
fact, some will be in place until 2019. And the minister claims 
that his goal is consistency. Well if anyone in this Chamber 
honestly believes that the minister’s goal is to allow a rising tide 
to raise all ships, well then I’ve got a $2 million bypass that 
runs right through a city that I’d like to sell you. 
 
The truth is, Mr. Speaker, the minister’s goal is to cut more 
from education. How can the minister deny that these cuts will 
hurt our kids’ classrooms? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 
opposite actually makes a point on the argument about LINC 
[local implementation and negotiation committee] agreements 
when she talks about the varying dates of the expiry of the 
contracts and the inconsistencies that are there. We recognize 
that there’s a significant difference between the agreements 
across the province. What a teacher receives can vary 
significantly for things like prep time, leaves, professional 
development. We want to work with the divisions to try and 
improve consistency and address some significant disparities 
that are there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we think that those things are best done at the 
bargaining table, not on the floor of the Assembly, not through 
the media. We’ve indicated it’s something we want to have the 



1726 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2017 

discussion with, nothing more, and we welcome the process that 
will take place through them, unlike the NDP whose 
methodology for LINC was closing 176 schools. We’re not 
there. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, the minister himself has admitted 
that the government’s plan to cut their way out of this massive 
deficit runs right through our kids’ classrooms. And we’ve seen 
them cut, underfund, and undervalue the people who work in 
those classrooms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party’s scheme to cut public servants’ 
pay includes the people who teach and support our children. 
And putting everything from teacher prep time to sports and 
extracurricular activities at risk is simply unacceptable, Mr. 
Speaker, and it has Saskatchewan people worried. 
 
The fact is that thousands of Saskatchewan people have already 
signed postcards and delivered them to the minister today. 
These people are sharing their concern for this government’s 
underfunding of education. Will the minister finally admit that 
his deep cuts to education are failing teachers, failing students, 
and failing their families? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite 
wants to insert herself onto the bargaining committee when we 
go through the next round of negotiations, that’s between her 
and STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation]. We don’t plan 
to negotiate on the floor of the Assembly. 
 
The NDP’s history in negotiating and dealing with LINC and 
dealing with teachers has been simply this, Mr. Speaker: they 
closed 176 schools; 32,000 students moved from here to 
Alberta because of the NDP history. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our record speaks volumes about our commitment 
to education. In 2007 the operating funding for our schools was 
$1.41 billion; 2016, $1.88 billion; record funding for students 
with disabilities and special needs, $288 million, Mr. Speaker; 
in 2007, 8,601 teachers; 2016, 9,355 — up 754. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Child Welfare Legislation 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, first to the Minister of the 
Environment. Given what he said yesterday, I’m really sorry he 
was disappointed he didn’t get a chance to see me while I was 
at the SARM convention this week. I would have loved to have 
introduced him to the people who kept coming to me to say 
how disappointed they are with the Sask Party’s 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste. 
 
But to the Minister of Social Services, Saskatchewan’s 
Children’s Advocate has again raised concerns about the 
well-being of children in foster care. He’s disappointed the 
minister decided to slow down important changes to our child 

welfare legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, under the current legislation, Saskatchewan’s 
most vulnerable children are falling through the cracks. When 
will the minister finally make kids in care a priority? Mr. 
Speaker, when will she act on her promise to overhaul our child 
welfare legislation? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker, and I thank the member opposite for the question. I’m 
very grateful for the work of the Children’s Advocate, and I 
look forward to working to build on our relationship together 
for the betterment of kids in our province. 
 
[10:45] 
 
There’s three key areas of child welfare transformation, Mr. 
Speaker. They are: working differently with First Nations, 
prevention, and the renewal of our child welfare system. I am 
very proud of our ministry and the progress that we’ve had on 
all these fronts. 
 
We’ve seen necessary changes to our legislation. In addition to 
that, we’ve made a number of initiatives around the flexible 
response pilot, which provides alternative interventions in cases 
that would normally trigger a child protection response and 
investigation. And one of the ways in which we are working 
differently with First Nations and Métis organizations, Mr. 
Speaker, is by providing support and funding to First Nations 
children and family CBOs [community-based organization]. To 
that end, Mr. Speaker, we’ve provided $25.4 million in funding 
to First Nations children and family CBOs, which is 311 per 
cent since we formed government. I think we’re very 
committed to advancing child welfare. There’s always more 
work to do and the good people in my ministry will continue to 
do it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, she actually wants us to believe 
that everything is going as planned, but we know something is 
terribly wrong because our province’s Children’s Advocate is 
publicly worried. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party is failing to act on the changes they 
promised to make, and they are failing to look out for the safety 
and well-being of the kids in their care. The minister’s excuse 
for putting off these changes is that they are still planning. Mr. 
Speaker, these kids in foster care need action now. So I’ll ask 
once again: will this minister stop stalling, stop putting our most 
vulnerable children at risk, and finally act in a real way to 
follow through on her commitment to overhaul our child 
welfare legislation? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Mr. Speaker, we’re not stalling 
on changes to the child welfare legislation. In fact, the majority 
of the issues identified with our PSI [person of sufficient 
interest] program, for example, have been addressed through 



March 16, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1727 

policy and practice changes today. This is an issue that has a lot 
of sensitivities around it, particularly the child and welfare 
piece. We are working and continuing to work on the area of 
child welfare and I’m happy to continue to do that with the 
people in our ministry. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 

Support for the Northern Teacher Education Program 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday we heard that Northlands 
will be taking over NORTEP. The minister said, and I quote, 
“. . . it makes good common sense.” But, Mr. Speaker, we’ve 
heard no convincing rationale for this change. This is a solution 
in search of a problem. It doesn’t make any sense at all. The 
teachers, students, and community members rallying today in 
La Ronge, they don’t think it makes sense. Even the committee 
this minister tasked with making a recommendation about 
NORTEP’s future doesn’t think it makes sense. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that committee unanimously recommended 
another institute. Northlands didn’t even apply to this process. 
Mr. Speaker, none of this is adding up, and people are 
understandably worried about what other sell-offs and job cuts 
the Sask Party has planned for this important program. So why, 
Mr. Speaker, why did this minister ignore the stakeholders? 
Why did she ignore the committee that she established, and 
what other plans does she have to undermine this program and 
ignore the needs of the North? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
was a due transparent process. There were six submissions, one 
of which came from Northlands who met with NORTEP 
Council on November 29, Mr. Speaker, as part of that process. 
Ultimately we made a decision that was in our discretion — 
discretion acknowledged by NORTEP Council, Mr. Speaker — 
which is in the best interests of the students. And I would like to 
quote from the press release that Northlands released this 
morning, Mr. Speaker: 
 

. . . this announcement [yesterday] does not mean the end 
of [NORTEP] . . . the end of opportunities for students to 
take other university courses . . . Students currently 
enrolled . . . will see virtually no change; classes will be 
offered in the same classrooms, many of the instructors 
will remain the same, housing will continue to be provided 
to those who need it, and we will work diligently to keep 
other . . . supports in place as well. 

 
It went on: 
 

We all want to see northern students . . . receive a top rate, 
culturally affirming education so they can enjoy a good 
quality of life and continue to be proud of who they are and 
where they are from [Mr. Speaker]. 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Domestic Violence Legislation 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the 
Minister of Justice for his co-operation in acknowledging the 
severity and the need to take action to address domestic 
violence in Saskatchewan. Now we’re asking him and all of his 
colleagues to back those good words up with solid action. 
 
I can’t help but worry that this will become another case of the 
Sask Party dragging their feet on their promises. They have said 
that they will address domestic violence when the finances 
allow. Mr. Speaker, domestic violence is not a problem for the 
future. Action to help women facing domestic violence needs to 
happen now. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, does the Minister of Justice have the support 
of the Minister of Labour and the rest of their colleagues to 
either support Bill 603 or, at the very least, bring forward 
legislation in this session that will implement the three policies 
outlined in it, to provide supports to those escaping violent 
intimate relationships? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
will again thank the member opposite for bringing this very 
important issue to the floor of the House. We have a copy of the 
private member’s bill that has been submitted, Mr. Speaker. 
I’ve sent it over to the Ministry of Justice for their review, and 
I’ve begun the consultation process with the Minister of Labour 
with respect to the issue that was raised on the labour side, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But I do want to correct a piece of information that the member 
opposite brought forward. I never said that we would move 
forward with domestic violence review if the finances allow for 
that, Mr. Speaker. This is a priority for this government. It’s a 
priority for my ministry, and it’s a priority for me personally, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have indicated that we will be proceeding with some 
legislation. We hope to have that legislation drafted quite 
quickly, Mr. Speaker, to address some of the deficiencies in the 
bill that was presented yesterday, Mr. Speaker. But I will wait 
for my officials within the Ministry of Justice to give me that 
advice, Mr. Speaker. But we are committed to dealing with this 
problem. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Intent of Bill No. 40 and Ownership of Crown 
Corporations 

 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, again I appreciate the Minister 
of Justice’s willingness to work with us, and I look forward to 
getting these important changes passed soon. Now we’re hoping 
he’ll also work with us to stop his dangerous bill to let them sell 
off 49 per cent of SaskTel and the rest of our Crowns. Everyone 
knows, Mr. Speaker, it’s a clear attempt to get through the back 
door what they know they can’t get through the front. 
 



1728 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2017 

Our Crowns were built by generations of Saskatchewan people, 
but this is risking it all with their cynical wordplay just to make 
a quick buck. But Saskatchewan people are making their voices 
heard. They know this bill is nothing more than the SaskTel 
sell-off by just another name. Thousands of people have signed 
petitions calling on the Sask Party to scrap this dangerous bill. 
There have been protests and town halls here at the legislature 
and all across our province. What more does the Minister of 
Justice need to see before he’ll scrap Bill 40? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I thank the member opposite for the question. And of 
course there’s . . . We’ve pointed out numerous times in this 
House, Mr. Speaker, and outside this House, that there is no 
offer on the table with respect to SaskTel or the sale of any 
amount of equity in any of the Crown corporations, Mr. 
Speaker. So it’s hypothetical. And I will tell the member 
opposite that this government will not proceed with respect to 
any matters in that regard unless those transactions are in the 
best interests of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I would point out that on a number of occasions, Mr. Speaker, 
members opposite have spoken and they’ve said there’s many 
definitions for the word privatize. And yet when the legislation 
was tabled in this House back in 2007 by the government of the 
NDP at the time, they refused and they neglected, Mr. Speaker, 
to define the word. Mr. Speaker, this legislation simply moves 
forward to correct the deficiency in the legislation, the 
deficiency of which should be laid at the hands of the New 
Democratic government at the time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — You know, Mr. Speaker, if they’re so 
desperate for a definition, maybe they should write down the 
definition for transparency, and honesty too. The privatization 
. . . The Canada Revenue Agency already has one. It’s 10 per 
cent. After the Sask Party sells off 10 per cent of one of our 
Crowns, the CRA [Canada Revenue Agency] will collect their 
income taxes for Ottawa. But that Sask Party does not seem to 
care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last fall after facing huge backlash and outrage 
across Saskatchewan, the Justice minister did the right thing 
and scrapped his poorly thought-out amendments to The 
Coroners Act. The minister listened and recognized that moving 
forward was the wrong thing to do. Doesn’t he see now, and 
hear, that this is the wrong move today? 
 
Billions of dollars are at risk because this cash-strapped Sask 
Party government is so intent on selling off anything that isn’t 
nailed down. The Justice minister has shown that he is strong 
enough to admit when he’s wrong and pull the plug instead of 
pushing forward with a damaging and flawed bill. Can he show 
that same strength again? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’ve said many times on the floor of this House that I’m not 
going to pull this bill, Mr. Speaker. It’s a valuable piece of 
legislation, Mr. Speaker. And instead of looking at all the 
negative pieces, Mr. Speaker, perhaps the members opposite 
should look at the opportunities that this bill presents, Mr. 
Speaker, to strengthen the balance sheets. 
 
Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, in the House, the member from 
Athabasca talked about partnerships. He talked about 
strengthening the Crowns through partnerships, Mr. Speaker. 
This legislation is going to allow that to happen, Mr. Speaker. 
So if the member from Athabasca wants to stand up and retract 
his comments, that’s fine. But he talked about partnerships; 
other members on that side of the House have talked about 
partnerships, Mr. Speaker. This legislation is going to allow that 
to happen and strengthen our Crowns, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Availability of Contract Details for 
Regina Bypass Project 

 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
minister keeps saying that the bypass contract details are online. 
He can say it over and over and over again, but it won’t make it 
true. The bones are there, Mr. Speaker, but none of the 
important information around how much they’re forcing 
Saskatchewan people to pay is in there. They are hiding all the 
costs for the construction work, and they’re even hiding the 
monthly service payments that we are making as a province. 
 
They’ll be shipping off to a company from overseas — and this 
matters, Mr. Speaker — the money that they’re shipping to a 
company overseas, this matters, Mr. Speaker, because it’s $2 
billion of our money. Two billion with a “b.” And all they have 
to show for it in this deal is to build 40 kilometres of twinned 
highway for an average cost of $30 million per kilometre. It is 
beyond belief, Mr. Speaker, if the minister still somehow stands 
behind this scandalous deal. The people of Saskatchewan have 
a right to see that contract. Will he table those contract details in 
full today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I said in the House 
yesterday that the contract is online. And I also mentioned in 
the House yesterday, Mr. Speaker, that the contract has been 
redacted for commercially sensitive information. That is the . . . 
that member, the member from Athabasca, Mr. Speaker, the 
member from Athabasca . . . well if they want to . . . If you 
want the answer, I’ll give it to you. The member from 
Athabasca, Mr. Speaker, the former minister . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Would the member from 
Athabasca come to order. He asked the question; would he 
please give the decency to listen to the response. I recognize the 
minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 



March 16, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1729 

the member from Athabasca is the former minister of 
Highways. He knows, he knows, Mr. Speaker, that when 
contracts are made public, they’re redacted for commercially 
sensitive information, all consistent with the information and 
privacy Act, Mr. Speaker, and sanctioned by the Information 
and Privacy Commissioner, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the bypass, it’s very 
interesting. The interim leader of the NDP has stood up on 
numerous occasions in this House complaining about truck 
traffic coming into the city of Regina, Mr. Speaker. He’s not 
standing up anymore, Mr. Speaker, because the bypass fixes 
that problem. We’ve heard comments from the members of the 
opposition, Mr. Speaker, with respect to safety on Highway 1. 
We’re not hearing those concerns anymore from the opposition 
because this bypass fixes it. He should stand up, Mr. Speaker, 
and members of his caucus should stand up and say, we support 
the bypass; we support economic development; we support the 
safety of the people of this province, Mr. Speaker, to get this 
bypass done as quickly as possible. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Athabasca on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Belanger: — My question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Ministerial statements. I recognize the Deputy 
Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, with leave for an 
introduction and for an extended introduction, please. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
pleasure to introduce some very special guests to the Legislative 
Assembly today seated in your gallery. Please welcome His 
Excellency Konstantin V. Zhigalov, ambassador of the 
Republic of Kazakhstan to Canada. The ambassador is 
accompanied by his colleague from the Kazakhstan embassy in 
Ottawa, Mr. Daniyar Seidaliyev, counsellor for economic 
affairs. They are joined by protocol staff: Chelsey Vargo 
Wilson and Lisa Harder. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the ambassador is in Saskatchewan for two days. 
He arrived in Saskatoon yesterday and met with officials from 
Cameco, and today in Regina his busy schedule includes 
meetings with government and business representatives. 
 
Members of the Assembly will already know that Kazakhstan 
and Saskatchewan share a common interest in a major global 
resource: uranium. Kazakhstan is the world’s largest producer 
of uranium, and Canada is the world’s second-largest producer, 
with all of our nation’s current uranium production coming 
from our province. Cameco is Canada’s largest investor in 

Kazakhstan and owns 60 per cent of the country’s Inkai mine. 
So undoubtedly the program yesterday with Cameco was very 
important and, I trust and hope, very productive. 
 
[11:00] 
 
Saskatchewan and Kazakhstan also share common priorities in 
agriculture, with both jurisdictions being large producers of 
wheat and other grains. This has resulted in opportunities in the 
past for Saskatchewan exporters of agricultural equipment. We 
look forward to strengthening our trading relationship in the 
future. 
 
As well and on a somewhat lighter note, I refer to the welcome 
message on the Kazakhstan embassy’s website, where the 
ambassador talks about all that Canada and Kazakhstan have in 
common, which includes a shared love for ice hockey. Talented 
hockey players are perhaps another one of our province’s major 
exports to the world. I would humbly submit that if the 
ambassador wants to see our nation’s and our province’s 
passions for hockey on full display, he may wish to consider 
making another visit to our province next May while Regina 
will proudly host the 100th Memorial Cup. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud of the relationship our province 
enjoys with Kazakhstan, and I’m pleased that we can extend our 
hospitality to Ambassador Zhigalov and Mr. Seidaliyev and 
meet with them to discuss the shared interests of our two 
jurisdictions as well as areas of future correspondence. Mr. 
Speaker, I would ask that all members of the Assembly join 
with me in welcoming the ambassador and Mr. Seidaliyev to 
Saskatchewan’s legislature today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — To you and through you, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s my pleasure to join with the minister, the Deputy Premier, 
opposite to welcome this delegation from Kazakhstan to the 
Saskatchewan Assembly. 
 
Once again, it’s a pleasure to have you here today. It’s a 
pleasure to welcome His Excellency Konstantin Zhigalov, 
ambassador of the Republic of Kazakhstan to Canada, and 
welcome back to the Saskatchewan legislature. I believe you 
were here in 2012 as well, you know, really displaying how 
important this relationship is to Kazakhstan and to 
Saskatchewan. We value your presence here. 
 
It’s also an honour to have Mr. Daniyar Seidaliyev, counsellor 
for the economic affairs for the Kazakh assembly in Ottawa 
here as well, and we welcome you. As I say, this is a very 
important relationship. It’s nice that you are here once again. 
We value your presence in the Assembly. 
 
We do have a lot in common with Kazakhstan, from agriculture 
through to farm machinery through to uranium mining — a lot 
in between. Our regions certainly have a lot in common and are 
made stronger through the relationship that’s demonstrated with 
your presence here today. I hope your meetings with Cameco 
were productive. We wish you well with your time here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We do have that shared love of hockey as well, from 



1730 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2017 

Saskatchewan and Canada and Kazakhstan. I know that, I 
suspect the member from Silver Springs cheered hard for Nik 
Antropov with the Winnipeg Jets over the years. And the 
Deputy Premier’s quite right that we are both proud of 
Saskatchewan, as I’m sure Kazakhstan is, with not just that we 
provide by way of energy and crops to the world, but those 
incredible hockey players that make us all proud worldwide. 
 
So I ask all members to join with me in welcoming this 
important delegation from Kazakhstan to the Saskatchewan 
Assembly. On behalf of a grateful opposition and a grateful 
province, welcome. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Bonk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
welcome the ambassador and Daniyar, someone I’ve known for 
quite a while, Daniyar Seidaliyev. We’ve known each other for 
probably four or five years now, I’d imagine. 
 
Kazakhstan is a place that’s near and dear to my heart; I’ve 
spent quite a bit of time there. I first visited Kazakhstan in 
2002, I believe, and the change in the country since then has 
been just remarkable. So Kazakhstan and Saskatchewan share a 
lot of similarities. Our landscape is almost identical. Our 
climate is almost identical, but most importantly, the people. 
We have warm and hospitable people, just like Kazakhstan. So 
I’d like to welcome you here, and: 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Russian.] 
 
And I look forward to meeting with you later today with the 
Minister of Economy. So I’d like to ask all members to help me 
welcome you to our Legislative Assembly. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 

Indicators for Economic Growth in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure to enter 
into debate on an important motion today, a motion that I will 
be moving at the end of my speech. Before I talk about some 
key economic indicators which show that the policies of our 
government are creating an environment that encourages 
investment growth, we need to talk about what it was like in 
Saskatchewan when the NDP were in government. 
 
The days under the NDP were a very difficult time for our 
province. Saskatchewan businesses were facing hardships. 
Schools were closed, classes were overcrowded. The wait time 
for surgery in Saskatchewan was the longest in Canada. The 
number of care beds were reduced due to hospitals and 
long-term care facilities closing. It was during these years that 
our young people and professionals alike had to leave 
Saskatchewan to go job hunting in other provinces. 
 
We all know between 1996 to 2006 Saskatchewan’s population 
actually decreased by 22,000 people while people were leaving 
our province. NDP leaders did not think it was possible for 

Saskatchewan to prosper. As NDP MLA Harry Van Mulligen 
once said in 2003: 
 

They . . . [prosper] to increase the population of 
Saskatchewan by 100,000 over . . . I forget what number of 
the years, Mr. Speaker. Well it’s so over the top, it is so 
farcical, Mr. Speaker, that it flies in the face of reality. 

 
People and companies were afraid to invest in the province 
under the NDP because the government seemed to be actively 
discouraging investment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since 2007 there have been many changes in 
Saskatchewan. The Saskatchewan Party government took the 
lead and our policies have led the people and business to start 
investing in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only did the NDP policies discourage private 
sector investment, but the NDP failed to invest in schools, 
hospitals, long-term care facilities, highways, bridges, 
overpasses, children’s hospitals, colleges, and universities. This 
is why our government has continued to make record 
investments in infrastructure. Mr. Speaker, we are fixing the 
infrastructure deficit that the NDP left when they were voted 
out of office in 2007. 
 
The members of the NDP like to ask the question, where did the 
money go? Well the answer is very simple. It went to building 
schools; new hospitals; paving roads, new, and renovating old 
roads; long-term care facilities; and many other things that the 
NDP failed to invest in. We have been fixing their mistakes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the policies of our government have created many 
employment opportunities, so people started moving back into 
our province. In fact, Mr. Speaker, in 2008, my family moved 
to Saskatchewan for a better life, and I have seen first-hand the 
amazing opportunity that exists here. 
 
Over the past decade, from 2006 to 2016, Saskatchewan grew 
by more than 130,000. In fact, all 16 Saskatchewan cities saw 
their population increase from 2011 to 2016 by a total of 
59,189, which is 9.9 per cent. 
 
That is a complete turnaround from the previous decade where, 
from 1996 to 2006, the Saskatchewan population actually 
dropped by 22,000 people. That includes many young people. 
In fact when I speak to the people who were around in those 
days, they used to buy luggage for a graduation gift because 
there was no opportunity for them here. 
 
Our government made it clear that Saskatchewan was ready for 
growth. They just needed a government that believed in the 
innovation and potential of this province. The Premier had this 
to say on the announcement of the most recent census numbers: 
 

Obviously, given the current fiscal situation, a growing 
population presents some challenges for our province, but I 
would much rather be facing the challenges of growth than 
the challenges of decline. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is moving in the right direction, and 
the key economic indicators I have mentioned show that. In 
addition, we are seeing strong growth in exports and 



March 16, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1731 

manufacturing. This is the work, and being done by our 
government for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are always a top 
priority of our government. Despite the low commodity price 
and fragile global economic situation, our province is faring 
well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the job report that came out last week showed that 
15,300 jobs were created across Canada. That same report 
showed that 8,000 jobs were created in Saskatchewan, which is 
a 1.5 per cent increase compared to the last year. More people 
were employed in Saskatchewan in February than ever before 
with 563,600 working in our province. We are leading the 
nation in month-over-month job growth, and that is a positive 
indication that the economy is moving in the right direction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to quote the Minister of the Economy 
on what he had to say on the recent job numbers: 
 

Leading the nation in month-over-month job growth is a 
positive indication that the economy is moving in the right 
direction. This along with recent reports on retail sales 
growth, manufacturing sales growth and wholesale trade 
growth show the continued strength and resilience of 
Saskatchewan’s economy. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the seasonally adjusted unemployment rate is 6 
per cent, the third lowest in the country. This compared to the 
national unemployment rate which is 6.6 per cent. The numbers 
are not where we want them but they are moving in the right 
direction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, along with the recent report on retail sales growth, 
manufacturing sales growth, and wholesale trade growth 
showed the continued strength, show a resilience in the 
Saskatchewan economy. It is worth mentioning that 
manufacturing sales in Saskatchewan rose 5.4 per cent, 
seasonally adjusted, between November 2016 and December 
2016, the highest percentage in increase among the provinces, 
which compared to the national average, which also was up. It 
was only by 2.3 per cent. On a year-over-year basis, sales were 
up 11.9 per cent, seasonally adjusted, in Saskatchewan, the 
second highest among the provinces and well ahead of the 4.1 
per cent posted nationally. The Saskatchewan advantage is real, 
and we have seen unprecedented growth and investment in our 
province under our government. 
 
Capital investments. Statistics Canada forecasted total capital 
investment in Saskatchewan will reach $14.5 billion in 2017, an 
increase of 76 per cent since 2007 and a 3 per cent increase 
since 2016. Between 2007 and 2016, there was an amazing 
$143 billion invested into Saskatchewan’s economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since 2006 Saskatchewan’s GDP [gross domestic 
product] has increased by 25 per cent. This is the 
second-highest GDP growth among the provinces over the last 
decade. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we excelled in exports. Since 2006 Saskatchewan 
exports have grown by 62 per cent. This is the largest increase 
across Canada. This compares . . . The total national export 
increase was 17 per cent. 

Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, Saskatchewan grew by 
more than 130,000 people over the last decade according to the 
2016 census. This is the most growth in any 10-year period in 
the province over the last 84 years. In fact to see this kind of 
growth, you have go back to a decade between 1922 and 1932. 
According to the latest Statistics Canada estimate, 
Saskatchewan’s population continued to grow, and there were 
1,155,393 people living in the province as of October 2016. 
 
[11:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, people of Saskatchewan have a good quality of 
life. According to the most recent Statistics Canada data, the 
average weekly earning in Saskatchewan reached more than 
$1,000 for the first time in the province’s history and are the 
third highest among the provinces. In fact in December of last 
year, average weekly earnings were $1,010.37. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have very successful businesses in our 
province. A great example of this, the Saskatchewan mining 
industry has invested close to $30 billion over the last decade. 
In the past 10 years, the uranium industry has invested $4.8 
billion, including construction of $2.6 billion in the Cigar Lake 
mine, the world’s second-largest uranium mine. 
 
Mr. Speaker, from 2005 onward, existing potash producers in 
the province has committed $13.5 billion to expand many of the 
mines in Saskatchewan. K+S potash has committed to spend 
$4.1 billion in the construction of the Legacy solution potash 
mine near Bethune. To date, BHP Billiton has committed $3.8 
billion towards the development of the Jansen Lake project and 
its other Saskatchewan potash interests. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that the price of oil has seen lower prices 
but we still see significant investment in the industry. The oil 
and natural gas industry invested $4.4 billion in Saskatchewan 
in 2015, showing a 42 per cent increase in yearly investment 
since 2007. It is not an accident that since 2007 we have seen 
the growth, since 2007 is when the NDP were voted out of the 
office. 
 
Further, 2016 investment in the oil industry is estimated to be 
$3.6 billion — this estimated from the Government of 
Saskatchewan 2016-17 mid-year report. 
 
This is good news. Investment means jobs for our province and 
we support this investment, unlike the NDP who seems to only 
want to support the carbon tax and other policies that would 
want to see the oil industry and all carbon-intensive industry 
shut down. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there’s a further reason to be optimistic in a 
province, in the province’s future. We see, in the Fraser 
Institute’s 2016 annual global survey of mining executives, that 
Saskatchewan was ranked as the most attractive place in the 
world for mining companies to invest. Saskatchewan ranked 
number one out of 104 jurisdictions in the world. Competitive 
tax regime, efficient permitting procedure, certainty 
surrounding environmental regulation and land claims were the 
reasons for the province’s top rating. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also see the Fraser Institute’s annual global 
survey of petroleum sector executives ranked Saskatchewan as 



1732 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2017 

the most attractive place in Canada for oil and gas companies to 
invest. In fact, Saskatchewan ranked fourth in the world behind 
only Oklahoma, Texas, and Kansas. Alberta, on the other hand, 
ranked 43rd. Alberta has ranked 43rd in the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the numbers I have talked about shows us that our 
government is on the right track. Our policies are encouraging 
the growth, attracting investment, and are keeping our 
population growing. 
 
To bring me to the conclusion of my speech and, Mr. Speaker, 
it is my pleasure to move the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly recognizes the recent strength in 
Saskatchewan job numbers, alongside a growing 
population, as strong economic indicators that the policies 
of this government are creating an environment that 
encourages economic growth. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Regina Pasqua has moved: 
 

That this Assembly recognizes the recent strength in 
Saskatchewan job numbers, alongside a growing 
population, as strong economic indicators that the policies 
of this government are creating an environment that 
encourages economic growth. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 
Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
always, it’s always kind of a check-your-wallet moment when 
you see the Sask Party launching into a parade of 
self-congratulations because, you know . . . I want to state this 
right from the start: we’re glad to see the improvement in the 
job numbers in the information relayed by Statistics Canada last 
Friday. Certainly, I don’t know if it was the disbelief that was 
crashing the Statistics Canada website in terms of people trying 
to, you know, see precisely what had happened in the economy 
here in Saskatchewan or across the country. But again, those 
statistics, behind every statistic is a real human being, Mr. 
Speaker. And we’re very glad to see an improvement for that 
month in terms of the job situation in Saskatchewan. 
 
We’re glad to see it for First Nations and Métis folks in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, where again, the kind of unemployment 
levels that still exist are far too high and are unacceptable, Mr. 
Speaker. And it represents a lost opportunity, not just for those 
communities but for the entirety of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
in terms of realizing that tremendous human potential that is 
going to waste represented by those numbers. So we’re glad to 
see those very high numbers in terms of off-reserve First 
Nations and Métis unemployment come down for one month. 
We’re glad to see that, Mr. Speaker, but certainly it’s not where 
it needs to be. 
 
We’re glad to see the overall unemployment picture improve 
for the most part, Mr. Speaker. There’s certainly problems in 
the reporting district in and around Prince Albert that should be, 
again, cause for caution and, you know, calls for a redoubling 
of efforts on the part of government to work to make sure that 

you’re doing what you can to develop that human capital, to 
provide the economic capital opportunities to ensure that 
opportunities are realized, and also, Mr. Speaker, to look to the 
critical infrastructure role investments that this government can 
make, should be playing. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, we don’t dispute any of that, and I 
can’t emphasize this enough. In the McCall family, we’ve had 
great fortune when it came to the whole situation around 
unemployment. But certainly we have folks in our lives, in our 
household, that know what it’s like to be laid off, that know 
what it’s like to have tenuous employment, to not know where 
that next paycheque is going to come from. 
 
So we’re very glad to see one month of improved performance 
in terms of the job picture here in Saskatchewan. But what 
we’re not impressed with, Mr. Speaker, is again the way that 
this government takes one month and turns that into the . . . I’m 
always reminded of when George W. Bush declared the war in 
Iraq won and, you know, come flying in on an aircraft carrier 
and, you know, the big banner reading “mission accomplished.” 
 
And certainly this is a government that when things aren’t 
going so well, it’s like, oh well, what are we to do? It’s just the 
resource sector. Resource prices are down. You know, what are 
we to do? And they stand and say, you know, the buck stops 
somewhere else. They decry their responsibility for those 
circumstances, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But right on time, you know, you get one month of good news 
. . . And I’m not disputing the quality of that news. What I am 
disputing, Mr. Speaker, is the way that this government takes 
one month and then declares, and again referring to the words 
in the motion: 
 

That this Assembly recognizes the recent strength in 
Saskatchewan job numbers, alongside a growing 
population, [all fair enough] as strong economic indicators 
that the policies of this government are creating an 
environment that encourages economic growth. 

 
And the chests got puffed up, Mr. Speaker, and it was like, well 
you know, we’re big-time job creators, and that’s how it’s 
rolling on this side of the House. And it’s . . . Again, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s the kind of hubris that was on offer, you know, in 
2007 when these folks took over the government benches, 
where certainly they were handed a fine fiscal circumstance, 
Mr. Speaker. They were handed an economy that was growing. 
They were handed a natural resource revenue regime that 
certainly again they’re taking credit for it. They were handed, 
you know, $2 billion cash on hand, Mr. Speaker, a rainy day 
fund. 
 
And they were given a pretty good hand to play that, in their 
more thoughtful moments, Mr. Speaker, members of that 
government will acknowledge. And certainly I’ve . . . And as 
much as a surprise that it is, and it gets fewer and fewer in 
between, Mr. Speaker, I’ve even heard the Premier 
acknowledge that on occasion, if you can imagine. But that’s 
usually the exception, and the rule is the way that this 
government takes, you know, one . . .  
 
You know, it’s not about let’s keep building on good news; it’s 



March 16, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1733 

like let’s take a moment to celebrate ourselves, Mr. Speaker. 
Let’s throw a little party for us to thump our chests and say, you 
know, all that stuff we’re talking about with the resource sector 
being in a downturn, and revenues are . . . There’s a knock-on 
effect and on and on. You know, all of that goes out the door, 
and it’s suddenly into this, let’s throw a parade and, you know, 
deploy the confetti cannons. 
 
And I guess, Mr. Speaker, that they’re picking this month of all 
months to do this is kind of, you know again, in terms of the 
way that this government likes to tempt fate with their hubris 
and their sort of the way they get consumed by themselves. This 
is on the eve of a budget that . . . Again they haven’t had the 
decency to table a third quarter report to give us an accurate 
picture of what the finances are looking like, but they do like to 
talk about how everything is on the table. And everything 
except for, you know, the number of MLAs or the wages of that 
cabinet, Mr. Speaker. That’s not on the table. Or you know, 
what’s happening in terms of governance across the province 
generally; that’s not on the table. 
 
But what is on the table of course, and you know that the first 
stop on the tour of the cuts that this government is going to be 
making, that one of the very first places they stopped in to hand 
out the layoff notices was with 230 cleaners. And Mr. Speaker, 
I’m not in the habit of . . . I don’t agree with everything the man 
writes, but certainly I recommend for the people of 
Saskatchewan, if you get a chance, please read from the 15 
March 2017 Regina Leader-Post column by Murray Mandryk, 
the column entitled, “Fighting deficit on the backs of cleaners 
accomplishes little.” And again, it’s an indictment of the 
misplaced priorities of this government when it comes to who’s 
going to be held to account for the budget mess that this 
government has created. 
 
And you know, I guess I could quote as well, Mr. Speaker, from 
an earlier column where I again, I agreed with him. It’s a bit of 
a streak, Mr. Speaker. But I believe the title was, and again 
quoting, “Wall, Doherty . . . [little more than] Devine-era 
incompetents.” You know, I guess, I guess that’s . . . And I hear 
the Finance minister yipping away over there, but on he goes. 
And I’m sure I just wish he had that much to say about the third 
quarter report, but again we’ve got to wait for the budget. 
 
One of the stranger things I heard yesterday, Mr. Speaker, was 
the member from Walsh Acres say, well just you wait until 
March 23rd and we’re going to look to you for your plan. 
 
[11:30] 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of . . . I get, I get why they 
want to throw parades. I get why they want to, you know, have 
that mission-accomplished moment for every little bit of good 
news that’s out there. And again, increased jobs and better job 
numbers, that’s legitimate good news. 
 
But this government, you know, in terms of what they have to 
do with it, something they’ve got direct control over are the 
choices that they make and the way that we’ll see that wrapped 
up in a budget this week to come. And the way that, you know, 
it’s going so far, Mr. Speaker, is that when they say 
everything’s on the table, it’s everything for those that are the 
most vulnerable. It’s everything for those who are the hardest 

working and, you know, the most modestly paid in the public 
service, let alone the 3.5 routine they want to pull for the 
entirety of the public service. So, Mr. Speaker, you’ll forgive 
me some skepticism when it comes to the way that this 
government likes to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you and to all members of the Assembly, it is an 
honour to stand before you today and enter into this debate on 
the economic growth in the province. 
 
I will begin, Mr. Speaker, by citing the most recent labour 
survey that was released this month from Statistics Canada 
regarding February’s employment numbers in this province. 
There were 563,600 people employed in Saskatchewan last 
month. More people employed in February in Saskatchewan 
than ever before. There were 8,000 jobs created in this province 
compared to January of this year. I want to repeat that — 8,000 
jobs. This represents an increase of 1.4 per cent which is the 
highest percentage rate increase among the provinces. Maybe a 
headline read: “Saskatchewan leading Canada in job growth” 
and “A very positive direction” and “Jobless rate rises in 
Saskatchewan in February.” 
 
Nationally employment was up 15,300 from January. That 
means that half of the increase in jobs in the country came from 
our province. Mr. Speaker, within that increase of 8,000 jobs 
and an increase of 8,600 jobs compared to one year ago, 3,300 
of those jobs were full time. Off-reserve Aboriginal 
employment was up 4,400 jobs for eight straight months of 
year-over-year increases, and Aboriginal youth employment 
was up 1,000 jobs for 10 months of year-over-year increases. 
Major year-over-year gains were reported for the retail and the 
wholesale trade sectors up 7,800 jobs; professional, scientific, 
and technical services up 4,800 jobs; educational services up 
4,500 jobs; and manufacturing up 3,000 jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is most exciting to see the manufacturing sales 
in Saskatchewan were up 5.4 per cent seasonally adjusted 
between November and December last year, the highest 
percentage increase among the provinces. In December, 
manufacturing sales in Saskatchewan totalled $1.3 billion. 
Year-over-year manufacturing sales were up 11.9 per cent 
which was the second highest among the provinces. 
 
Next let’s talk about the unemployment rate in February. 
Saskatchewan’s seasonally adjusted rate was 6 per cent, the 
third lowest among the provinces. Only BC and Manitoba had 
lower unemployment rates. The youth unemployment rate for 
people aged 15 to 24 was 10.3 per cent, second lowest among 
the provinces behind only BC. Those are the most recent job 
numbers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now let’s take a look at the average weekly earnings according 
to Statistics Canada. Saskatchewan workers saw the highest 
month-over-month percentage growth among the provinces in 
December, 2016. Those average weekly earnings were above 
$1,000. Our Saskatchewan workers are third highest among the 
provinces. This is the highest average weekly earnings in the 
province’s history. 



1734 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2017 

These are a lot of figures to digest. What do they mean? They 
mean that, despite the slowdown in the resource sector that has 
impacted government revenues, Saskatchewan is leading the 
nation with Canada’s highest rate of job growth. They mean 
that, despite the recent economic challenges, the men and 
women of Saskatchewan continue to work hard to contribute to 
the economic prosperity of the province. They continue to 
believe that hope beats fear. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have three daughters. Our oldest daughter, 
Amy, is a chartered professional accountant and a mother of 
three. Monique, our middle daughter, is a lawyer and gave birth 
to her first child last November. Both of them have made 
Saskatoon their home to work and raise their families. Our 
youngest daughter, Janelle, completed a Master of Public 
Administration degree at the Johnson-Shoyama Graduate 
School of Public Policy located at the University of 
Saskatchewan. She was the youngest student in her program. I 
am hopeful that she will choose to remain in the province as 
well. 
 
Our daughters are an example of how our fortunes have 
changed in this province. I remember a time not so long ago 
under the NDP when thousands of our brightest and most 
capable young people would leave this province in search of 
employment elsewhere because the job opportunities did not 
exist here. Thanks to the hard work of our government, young 
people are choosing Saskatchewan to be their home after 
graduation. I am grateful that grandparents like me now have a 
better chance of being close to their grandchildren. 
 
Now I would like to draw your attention to the latest population 
statistics, Mr. Speaker. The 2016 census population figures that 
were released in February by Statistics Canada show that 
Saskatchewan grew by 64,971 people in the past five years. 
Saskatchewan’s population grew by more than 130,000 people 
over the past decade from the 2006 census to the 2016 census. 
We have the second-highest growth rate among the provinces at 
6.3 per cent. There were 1,155,393 people living here as of 
October 2016. 
 
The NDP said it was impossible for Saskatchewan to grow by 
even 100,000 people in 10 years. This government has 
exceeded that goal. Every single one of our 16 Saskatchewan 
cities saw their populations increase from 2011 to 2016 by a 
total of 58,189 people, or 9.9 per cent. Saskatoon came in third 
for growth among the census metropolitan areas at 12.5 per 
cent, and Regina was fourth at 11.8 per cent. Towns and 
villages across the province also saw their populations increase. 
Compare that growth to the 10 years from 1996 to 2006 when 
the NDP were in power when Saskatchewan’s population 
actually dropped by 22,000. That is a stark difference, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Gone are the days when Saskatchewan’s 
greatest export was the people who called Saskatchewan home. 
 
We have seen unprecedented growth in investment in this 
province. Statistics Canada forecasts total capital investment 
will reach 14.5 billion in 2017, an increase of 76 per cent since 
2007. Saskatchewan’s GDP has increased by 25 per cent since 
2006. Exports have grown by 62 per cent in that same time, the 
largest increase of all provinces. 
 
In the past decade the mining industry has invested close to 

30 billion, and the uranium industry has invested 4.8 billion. 
Agriculture exports have grown by 186 per cent over the past 
10 years. That is a remarkable achievement. We have over 750 
more doctors practising in this province since 2007. That’s a 
44 per cent increase. Let’s not forget that the Fraser Institute’s 
2016 annual global survey of mining executives ranks 
Saskatchewan as the most attractive place in the world for 
mining companies to invest. When the Fraser Institute surveyed 
petroleum sector executives last year, Saskatchewan ranked 
fourth in the world as the most attractive place for oil and gas 
companies to invest behind only Oklahoma, Texas, and Kansas. 
 
So how did this happen, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Did a fairy 
godmother wave a magic wand over Saskatchewan to create 
8,000 jobs in one month or increase our population to over 
1.1 million people? The benefits of growth and investment in 
Saskatchewan allow for greater investments in our quality of 
life. How do we explain that in the investment, the likes that we 
have never before witnessed in this province?  
 
The policies of this Saskatchewan Party government, that’s 
how. Policies that make Saskatchewan a good place to start and 
grow a business. Policies that attract, train, and develop a 
skilled workforce. Policies that support increased trade, 
increased investment, and increased export through engagement 
with international markets. Policies that advance the strength of 
our natural resources. Policies that encourage people to move to 
our province rather than move out of our province. Policies that 
invest in the infrastructure that is required for growth. 
 
We know that an increase in population means that there will be 
greater demands on health care, education, social services, and 
infrastructure. I would like to quote our Premier: 
 

Obviously, given the current fiscal situation, a growing 
population presents some challenges for our province, but I 
would much rather be facing the challenges of growth than 
the challenges of decline. 

 
I couldn’t agree more. We know that, as government, we have 
more work to do. While we are seeing indicators that our 
economy is showing signs of growth, this government faces 
some difficult but necessary decisions with the budget next 
week to address our significant resource revenue shortfall. But 
these latest job numbers and our growing population reflect that 
we are moving in the right direction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, I would like to offer my support to 
the motion brought forward by my colleague from Regina 
Pasqua. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have to say I 
find this so passing strange to get up after one month’s report 
and we have the government jumping up and congratulating 
themselves, patting themselves on the back. 
 
And once again . . . And I don’t know whether it’s a hazing 
thing over there or they have to dare new members to repeat old 
speeches because we hear the same thing, the same old lines. 
And I couldn’t believe that member there or the member from 



March 16, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1735 

Regina Pasqua. I don’t know whether they believe in the theory 
of abrupt appearance, the abrupt appearance that there was no 
oil in Saskatchewan prior to 2007, and there was no potash 
prior to November 2007. And what do you know? Those folks 
discovered it. 
 
You know, I just find it very interesting how they kind of forget 
what happened in 2005, 2006, and the first three-quarters of 
2007 before they took over, and how this province became a 
have province. And we were all very happy to be a part of that. 
But when she talks about policies or the member from Regina 
Pasqua talks about policies, I’d like to know what specific 
policy. Was that Enterprise Saskatchewan that you were talking 
about? Yes, Enterprise Saskatchewan. Whatever happened? 
Now that’s an oldie but goldie from 2007-08-09. Whatever 
happened to that? Whatever happened to . . . Oh, there’s silence 
in this room. Nobody remembers Enterprise Saskatchewan. 
What happened to that? 
 
But we have these stooges from the Devine era that are coming 
back and bringing back this abrupt appearance. There is no 
answer to that. 
 
I want to know what happened when they congratulate 
themselves on the back. Whatever happened to those policies? 
And they found out, best to keep our policies going, our policies 
that got potash industry going up, that got population going 
here. And you know that. Members over there know that for 
sure. They sure do. 
 
So as they congratulate themselves on this one-month’s report 
. . . And we are very glad to see these kinds of results. We are 
very . . .  
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I realize that members would like to 
all get into this debate, but currently the member from 
Saskatoon Centre has the floor. I recognize the member. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to 
highlight on another great indicator things are changing in 
Saskatchewan that happened just a couple of weeks ago and 
that was the by-election in Meewasin, which I think speaks 
more volumes about people seeing through that side, that 
government side, and what they’re bringing forward to the 
people of Saskatchewan. We talked about government policies. 
We talked about policies such as the cuts to health and 
education, and the sell-off of the Crowns, particularly SaskTel. 
And what did the people do? Well 1,500 of their supporters 
stayed home; more supporters came out for us. People wouldn’t 
come out to support that kind of policy from that kind of 
government. 
 
Again silence in the room. They have nothing to say about that 
because that’s the true measure of what the people of 
Saskatchewan are talking about. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do want to highlight just one article. 
There are many articles and we don’t have much time, but here 
again we were talking about the journalist Murray Mandryk and 
his column that he wrote, “Dumping government cleaning staff 
is ironic and sad.” And I have to tell you that this is so 

interesting. There are a number, and I quote: 
 

There are any number of ironies in the provincial 
government telling us it’s just a business decision to 
explore dumping low-paid cleaning staff in favour of 
private contracting. 

 
[11:45] 
 
Did we not hear that very answer today in question period while 
we were asking about the four very important positions about 
gambling over at the casinos? And then this is one of the things 
I have to say, and I quote: 
 

If there is one ministry which this government could do 
without, it’s likely Central Services. In fact, Central didn’t 
exist as a stand-alone ministry three years ago . . . [It 
became] a safe haven for Premier Brad Wall to send 
ministers who struggle with more formidable cabinet 
responsibilities. 

 
And did we not see that in question period again today, where 
we couldn’t get a straight answer about the laying off of four 
very important positions? And yet they stand up and 
congratulate themselves on that good news in terms of the stats. 
But you’ve got to have more than one month . . . makes a trend. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, every day I stand up and I’ve 
been asked to present a petition in terms of pay equity, and I 
think that’s a very good indicator. Now today we did hear 
applause on our petition about domestic abuse, domestic 
violence. That’s very good. But I have yet to hear any applause 
from that side when it comes to talking about pay equity, when 
it comes to women’s salaries here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And we know that the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives 
found that in Saskatoon, 2016, women earned on average 63 
cents for every dollar that a man makes, and in Regina women 
earned on average 73 cents for every dollar that a man makes. 
According to the most recent StatsCan data, the national wage 
gap for full-time workers is 72 cents for every dollar a man 
makes. 
 
Now this is the report actually right here, and it is very 
interesting. It is actually pretty tough on Saskatchewan. It talks 
about the best and worst places to be a woman in Canada, 2016, 
and I really would encourage the members opposite, before they 
start bragging and taking their self congratulations too 
seriously, how are they doing in Canada, in our cities here? And 
what is really happening for women? And if that’s the case, 
what is it for others? 
 
In Regina, it’s the 18th worst city in Canada to be a woman in 
terms of economic security, education, health, leadership, and 
security. Overall ranking is 18th. I think that’s a sad indictment 
of where we are today. And we can do better, and I would 
rather see a motion from the government to say . . . And they 
always say this, there’s so much more work to be done, so 
much more work to be done. 
 
And yet we see strategies come out that are half-baked. And in 
fact what it says is that we are not going to address . . . The 
poverty strategy, said very clearly that they are not going to 



1736 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2017 

address the issue of women’s . . . domestic violence until there 
is money to do that. That’s just not right. That’s just not right. 
But here, here is . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well that’s 
what the report said, and you know it. You know it. That’s the 
report, black and white. 
 
In Saskatoon, out of 25 cities, it’s ranked 21st as the worst city 
to be a woman in 2016, in terms of economic security, 
education, health, leadership, and security. In security, in 
security — and this is very serious, Mr. Deputy Speaker — it’s 
25th. It’s 25th. The worst city in Canada to be a woman in 
terms of security. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think there’s lots of issues that we 
have, and we could take a moment and when we see good news 
like last month’s job reports, fair enough, we should take a 
minute and say okay, that’s a good start. 
 
But what’s going to happen with the budget next week? And as 
my colleague from Regina said, it’s just passing strange that on 
the eve of that, when we’re afraid of cuts — we’ve just seen the 
beginning of it in terms of 230 cleaning staff — what more will 
be coming? You know, this is something that really worries us 
here in Saskatchewan because they’re threatening to tear up 
contracts, enforcing pay cuts, and job losses, and you know, this 
is really something that we are worried about. And what does 
that mean in terms of when we’re finally . . . The province is 
coming together and things are looking good, will this 
government put that all at risk next week? That’s the challenge 
that we have before us. What are their plans? 
 
And of course we have a minister who will not even release the 
third quarter report — that would be a good start, something 
basic like that — and is hiding behind, well we need more time. 
But right as soon as they get stats from Stats Canada about 
improving job numbers, they jump up and they want to 
congratulate themselves. 
 
So we have a lot of concerns, you know. Among them, and I 
know the new member from Saskatoon Meewasin will be 
talking about this, we’re leading the country in food bank usage 
among children. Our child poverty rates are among the highest 
in Canada. Our HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] infection 
rate doubles the national average. And, Mr. Speaker, you know, 
the one thing this government is not talking about, is when they 
came to power there were 20,000 people looking for work, 
20,000 people. And what is it today? It’s 40,000. It’s double. 
It’s double. 
 
So yes sir, they sure have got a lot more work to do, and that’s 
what the motion should have been about and not this 
self-congratulations where they know it’s way too soon, way 
too soon. And they have . . . And they shout from the sides, Mr. 
Speaker, but I really do have to say, it’s way too soon. And we 
have to see what happens next Wednesday on the budget and 
what that will really mean for women, the working poor, and 
will we be able to keep some of these jobs here in 
Saskatchewan. Therefore I won’t be supporting this motion. 
Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Mr. Nerlien: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. At the end of 
my comments, I will be supporting the motion by the member 
from Regina Pasqua: 
 

That this Assembly recognizes the recent strength in 
Saskatchewan job numbers, alongside a growing 
population, as strong economic indicators that the policies 
of this government are creating an environment that 
encourages economic growth. 

 
Mr. Speaker, our government has created an environment where 
our province is growing because people recognize and respect 
that job creation is not a symbolic concept, but is in fact about 
real people achieving their potential through responding to a 
new economy with enthusiasm and the Saskatchewan spirit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the numbers that this debate is built upon have 
been well-positioned by my colleagues. I will simply touch on a 
few for perspective in my comments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our seasonally adjusted unemployment rate 
dropped from 6.4 per cent in January to 6 per cent in February, 
second only to British Columbia in the country. Mr. Speaker, 
this is about jobs, and the trends are pointing in the right 
direction. Despite members opposite ongoing campaign of 
misinformation, public sector employment is actually up year 
over year by 4.2 per cent, while private sector employment is up 
3.3 per cent. It’s important to note that overall public sector 
employment includes federal, provincial, and municipal jobs of 
140,300. Private sector employment in the province is 320,500, 
and the self-employment number is 102,800. Mr. Speaker, jobs 
mean growth and growth means jobs. 
 
Our government’s track record has led to 130,000 new citizens 
in the province. New citizens means new demands on services 
which equates to new jobs and new opportunities for the people 
of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, there are 5,000 more women 
and 3,500 more men working than a year ago. Aboriginal 
employment is up 4,400, 10 per cent year over year. Aboriginal 
youth employment is up 1,000 for the 10th consecutive month 
of growth. 
 
In context, Mr. Deputy Speaker, remember when the NDP were 
in power and jobs were sent out of the province. Teachers, 
nurses, doctors, and thousands of Saskatchewan residents 
moved away. 
 
Further, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite would never let the 
facts get in the way of a good conspiracy theory. Mr. Speaker, 
anyone interested can drive around the bypass site and see the 
scope of the project. Thousands of taxpaying Saskatchewan 
jobs have been created. Millions of dollars are circulating 
through the Saskatchewan economy as a result of this project. I 
find it troubling that rather than celebrate the engineering 
marvel in front of us, members opposite are willing, day after 
day, to attack the very economic benefits and Saskatchewan 
spirit that imagines the opportunities before us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, their opposition to the thousands of jobs created 
and the safety and efficient movement of goods is truly 
troubling. Mr. Speaker, if you listen to the members opposite, 
you would surely believe that the great people of this province 
cannot find their way without the government holding their 



March 16, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1737 

hands. Where have they been for the last 100-plus years as the 
people of Saskatchewan, those who arrived at our borders with 
nothing but the shirts on their back, created this dynamic, 
world-leading province? Mr. Speaker, for decades the people of 
this province have been the innovators in manufacturing, in 
agriculture, in mining, in forestry, and in building infrastructure 
to support a small but fully engaged population. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are the number-one mining investment 
destination in the world for a reason. Mr. Speaker, it is well 
recognized that our government has created an environment for 
growth and job creation. Otherwise why would world-renowned 
companies like Cameco invest to develop Cigar Lake as the 
world’s highest grade uranium mine located in northern 
Saskatchewan? They believe in opportunity. 
 
BHP Billiton has committed billions towards the Jansen Lake 
potash mine, and in so doing, are developing new ways of 
dropping the shaft and developing new infrastructure for 
movement of product. In addition, they are investing in the 
surrounding communities, creating a positive workplace for 
families in the area. Mr. Speaker, this is a major corporation 
that understands the principle that we hold dear: that jobs and 
community are not mutually exclusive, whether public sector or 
private sector. Mr. Speaker, they believe in our workers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, K+S Potash has committed billions in 
construction to the Legacy mine near Bethune. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, they are prepared to assume risk and move forward. 
Not only do companies like Cameco and BHP and K+S and 
hundreds of others make these incredible investments in our 
province, but they develop new technologies here that can be 
used and marketed around the world. Mr. Speaker, that is about 
jobs. Mr. Speaker, these companies invest in the communities 
they are engaged in. They invest in employee education and 
training. They invest in safety and community resources. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member from Melville-Saltcoats 
reminded me yesterday that the Municipal Potash Tax Sharing 
Administration Board distributed 20,904,000 tax-sharing dollars 
last year. Mr. Deputy Speaker, does that sound like the evil big 
business that the members opposite would have you see? This is 
support for local infrastructure. Mr. Deputy Speaker, do the 
corporate donations to thousands of community projects across 
the province sound like an uncaring group? 
 
Let me also pay tribute to those that are self-employed, which is 
defined as both incorporated and unincorporated self-employed 
persons, the entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan, those that may 
have a small business, those that work from home, those that 
provide the most basic of services. Transition from employment 
to self-employment is not a bad thing. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
beyond the imagination of members opposite, thousands of 
people choose, I repeat, choose to be self-employed private 
industry participants because they see opportunity in front of 
them. They understand that risk is a real factor of 
self-actualization, and that they have the belief in themselves to 
be successful and are willing to challenge themselves to the 
highest possible standards. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the farmers of Saskatchewan, the small 
businesses, the mom-and-pop operations are the backbone of 
our economy and the creator of a vast number of jobs. I took the 

opportunity yesterday to check the SaskJobs website. 7,154 jobs 
were available in Saskatchewan, including 654 in oil, gas and 
mining, and agriculture; 1,782 in trades, transport, and 
construction; 294 in management; 559 in business, finance, and 
administration; and I could go on. Mr. Deputy Speaker, these 
are real jobs for real people. This is only one of the many 
resources available to the people of Saskatchewan to find 
fulfillment in their chosen fields. 
 
[12:00] 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have a robust economy and a robust 
job market as a result of the decisions our government 
continues to make. Mr. Deputy Speaker, members opposite are 
so opposed to private participation in the economy that the 
member from Athabasca even spoke against the participation of 
private companies and social agencies in the development of 
social impact bonds. Imagine the crippling ideology that is so 
anti everything that they can’t even imagine the value of 
community participation in developing real solutions for social 
concerns in the province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, jobs must be considered as a continuum. 
As we all know, a job generates a combination of current 
buying power as well as an accumulation of wealth over time. 
Despite what members opposite would have you believe, I 
would position that the majority of workers today value their 
personal ability to succeed, to reach a level of self-actualization 
through a combination of education, personal priorities and 
opportunities, and their ability to face the world head on. To 
many young people I’ve had the good fortune of working with 
over the past number of years, it is not the golden handcuffs of 
a career that inspires them, but the opportunity for personal 
achievement. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, ask yourself what the retail, wholesale, 
and service marketplace might look like in five years. Imagine 
the consequences of the astounding pace of change in 
technology today. Mr. Deputy Speaker, imagine what the 
advent of drone technology, self-driving cars and the trucks, 
communication technology, development in health sciences, 
and innovations in mining and production systems might look 
like. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if I can quote in closing, in the words of 
the 21st century American philosopher, Larry the Cable Guy 
says, “Let’s git ’er done.”  
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s always 
a privilege to rise in the House in the 75-minute debate and 
have an opportunity to enter the discussion here. I want to start 
out just echoing the comments from my colleague from 
Elphinstone-Centre where he said, of course we’re glad to see 
the improvement in job numbers for this one month, 
particularly because those job numbers are real people, Mr. 
Speaker, and real people are impacted by decisions that this 
government makes. We only need to take a moment and talk to 
the cleaners in this building about this government’s decision to 
privatize and cut their jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 



1738 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2017 

I think I would like to direct the government, to provide them a 
little piece of wisdom from Reader’s Digest, from Mary 
Waldrip who is an author and an editor. And she points out that 
“When someone sings his own praise, he always gets the tune 
too high,” Mr. Speaker. This is a government who, at a time . . . 
Now is not the time to boast about one month’s job 
improvements, Mr. Speaker. This government needs to spend 
less time boasting and more time addressing our abysmal record 
here in this province in so many places. 
 
Actually my colleague from Saskatoon Centre pointed out some 
of the places this government should be concentrating its 
efforts. When we think about the track record of this 
government . . . This province, our province of Saskatchewan 
leads the country in food bank usage among children, Mr. 
Speaker. Saskatchewan child poverty rates are among the 
highest in Canada. The HIV infection rate in Saskatchewan is 
almost double the national average. Saskatchewan led all other 
provinces in its rates of reported intimate partner violence and 
violence against children in 2015. 
 
I think about this government boasting a little bit earlier this 
week too, as the Health critic, Mr. Speaker. They sent out a 
release about the number of physicians practising here in 
Saskatchewan and, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to me that they 
can boast about this. They’re telling us that we have more docs 
but they fail to mention specific numbers from its own report, 
that people are actually getting fewer services from those 
doctors than they were in 2007. 
 
This is coming out of the ministry’s own reports, Mr. Speaker. 
They can send out a news release about the number of doctors, 
but they need to go check out the emergency rooms. They need 
to go check out the specialists’ wait lists, Mr. Speaker. They 
need to talk to people on the front line. 
 
So I’m wondering how this government thinks that a 3.5 per 
cent cut to health care staff, the support staff, the people around 
doctors, is going to help provide services here in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. But you know, the one really distasteful thing for 
me, Mr. Speaker, that stood out for me again was the boasting 
at the same time they were cutting 230 jobs of some of the most 
modestly paid people here in this province, Mr. Speaker, 
modestly paid public servants who average about $18 an hour, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you know, ironically, this stood out for me as well. You 
know where some of these folks heard about their impending 
job losses? Just down the way, Mr. Speaker, at the Canada 
Saskatchewan Production Studios. The soundstage, Mr. 
Speaker, where just five years ago . . . Budget is approaching 
now, Mr. Speaker. This time five years ago, this government 
chose to cut the film employment tax credit, Mr. Speaker, 
which gutted the film industry here in Saskatchewan, which 
sent jobs . . . 
 
It was funny listening to the member from Churchill-Wildwood 
talk about young people being able to stay. We have a film 
school here in Regina. Do you know what that decision meant, 
that cut to the film tax credit meant? That many of those 
graduates from that film school would never be able to earn a 
living here in Saskatchewan. It chased hundreds of people who 
work directly in the industry out of the province, but impacted 

their families as well. 
 
Speaking of physician recruitment, I know of one family in 
particular. We lost a specialist who was married to someone 
who worked in the film industry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s interesting when we talk about the film industry. This is a 
government who, right from the get-go, had no interest in 
saving it. We had the three pillars. We had SCN [Saskatchewan 
Communications Network] which was the broadcast, our 
provincial broadcast agency that helped trigger licences. We 
had a sound stage, a beautiful sound stage that now sits empty 
and gets used for things like firing people, Mr. Speaker, and the 
film tax credit. 
 
Other provinces know the benefit of the film industry, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m just looking — this actually makes me very sad — 
it’s from Reel Academy. It’s just an infographic about Canadian 
film jobs, Mr. Speaker. You look at BC. I know you can’t see 
this, and I’ll talk little bit about numbers of people in the film 
industry here, Mr. Speaker, and the need for a diversified 
economy. 
 
I just want to point to the fact that the day after the budget last 
year, the Finance minister, on CBC [Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation] radio, I recall him talking about how of course 
we’re having economic challenges. We live in a resource-based 
economy. No kidding, Mr. Speaker. This is a government who 
cut one of those support pieces that could have helped when we 
saw the perfect storm of potash, oil, uranium, everything drop, 
Mr. Speaker. We could’ve had a film industry that helped 
bolster us at a time when things were tough, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the film industry . . . This government’s own commissioned 
study over the lifetime of the film tax credit, the total 
investment by government was just over 100 million, Mr. 
Speaker, and it generated $623.4 million in economic activity, 
Mr. Speaker. On average they estimated that it created 851 jobs, 
Mr. Speaker. Other provinces know this is the case. Again, 
pointing to the infographic from Reel Academy, Mr. Speaker, 
you see the bar for BC and Ontario are high. Quebec is doing 
well, Mr. Speaker. Alberta and Manitoba and Atlantic Canada 
all have production. There is nothing registering in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to tell you a little bit about . . . So Manitoba, a province 
not dissimilar from Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, Manitoba, 
“Our film and television industry . . .” This is from the 
Manitoba government: 
 

Our film and television industry employs over 1,400 
Manitobans as cast, crew, and industry support staff. In the 
past ten years alone, about . . . [a billion] worth of 
production has happened here. Over half of that amount 
was spent in the province on salaries, services and supplies 
[Mr. Speaker]. 

 
We can point to Calgary actually, Mr. Speaker, who opened up 
a sound stage a year ago, Mr. Speaker. And I just want to draw 
your attention to an article where, “New Calgary film studio 
hoped to help struggling Alberta economy.” “Officials say a 
new film studio being constructed in southeast Calgary is 
nearing completion and could help bolster Alberta’s struggling 



March 16, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1739 

economy.” And that’s from January 1st, 2016. Just a short while 
later they actually had the grand opening. 
 
“Film Commissioner with Calgary Economic Development 
Luke Azevedo said the facility will be a benefit to the local 
economy, especially with a deflated Canadian dollar.” Azevedo 
goes on to say, “This industry is also purposeful diversification. 
The industry itself attaches nicely with the economic strategy 
for Calgary with diversification and innovation.” So those are 
two of the smaller provinces, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to 
film production. 
 
But I want to point you to BC, Mr. Speaker, and this is not all 
of BC. This is just in Vancouver. This is actually the north 
shore, so all three of the north shore’s municipalities. This is 
from The North Shore News on March 9th, 2017: 
 

The District of North Vancouver hosted 122 TV, movie 
and commercial productions in 2016, 38 per cent more 
than the previous year. That brought in $643,000 in fees 
for general revenues, up 17 per cent . . . 
 

That’s just in the district of North Van, Mr. Speaker. 
 

West Vancouver almost doubled the number of film 
permits issued to 60 and more than tripled the amount of 
cash it brought in from film permits, inspection and . . . 
[local] fees, and contributions to park amenities at 
$175,000. 
 
The City of North Vancouver, meanwhile enjoyed a 47 per 
cent increase in film permits . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker, we have multiple jurisdictions who’ve seen the 
value of a film tax credit, particularly when the Canadian dollar 
is low and when other parts of the economy are struggling. This 
government can boast about jobs — I think wrongfully so, Mr. 
Speaker — but they certainly have not done a good job of 
diversifying our economy. And I will not be supporting the 
motion. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Time for debate has expired. 
Questions. I recognize the member from Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve made a lot . . . We 
talked a lot about the custodial cleaners, the 230 that will be laid 
off, and it’s in 95 buildings across the province. We know the 
folks who are working and cleaning this building here today, 
but we also know that it’s 95 buildings across this province. 
 
So I want to know from the member from Churchill-Wildwood 
Saskatoon — because it’s going to be some of her constituents 
that are being laid off next week — how can she brag about the 
job stats last month when next week people are going to be 
worried about how they’re going to make ends meet? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood. 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I want 
to thank the member opposite for this question. I would start by 
pointing out that from 2000 to 2007, the NDP were the last in 
the country when it comes to job creation. I will repeat that. We 

have created 8,000 jobs in the province from January to 
February of this year. Unemployment rate in this province for 
February was 6 per cent, the third-lowest among the provinces. 
The latest job numbers show the continued strength and 
resilience of our economy here in Saskatchewan. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On October 30th, 
2016, to the CBC news, the member for Saskatoon Meewasin 
said, and I quote, “. . . we applaud the federal government’s 
recent announcement of a minimum price on carbon.” He said 
this even though on June 21st, 2016, article from the Fraser 
Institute said, and I quote, “. . . carbon tax will lead to loss of 
jobs, income, exports, revenues, etc.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the member from 
Elphinstone-Centre. Do you support your colleague’s 
championing the carbon tax even though it will lead to loss of 
jobs in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, again I know that this 
government likes to throw a nice parade for itself every now 
and then and reflect on all the good that they like to take claim 
for. And in terms of, you know, decisions that help or hurt the 
economy, I guess maybe that member could take a look in the 
mirror and see what’s happened with the consecutive power rate 
increases that have gone on at SaskPower on this government’s 
watch, Mr. Speaker. And maybe if he could answer for that, 
then that question would have some credibility in this place. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To the 
member from Churchill-Wildwood, does she have anything to 
say to the 40,000 people looking for work across the province, 
20,000 more, Mr. Speaker, than when her government first took 
power? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood. 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I thank 
the member opposite for the question. I would again point out 
that from January to February of this year, 8,000 jobs have been 
created. Our unemployment rate is third lowest among the 
provinces. These latest job numbers show the continued 
strength and resilience of our economy. 
 
We have many economic indicators that again point that our 
economy is moving in the right direction. I’ll just cite a few. 
Exports right now are $26.5 billion, a 61 per cent increase since 
2006 when the NDP were in power. Our ag-exports are 
$14 billion, a 186 per cent increase since the NDP were in 
power in 2006. Our GDP is currently just under $60 billion, and 
that’s a 25 per cent increase since 2006. Thank you very much, 



1740 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2017 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In the 
most recent federal NDP leadership debate, MP Guy Caron said 
in regards to Alberta’s carbon tax, “. . . what the government in 
Alberta is doing should be leading the way for ourselves.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. MP Caron clearly supports a carbon tax in Canada. 
Will your party support him in his stance on implementing a 
carbon tax if he becomes the leader of your federal party? 
Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
[12:15] 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve been very 
clear on this side of the House that we need a Made in 
Saskatchewan solution, not foisted upon us by the federal 
Liberals, Mr. Speaker. We have been abundantly clear that that 
is the case. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’ll refrain 
from asking them about, you know, are they in the Kellie Leitch 
camp over there or are they in the Michael Chong camp over 
there in terms of their federal Conservative leadership. Instead 
I’ll ask the member from Regina Pasqua, Mr. Speaker, where he 
stands when it comes to the decision made earlier this week to 
fire 230 cleaners, some of the hardest working and least paid 
members of the public service. Does the member from Regina 
Pasqua stand behind his government to fire those 230 cleaners, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the month 
of February is having the 28 days, and we created 8,000 jobs 
which means that’s 285 jobs in a day, and we are working more 
on it. And going back, in 2006 when a person was earning 
weekly only $709.61 average, now they are earning $1,010.37, 
Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In the most 
recent federal NDP leadership debate, MP Peter Julian said, and 
I quote: 
 

“Sometimes it’s not possible to reconcile the environment 
and natural resource extraction. When we talk about raw 
bitumen exports, when we talk about Kinder Morgan and 
Energy East it is very difficult to reconcile what those 
projects would mean in terms of accelerating climate 

change . . . [and what that means in terms of our economy 
and our environment].” 
 

Mr. Speaker, my question is to the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. It’s clear that MP Julian is firmly against pipelines. Will 
your party support him and his stance against pipeline 
development if he becomes the leader of your NDP federal 
party? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s well 
known what our stand is on pipelines, and we . . . Well I mean 
if these folks over here would take half the time they focus on 
our federal leadership race and talk about, look at what we’ve 
said in the House, it’s very, very clear. And especially that 
Minister of Finance should get to work on the third quarter 
report. But I do want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this focus 
on federal leadership . . . They should be focusing on saving 
jobs here in Saskatchewan especially for those most vulnerable 
in our communities. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I guess, 
you know, if they want to talk leaderships, I guess, you know, 
we’ll happily go down that path. And if the members want to 
get on the record clarifying some things, in terms of someone 
running for the top job of their federal party, Mr. Speaker, can 
the member from Regina Pasqua clarify for us, in terms of, is he 
supporting Michael Chong who is out there in favour of a 
carbon tax? And you don’t hear much about that from them, 
Mr. Speaker. Or is he supporting Kellie Leitch, who’s got, you 
know, I think it was termed as a Trump-karaoke position on 
Canadian values? Can the member from Regina Pasqua clarify 
that for the House? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we are talking about 2006 and employment was only 491,000 
and now these days we have 563,600 employment these days, 
which is 18 per cent more than what they had in their 
government, Mr. Speaker. Thanks. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Bonk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While our government 
works hard to promote growth and the economy, the NDP focus 
on policies that would send Saskatchewan back, back to the 
days when our young people had no choice but to look for jobs 
elsewhere. Back to when Saskatchewan was the last in 
population growth and had the unfortunate distinction of having 
the highest unemployment in the country. Mr. Speaker, to the 
member from Saskatoon Centre, will he finally admit that 
supporting the principles of the Leap Manifesto will lead to 
higher unemployment? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Time for the 75-minute debate has 



March 16, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1741 

expired. 
 
I would simply like to remind members that questions in the 
75-minute debate should pertain to the motion. I think we were 
maybe stretching a pretty long bow here this morning. So I 
would caution members to keep that in mind for the next 
75-minute debate. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 602 — The Election (Fairness and Accountability) 
Amendment Act 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise to speak at second reading to Bill No. 602, The Election 
(Fairness and Accountability) Amendment Act. This is an 
important bill that we’re proud to have put forward for 
Saskatchewan people to, in essence, to make sure that we have 
democracy, our democracy, in the hands of Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
We have laws in Saskatchewan that clearly need to be fixed. By 
any measure and any assessment we’re the wild west of 
electoral finance laws in Saskatchewan, with structures and 
laws that are inappropriate. And this is the kind of bill that, you 
know, that we reach across the aisle and that we have sought 
support for, and it’s the kind of bill that we could pass with the 
support of government in a very urgent way to get big money 
out of Saskatchewan politics. 
 
This is about our democracy. This is about the people of 
Saskatchewan. This is about addressing the undue influence in 
questions of influence that we see with the current governing 
party. And it’s about doing it in an even-handed way, a way of 
levelling the playing field for all. The bill that we’ve brought 
forward, that I’m proud to have brought forward along with our 
official opposition team, has the support of both labour unions 
and people, but also business groups, Mr. Speaker, and that’s 
important. 
 
The bill itself would put a cap on all donations: a cap on 
individual donations, and it would ban corporate and union 
donations into the political process, to political parties. And of 
course it would ban out-of-province donations, something that 
frankly is offensive to Saskatchewan people when they realize 
the millions and millions and millions of dollars that have filled 
the coffers of that Sask Party, and the thousands, hundreds of 
thousands of dollars, that have filled the pocket of that Premier 
while he’s serving the people of Saskatchewan, a Premier that 
right now, if you can imagine it, who’s accepted that offensive 
and inappropriate top-up for year after year after year, with 
almost half a million dollars in his pockets now. This is all 
money on top of the pay that he receives, good pay to serve the 
people of Saskatchewan as Premier of Saskatchewan, and 
leaves Saskatchewan people with all sorts of questions about 
who that Premier and who the Sask Party is really serving. 
Who’s had access to that government? 
 

And it makes you question who their masters are, Mr. Speaker. 
And it’s, you know, pretty difficult to serve a couple of masters. 
And it starts to become abundantly clear when you see a 
government that’s mired in scandal with dollars that have filled 
the pockets of supporters of that government, and you see a 
Premier and a Sask Party that are breaking promise after 
promise with Saskatchewan people, clearly not serving the best 
interests of Saskatchewan people. It leaves you questioning 
who’s had access to that Premier, who’s had access to that Sask 
Party cabinet, and who are they serving, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now we can do the right thing here in this Assembly. We can 
support this legislation. We would support constructive 
amendments from the other side to find a space that works for 
everyone. But it’s clear that it’s not appropriate that 
Saskatchewan is the last province standing without actions 
toward electoral finance reform. This is about building the basic 
trust that we need to have — that all of us need to have, that our 
democratic system needs to have — with Saskatchewan people. 
 
You know, it’s been disappointing to see, you know, the Sask 
Party and the Premier delay any action on this front. Of course 
we as the official opposition NDP, along with others, have been 
bringing this to the attention of the Premier and the Sask Party, 
highlighting the inappropriateness of that top-up that he takes, 
has taken annually for year after year after year, almost a half a 
million dollars in his own pockets, Mr. Speaker. And it took 
him, it took him a long time to come to the right decision, 
which is to end taking that top-up. But it’s offensive and it’s 
rich to see that coming from that Premier, taking that top-up of I 
think it was about $37,000 a year, almost about the same 
amount as those cleaners that work in this very Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker, who that government is eliminating the jobs of right 
now. Its questions of influence or of who’s influencing that 
government are significant. 
 
Now of course, Saskatchewan people have spoken up. They’ve 
applied pressure. We’ve applied pressure. Christy Clark, the 
Premier of BC, stepped away from accepting this top-up a while 
ago, leaving this Premier as the last one standing taking that 
inappropriate top-up, finally saying he’s going to do the right 
thing. I don’t know what kind of repayment plan is being 
committed to by the Premier. We need some greater clarity on 
that front. 
 
But now we need to go a step further, a very important step 
further, which is to make sure we get corporate and union 
donations out of Saskatchewan politics, to make sure that we 
ban out-of-province money. And again, like the top-up, BC has 
finally acted on this front as well, and on the eve of an election 
has indicated now, the Premier has indicated that there’s going 
to be an electoral reform or some sort of a process to overhaul 
the electoral finance laws in that province. 
 
You know, at the end of the day, each of us in this Assembly — 
whether it’s a member of the backbench of the governing party 
or whether it’s a member of the opposition or a member of 
cabinet — should do what we can to build and strengthen 
democracy in Saskatchewan. To have Saskatchewan standing 
out with these inappropriate laws, inappropriate actions of 
government, is something that we should all care about. It’s 
something that we can all address. And so I implore members 
opposite to dig a little deeper than we’ve seen so far on this 



1742 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2017 

front and support these changes. 
 
You know, it’s again though that we see very much that for this 
governing party that there’s, you know, that this arrogance 
that’s sort of taken over over there. You know, serving 
Saskatchewan people is supposed to be just that: serving the 
people of this province. And it seems on day after day, it’s all 
about — for the governing party — all about themselves, all 
about their political and partisan self-interest, all about their 
own self-interest, Mr. Speaker. We see that with the money 
that’s in the pockets of the Premier in an inappropriate way. We 
see that as well even with the cabinet right now, where we have 
a cabinet that actually is unwilling, if you can imagine, Mr. 
Speaker, to cut their pay, their additional pay, because they get 
paid first of all as MLAs and then they get an additional amount 
of pay to serve in cabinet. And with that comes some 
responsibility and, we’d like to think, some accountability. 
 
So this is a cabinet that has put us into billion-dollar 
mismanaged projects, that won’t come clean with the state of 
the finances, that are breaking promise after promise, that are 
working to sell off our valued Crown corporations, but they 
won’t take any responsibility themselves. 
 
And we think it’s only fair of course that that cabinet that put 
Saskatchewan’s finances in this mess, that are breaking their 
word time and time again, a government that just won’t be 
straight, that they have to show a little bit of accountability, a 
tiny little bit of leadership, and take that 20 per cent pay cut on 
the bonus or the additional amount that they receive to serve in 
cabinet. We think that’s more than reasonable. 
 
This is a government that’s attacking Saskatchewan people’s 
jobs at this very time, that’s kicking people out of their 
employment — disgraceful actions where we see a government 
attacking low-wage workers in Saskatchewan, all while making 
sure things are pretty good for them. All about them, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[12:30] 
 
Anyways, I see that the time of the day would suggest that I 
might come to a conclusion of my remarks here today. But I 
guess I would just take it back. Our laws are wrong in 
Saskatchewan. What the Sask Party and what the Premier has 
been doing is wrong and inappropriate. We have the chance as 
legislators in this session, in an urgent way, to do the right 
thing. 
 
And so I ask every last member of the governing Sask Party, the 
backbenchers, the cabinet, to join us, the NDP, the official 
opposition of Saskatchewan, to get big money out of politics 
once and for all and to bring democracy and ensure democracy 
is rightfully in the hands of Saskatchewan people. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, at this point in time though, I move that Bill 
No. 602, The Election (Fairness and Accountability) 
Amendment Act be now read a second time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member of the legislature for 
Rosemont, the Leader of the Opposition, has moved that Bill 
No. 602, The Election (Fairness and Accountability) 
Amendment Act, be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? Or is the Assembly ready 
for the question? I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad 
to briefly join debate on Bill No. 602, The Election (Fairness 
and Accountability) Amendment Act, moved by the Leader of 
the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this point in time I’ll say this: it’s a great bill. 
It’s time we showed leadership on this front and quit being the 
laggards that the current . . . You know, we’re in the 21st 
century and here we are, the last on so many fronts when it 
comes to getting big money out of politics here in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’d urge members opposite to give it some 
long, hard thought as to the value of this, what it means for 
putting the power squarely in the hands of ordinary citizens in 
this province to make sure that their democracy is working for 
them and that it’s not subject to this ongoing question of who’s 
paying the piper. 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d move to adjourn debate on Bill 
No. 602, The Election (Fairness and Accountability) 
Amendment Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 
602, The Election (Fairness and Accountability) Amendment 
Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that this House does now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 
until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:33.] 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1719 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1719 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1719 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1721 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1729 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1729 
  Bonk ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1730 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1719 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1719 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1720 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1720 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1720 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1720 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1721 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1721 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1721 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities Annual Convention 
  Steele ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1722 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1723 
 Access to Feminine Hygiene Products in the North 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1722 
 We Day Celebration in Saskatoon 
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1722 
 Dine for a Difference Fundraiser 
  Buckingham ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1723 
 HomeStyles Home Show 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1723 
 Statement by Opposition Member in the House 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1723 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Role of the Global Transportation Hub in Land Acquisitions 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1724 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1724 
 Government’s Fiscal Management 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1724 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1724 
 Provision of Cleaning Services in Government Buildings and Elimination of Gaming Corporation Positions 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1725 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1725 
 Funding for Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1725 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1725 
 Child Welfare Legislation 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1726 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 1726 
 Support for the Northern Teacher Education Program 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1727 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1727 
 Domestic Violence Legislation 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1727 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1727 
 Intent of Bill No. 40 and Ownership of Crown Corporations 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1727 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1728 
 Availability of Contract Details for Regina Bypass Project 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1728 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1728 
 
 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Indicators for Economic Growth in Saskatchewan 
  Fiaz ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1730, 1740 
  McCall ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1732, 1739 
  Lambert ......................................................................................................................................................................... 1733, 1739 
  Forbes ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1734, 1739 
  Nerlien ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1736 
  Chartier ......................................................................................................................................................................... 1737, 1739 
  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1739 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1740 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1740 
  Bonk ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1740 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 602 — The Election (Fairness and Accountability) Amendment Act 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1741 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1742 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


