


















































December 4, 2017 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 22A  MONDAY, DECEMBER 4, 2017, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Nicole Sarauer 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Hon. Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Hon. Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 
Vacancies — Kindersley, Melfort 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 47; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 2 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3231 
 December 4, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave to 
make an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, in your gallery and in the west gallery there are a 
number of individuals that have braved some pretty difficult 
travel conditions to be here at the legislature this morning. They 
were a part of our announcement on a made-in-Saskatchewan 
climate change plan. They come from business, industry, 
agriculture, the environmental sectors, to name just a few. There 
are so many individuals here that I’m not actually going to be 
able to read into the record every single individual’s name, but I 
do want to note the industries or the businesses that they do 
represent. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, joining us we have individuals from the 
Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce, Evraz, Federated Co-op, 
Saskatchewan Stock Growers Association, SUMA 
[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association], APAS 
[Agricultural Producers Association of Saskatchewan], SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities], 
Saskatchewan Mining Association, Mosaic, Westmoreland 
Coal, K+S Potash, Husky Energy, Crescent Point Energy, the 
Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers, CNRL 
[Canadian Natural Resources Ltd.], Valleyview Petroleums, 
CFIB [Canadian Federation of Independent Business], the 
Regina Chamber of Commerce, the Saskatchewan Wildlife 
Federation, Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, the Global 
Institute for Food Security, and the Saskatchewan Heavy 
Construction Association. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these stakeholders and many more will be very 
vital in the coming months on our consultation process as we 
develop this plan. And I would ask all members to join with me 
in welcoming all of these guests from around the province and 
outside of the province to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the minister in welcoming all of these officials and business 
executives to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
I was trying to keep track of and make a list of everyone that 
was here based on who I already knew, and then when the 

minister was describing them, unfortunately I wasn’t able to 
keep up to the minister’s words. So please just let me generally 
say welcome to all of you. It’s great to see you all here this 
afternoon at your Legislative Assembly. On behalf of the 
official opposition, we’d like to welcome you as well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 
 
Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
welcome Christie Gamble to the Legislative Assembly. Christie 
was born and raised in Regina. She moved away in 2004 to 
attend McGill University and later completed an M.B.A. 
[Master of Business Administration] at Dalhousie University. 
At that time, she understood that advancing her career meant 
moving out of the province. Twelve years later, she and her 
husband, an engineer, were convinced to return to 
Saskatchewan thanks to the many job opportunities fuelled by 
our strong economy. She is now proud to raise her children here 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
While in Halifax, Christie joined a start-up technology firm 
called CarbonCure, whose mission is to reduce the carbon 
footprint of the concrete industry. Here in Regina, Christie 
continues to represent CarbonCure which has since been named 
one of the world’s top 100 clean tech companies, the world 
leader in carbon utilization potential, and is currently a finalist 
in the global Carbon XPrize competition based in Alberta. 
 
I’d ask all members to welcome Christie to her Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
introduce guests that we have with us from NORTEP [northern 
teacher education program] seated in the west gallery today. I’ll 
ask them to give a wave when I mention them. So April 
Chiefcalf, April is a former faculty member with NORTEP. She 
spent 16 years with the organization. And Tammy Robinson, 
also a former faculty member with NORTEP and the student 
services coordinator, she has 18 years with the organization and 
initially started out as a student. So I welcome them in their 
long trip from La Ronge to come join us today and would like 
to ask all members to join me in welcoming them to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to you and through you, I’d like today to introduce, sitting in 
your gallery, Nadiya Miftakhova. Nadiya, if you could give us a 
wave over there. I can see her just barely. Anyway, Nadiya is 
currently working at Crown Investments through the 
Johnson-Shoyama executive internship program where she’s 
learning all about working in public service and the Crown 
sector. She’s also engaging in research and initiatives in the 
Crown sector.  
 
Nadiya is in her second year in the program and comes to us 
from her home in Ukraine. She tells us she’s used to the winters 



3232 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2017 

like ours. Well she’d better get used to it for sure. In the 
Ukraine they have the same type of winters, so she’s settling in 
nicely into Regina. And we’re very glad to have her here and 
we thank her for all her hard work. I encourage all members to 
join me in welcoming Nadiya to the Assembly today. 
 
While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, seated in the west gallery 
I’d be remiss if I did not introduce my most favourite 
constituent, my best friend, the love of my life, my wife, Fran. 
I’d ask all members to help me welcome her to her Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
University. 
 
Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would just 
like to quickly also acknowledge the presence of Darla 
Lindbjerg, the president and CEO [chief executive officer] of 
the Greater Saskatoon Chamber who is with us; and especially 
the Chair of the Regina Chamber, who is with us and seated in 
the west gallery, Tyler Willox, a good friend. He is on many 
boards in our city. He’s on the CNIB [Canadian National 
Institute for the Blind]. He’s on the Regina Airport. He travels 
extensively for ISC [Information Services Corporation of 
Saskatchewan], and in his so-called spare time, he’s working on 
his M.B.A. at Queen’s. And it’s really great to see you here in 
the legislature. Welcome, Tyler. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To join in and join 
my colleague in welcoming a couple of my constituents from 
La Ronge, I want to acknowledge April and Tammy and just 
say to them, thank you very much for all the hard work you’ve 
done. You’ve been very dedicated to northern children and 
helping our northern students, and I want to thank you and 
welcome you to your legislature. But it’s unfortunate for the 
circumstances that you’re here. You know, that is unfortunate. 
But I would like to say again, thank you on behalf of the 
constituency of Cumberland. And I would ask all members to 
join me in welcoming to their Legislative Assembly, and maybe 
we can make some positive changes for the North. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Bonk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to request 
leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Bonk: — To you and through you, Mr. Speaker, to 
all members of the Legislative Assembly, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce two special guests here today who are working on 
Innovation Saskatchewan’s very first rural crime innovation 
challenge. 
 
The challenge is a new initiative that is part of the government’s 
strategy on rural crime reduction. Its focus is on using 
technology as a solution to improve the safety and security of 

rural citizens and property. The challenge was open to 
technology companies and researchers in September. Twelve 
companies and researchers sent in expressions of interests. Four 
were shortlisted and of these, Mr. Jeff Shirley, who is here 
today, was the top proponent. 
 
Mr. Shirley, owner and principal consultant of Rivercity 
Technology Services Ltd., or RCT, is a four-time Microsoft 
Most Valuable Professional award winner. He holds numerous 
IT [information technology] certifications and has worked in 
the industry for over 30 years. RCT is based in Innovation Place 
in Saskatchewan and has over 100 clients in a number of 
industries including mining, education, health care, agriculture, 
and manufacturing. 
 
Also here is Mr. William Topping, founder of Brand X 
Technologies. Mr. Topping holds patents on a number of 
technologies he has invented, and Brand X Technologies 
provides tailored Internet of Things devices. 
 
Mr. Shirley and his firm, RCT, will work with Mr. Topping to 
deliver the solution for rural crime innovative challenge. Their 
project is focused on designing and tracking systems and GPS 
devices that alert landowners about any event or irregular 
activity on their property. They will design a prototype in a 
16-week residency program with the Ministry of Justice. If 
successful, the prototype will be deployed and a pilot refined as 
necessary and eventually commercialized. 
 
The response to this challenge is a great example of how local 
technology entrepreneurs can help solve everyday challenges in 
our province. Mr. Speaker, I invite Mr. Jeff Shirley and Mr. 
William Topping to now stand while I ask everyone here to join 
me in welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d just 
like to join with the minister in welcoming Mr. Jeff Shirley 
from Rivercity Technology and Mr. William Topping from 
Brand X Technologies to their Legislative Assembly. And 
unless I miss my guess, Mr. Speaker, could be behind the clock 
up there, but I believe they’re here with Ms. Kari Harvey from 
Innovation Saskatchewan, certainly no stranger to this building, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Anyway it’s good to see these individuals here at their 
Legislative Assembly and certainly we join with the minister in 
wishing them well, wishing them good luck in terms of the 
work that they’ve set out to do, and we look forward to the 
results. So, Mr. Speaker, again we’d ask all members to join 
with us in welcoming these individuals to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Mr. Nerlien: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure 
today to rise in the House and introduce to you a long-time 
educator in my constituency, who has moved on to become a 
now-famous author. We welcome to our legislature, Gail 
Krawetz, the author of Risk and Reward: The Birth and 



December 4, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3233 

Meteoric Rise of the Saskatchewan Party, which has been 
described as an engaging and must-read book. We’re thrilled to 
see Gail here today, and with her, seated beside her, is her now 
somewhat less famous husband, who was a former member of 
the legislature and Finance minister. Welcome Gail and Ken. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the member opposite in welcoming Ken Krawetz again to his 
Legislative Assembly, but more importantly, Gail Krawetz to 
her Legislative Assembly. 
 
I actually had the opportunity, in light of this week, to finish 
your book. Yesterday I finished it, and it was quite good. So 
thank you for that. I’d ask that all members join me in 
welcoming . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — When are you crossing the floor? 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — I’m not planning on crossing the floor any 
time soon, despite what the Premier is heckling. I’d like to ask 
all members to join me in welcoming Gail and Ken Krawetz to 
their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I’d like to take this opportunity to introduce a 
special person in my gallery, if Ryan Vanjoff could please rise, 
give a wave. Ryan and I have been close friends ever since 
grade 2, going to school in East School in Esterhazy. 
Throughout the years, we have had lots of fun, lots of 
shenanigans we got up to, and lots of learning too. 
 
One of our learning experiences was in grade 11; we were 
actually in this Chamber. So we were a part of the 
Saskatchewan Youth Parliament, and we ventured from 
Esterhazy up to Regina for the weekend. He was the member 
from your leader, and I was the member from beyond all hope, 
and we debated things way back over 20 years ago in this 
Chamber. It is incredible to see him back here. He just moved 
back from Alberta and was a great support of mine throughout 
all my endeavours, and I am so appreciative of his support. 
Could you please welcome the member from your leader to his 
Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the federal 
government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the province 
of Saskatchewan. We all know that a federal carbon tax would 
do nothing, wouldn’t be efficient. It wouldn’t be effective, and 
would only reduce . . . It would do nothing to reduce carbon, 
but rather would be a tax and a further burden to the economy 
input of Saskatchewan business and a disadvantage to our 
economy. 
 
[13:45] 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Moose Jaw, 
Regina, Grande Prairie, and Wiseton. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 
again I’m very proud to stand in my place to present yet another 
page of petition as it affects the town of Balgonie. And the 
prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Take the necessary steps and actions to leave the west-in, 
west-out driving access for vehicles into and out of 
Balgonie at the intersection of Highway No. 1 and 
Balgonie’s Main Street. 
 
They also respectfully request that the Government of 
Saskatchewan put up a locked gate on the apron between 
the eastbound lanes and westbound lanes of Highway No. 
1 and Balgonie’s Main Street intersection. [Mr. Speaker], 
this gate would allow emergency vehicles access to the 
eastbound lanes of Highway No. 1 at the Main Street 
Balgonie intersection, but would not allow the public 
access to cross the east- and westbound lanes. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as we do every day, we present page after 
page after page of petitions signed by person after person after 
person from every town, village, and community in that area. 
And on this particular page, Mr. Speaker, the people that have 
signed are from Balgonie. They’re from Dalmeny. They’re from 
Regina. They’re from Moose Jaw. They’re from Edenwold. 
They’re from White City. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition calling for critical supports for survivors of 
domestic violence. Those who’ve signed this petition wish to 
bring to our attention the following: Saskatchewan has the 
highest rate of domestic violence amongst the provinces in 
Canada; employers should be obligated to reasonably 
accommodate survivors of domestic violence in the workplace; 
employees who are survivors of domestic violence should be 
able to take a leave of absence from their employment without 
penalty; and Saskatchewan must do much more to protect 
survivors of domestic violence. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Legislative Assembly to pass legislation providing critical 
support for survivors of domestic violence. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is what we’ve called for in our private 
member’s Bill No. 605, which we’re hopeful that the 
government will take on and pass. Individuals who are signing 
this petition today come from Regina. I do so present. 
 



3234 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2017 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I’m rising to present a petition to 
the Minister of Environment and the Minister Responsible for 
the Water Security Agency of Saskatchewan. The folks who 
have signed this petition want to bring to our attention the 
following: to reduce inflows in the Quill lakes, the Quill Lakes 
Watershed Association is proposing the phase 1 Common 
Ground Drainage Diversion Project that would drain saline 
water from Kutawagan and Pel Lakes into Last Mountain Lake 
and thereby the rest of the Qu’Appelle River chain of lakes. 
 
The Water Security Agency, despite their commitment to do so, 
has yet to close a single illegal drain flowing into the Quill 
lakes watershed as promised. The Ministry of Environment has 
reviewed the documents put forth by the proponent and 
determined that the project is not a development under The 
Environmental Assessment Act. There is widespread public 
concern regarding this drainage diversion because of potential 
environmental changes, and have an effect on a unique, rare, 
and endangered feature of the environment. So I’ll read the 
prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Minister of Environment and the Minister 
Responsible for the Water Security Agency of 
Saskatchewan publicly release all documents used to make 
the determination under The Environmental Assessment 
Act; deem the Common Ground drainage project diversion 
project a development and therefore initiate a full 
environmental assessment of the project, including public 
and First Nation consultations; refuse to issue any permits 
or licenses, nor fund any activities under the Common 
Ground Drainage Diversion Project proposal until a 
comprehensive, impartial environmental impact 
assessment and public and indigenous consultations are 
completed. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals who’ve signed this petition today 
are from Regina and Lumsden. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to stand 
today to present a petition for a second bridge for Prince Albert. 
The individuals who have signed these petitions want to draw to 
your attention the following: that the Diefenbaker bridge in 
Prince Albert is the primary link that connects the southern part 
of the province to the North; and that the need for a second 
bridge for Prince Albert has never been clearer than it is today. 
 
Prince Albert, communities north of Prince Albert, and 
businesses that send people and products through Prince Albert 
require a solution; and that municipal governments have limited 
resources and require a second bridge to be funded through 
federal and provincial governments and not a P3 [public-private 
partnership] model; and that the Saskatchewan Party 
government refuses to stand up for Prince Albert and this 
critical infrastructure issue. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan ask the 
Saskatchewan Party government to stop stalling, hiding 
behind rhetoric and refusing to listen to the people calling 
for action, and begin immediately to plan and then quickly 
commence the construction of a second bridge for Prince 
Albert using federal and provincial dollars. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals that signed this petition come from 
Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition calling on the government to restore funding to 
post-secondary institutions. These citizens wish to bring to your 
attention that the Sask Party is making students and their 
families pay for Sask Party financial mismanagement; that 
Saskatchewan students already pay the second-highest tuition 
fees in Canada; that this budget cuts 36.8 million from 
post-secondary education and 6.4 million from technical 
institutions; that funding for the Saskatchewan Student Aid 
Fund and scholarships have been cut by 8.2 million; and that 
the Sask Party has broken a 2016 election promise by 
cancelling their first home plan. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately restore 
funding to Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions and 
stop the damaging cuts to our students. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by individuals from Moose Jaw. I do 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition calling for the reopening of the Buffalo 
Narrows Correctional Centre. Mr. Speaker, this was a decision 
that came on the part of that government and had a particularly 
hard impact on the community of Buffalo Narrows in terms of 
15 individuals thrown out of work, and a facility that did some 
good work in terms of rehabilitation and correction, Mr. 
Speaker, for those who have fallen afoul of the criminal justice 
system, that they might repay their crimes and work to not 
reoffend, Mr. Speaker, to get those skills and those life skills 
that would guard against that. 
 
In any event, Mr. Speaker, this facility was closed by the 
government in the last budget. The community is not taking it 
lying down, though, and in the prayer that reads as follows, the 
petitioners: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan immediately reopen the Buffalo Narrows 
Correctional Centre to better our community for 
generations to come. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by individuals 
from the community of Buffalo Narrows. I so present. 



December 4, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3235 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition calling on the Sask Party to stop the cuts to our kids’ 
classrooms. Those who have signed this petition wish to draw 
our attention to the following: that the Sask Party has cut at 
least $674 in government funding for every student across the 
province; that the Sask Party hiked education property tax by 
$67 million while at the same time reducing the total 
government funding for education by $121 million; that even 
though the Sask Party is making us all pay more, our kids are 
actually getting less; that the Sask Party cuts mean that students 
will lose much-needed supports in their classroom. This 
includes funding for kindergartners and programs to help those 
students with special needs. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, the undersigned, call upon the government to reverse 
the senseless cuts to our kids’ classrooms and stop making 
families, teachers, and everyone who works to support our 
education pay the price for the Saskatchewan Party’s 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions are being signed by people all over 
the province. Today I have folks who have signed from 
Tantallon, Balgonie, Pense, Regina, and Saskatoon. I do so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present petitions on behalf of concerned northerners that have 
been blindsided by a decision of this government to end the 
social housing program, something that had a dramatic impact 
on countless families throughout the North. The prayer reads as 
follows: to cause the provincial . . . 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the provincial government to 
restore the rent-to-own option for responsible renters of the 
social housing program and to reinstate the remote housing 
program. 

 
And these petitions are signed by concerned residents from 
Beauval, Saskatchewan. I so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 

 
Teepee Project at Victoria School 

 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I’m proud today to recognize the 
fantastic example of the commitment to reconciliation taking 
place in my own community. The grade 7/8 class at École 
Victoria School has worked with Donnie Speidel, a cultural 
resource liaison with the Saskatoon Public Library, to paint a 
teepee on the grounds of the school. 
 
The teepee, provided through a partnership between the 

Broadway Theatre and the Wanuskewin Heritage Park, creates 
a learning space for students to learn about indigenous history 
and customs. One of the grade 7 students had this to say about 
the project: 
 

I thought it was really cool to learn about all the different 
shapes and meanings while painting the teepee, and I was 
super excited to help set it up. I had always wondered how 
it happened. I also love that we can learn about this stuff in 
person rather than just reading about it. 

 
Mr. Speaker, all members of this House should know that treaty 
education and learning from our indigenous peoples is 
necessary for our province to thrive into future generations. I 
can’t express strongly enough how important it is for our young 
people to learn about our province’s shared history in this 
regard. It’s quite inspiring to see the results of these efforts 
reach beyond just the immediate classroom as the teepee also 
has the potential to spur these conversations, both in the 
classroom and the broader community, thanks to its prominent 
location. 
 
Perhaps Donnie Speidel said best, “I think it has a lot of 
potential to bring people together, to have discussions and 
create new learning opportunities. I look forward to that.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of all members, I want to recognize 
again the outstanding efforts of the students of École Victoria 
School and encourage all members to take the time to visit the 
teepee if they pass by. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 
 

Memorandum of Understanding on  
Carbon Capture and Storage 

 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last week 
the Premier attended the Western Governors’ Association 
winter meeting in Phoenix, Arizona. At the meeting, the 
Premier signed a memorandum of understanding with the 
governors from Montana, North Dakota, and Wyoming on 
carbon capture and storage. This MOU [memorandum of 
understanding] will encourage information sharing regarding 
CCS [carbon capture and storage] technology, helping these 
states continue to build their carbon capture industries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was significant excitement for the MOU 
after it was signed. North Dakota governor might have put it 
best when he spoke to the ability for these three states and our 
province to come together and reduce emissions through 
innovation. This is exactly what SaskPower is working towards 
with the CCS project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, despite significant advances in renewable energy 
over the past few years, the world is still dependent on coal 
power for a significant portion of its electricity needs. And with 
our country and others’ commitment to reducing global 
warming and to limit future temperature increases to less than 2 
degrees Celsius, CCS will have to play a major role. In fact the 
International Energy association has identified that CCS must 
account for 12 per cent of cumulative emission reductions in 
order for us to meet this goal. 
 



3236 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2017 

Mr. Speaker, this government is proud of the work SaskPower 
is doing at Boundary dam, and this MOU is a significant step in 
seeing this innovative technology implemented across the 
world. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

International Day of Persons With Disabilities 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, December 3rd was the 
International Day of Persons with Disabilities, which aims to 
promote the rights and well-being of persons living with 
disabilities while increasing the awareness of the issues that 
people living with disabilities face every day. 
 
Across the world, it’s estimated that over 1 billion people are 
affected by some form of a disability. 
 
I want to recognize the outstanding work being done in our own 
province, specifically through Barrier Free Saskatchewan. 
Barrier Free Saskatchewan as an organization has been 
instrumental in fighting for equal and equitable access for 
people living with disabilities. Just this year they filed over 520 
complaints with the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission 
against 40 restaurants, due to their lack of basic access. From 
not being able to enter through the front door, to use the 
washrooms, or to manoeuvre through a facility to a table is a 
serious access issue for someone in a wheelchair, for example. 
This is just one example of many of the issues that people living 
with disabilities might face on a daily basis. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, for those who might not live with a disability, we 
might not think about how inaccessible our everyday lives 
could be for someone living with a disability. Mr. Speaker, on 
the International Day of Persons with Disabilities, the onus is 
on all of us to listen to those living with a disability and work 
together towards a more equitable and accessible province for 
everyone. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 

Members Raise Funds During Movember Campaign 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, Tom Selleck can rest easy this month. He once again 
has the world’s best moustache now that many members of this 
House are clean-shaven. Mr. Speaker, once again we had a very 
successful campaign, raising awareness and funds for men’s 
health. 
 
This year our team raised over $4,300. I’d like to recognize all 
of the members of our team: the Minister of Agriculture; the 
Minister of Advanced Education; the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure; myself; and our team captain, the Minister of 
Rural and Remote Health. Having recently completed 
treatment, the Minister of Rural and Remote Health was the 
driving force behind our team. He has truly been inspirational 
throughout his fight and in his effort to raise awareness and 
funds for this important cause. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to also acknowledge the members 
opposite’s Movember team. Sometimes our exchanges in the 
House can get heated, but I’m proud to say that we can rise 
above our differences to both support such an important cause. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, if I could offer this: I think moustaches on 
both sides of the House may have been a little more impressive 
. . . I think that moustaches on this side of the House may have 
been a little more impressive. On behalf of everyone in the 
House, I’d like to thank all of those who participated and 
donated this Movember. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Westview. 
 

International Day of Persons With Disabilities 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On December 
3rd people across this province and across the world observed 
International Day of Persons with Disabilities. This day was 
first proclaimed in 1992 by the United Nations, and its goal is to 
promote widespread understanding of disability issues while 
marshalling supports for the rights, dignity, and general 
well-being of those living with disabilities. This year’s theme 
was Transformation Towards Sustainable and Resilient Society 
for All. 
 
Here in Saskatchewan, our government has taken many steps to 
create a more inclusive society, ensuring that this province is a 
province for all. Mr. Speaker, our province has set a vision for 
the people of Saskatchewan as we take steps to become a more 
inclusive province that is welcoming, responsive, and 
innovative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this day is an opportunity to reflect on our diverse 
communities to see how far we have come and understand the 
necessary steps that are needed to be taken moving forward. I 
encourage businesses and organizations every day to celebrate 
their accomplishments and continue to strive for an inclusive 
and welcoming environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members please join me in 
celebrating International Day of Persons with Disabilities. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 
 

Soccer Teams Medal in Provincial Tournament 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to 
recognize the Middle Lake Avengers and Lake Lenore Lancers 
soccer teams for both taking home medals at this year’s 1A 
provincial tournament. Mr. Speaker, the boys’ Middle Lake 
Avengers brought home the gold, while the Lake Lenore 
Lancers took second. 
 
The Avengers entered the tournament as the top and dominated 
every team in their path. The provincial final game was a rivalry 
match against the Lancers and the Avengers. It was a 
hard-fought match, and the Avengers came out victorious, 
winning 2-zip. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Middle Lake Avengers girls’ squad took home 



December 4, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3237 

second in the provincial 1A tournament. Despite coming into 
the tournament as a lower end, the team refused to back down, 
taking out teams all the way to the final, earning a silver medal. 
 
It was a great season overall for the boys’ and girls’ Avengers 
team as well as the Lake Lenore Lancers. Both the 1A girls’ and 
boys’ soccer teams fought hard to represent their communities 
in the provincial tournament, making their fellow students and 
towns very proud of their achievements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now ask that all members join me in 
congratulating the Middle Lake Avengers and the Lake Lenore 
Lancers soccer teams on a successful provincial tournament; as 
well, the coaching staff for their commitment to the sports in 
their community. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Climate Change Strategy 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today our 
government released a climate change strategy that reduces 
emissions in key sectors, introduces flexible options for 
emitters, and protects our province from a changing climate — 
all without a carbon tax. 
 
This approach is called Prairie Resilience: A 
Made-in-Saskatchewan Climate Change Strategy. Our climate 
change strategy is about protecting our people and communities 
as much as it is about working with industry and others to lower 
emissions here in Saskatchewan. And we do plan to 
significantly reduce emissions in key sectors, but we will do so 
in a way that is economically sustainable and promotes 
economic growth. The strategy proposes actions in key areas 
including natural systems; physical infrastructure; economic 
sustainability; community preparedness; and measuring, 
monitoring, and reporting. Regulations will be developed 
through consultation beginning in 2018 and will recognize 
actions already taken by industry to reduce emissions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a good story to tell when it comes to 
climate change. This includes agriculture, where our producers 
sequestered over 11.9 million tonnes of carbon in 2015. An 
offset system will create additional value for actions that result 
in carbon sequestration or reduced emissions, especially from 
agriculture soils, wetlands, and forests. Mr. Speaker, we’re 
proud to release this strategy on behalf of the people of our 
province. Thank you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Effects of Tax Legislation on Businesses 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week the Sask 
Party took to social media and their fundraising email list and 
pushed political spin and hypocrisy to a new level. 
 
But they were the ones who raised and expanded the PST 
[provincial sales tax] on Saskatchewan families and businesses. 
And to add insult to injury, they stopped paying businesses to 

collect the increased PST for them. Mr. Speaker, instead of 
undoing the damage they’ve done to small businesses, because 
they are the ones who create more new jobs than anyone else, 
they didn’t help small business owners at all. Instead, the Sask 
Party just changed another definition. Mr. Speaker, nowhere 
else in the country are businesses that large considered small. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, people want to know why did the Sask Party 
make this change? Well the former Finance minister says there 
are members of his caucus who own these businesses. Can the 
Premier tell the people of Saskatchewan which Sask Party 
MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] will benefit from 
this new $11 million tax giveaway? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this is an incredible question 
coming from the opposition. Mr. Speaker, I would want to share 
with members of the House a fact that I would hope that they 
would know, and that’s that 80 per cent of the jobs in this 
province are created and sustained by the small-business sector. 
The specific changes that the NDP [New Democratic Party] 
voted against were for the small-business sector, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I guess members opposite know more than 
the Canadian Federation of Independent Business or the 
chambers of commerce, Mr. Speaker. You see, those 
organizations actually talk to small business, unlike members 
opposite. Those organizations represent those small businesses, 
and they advocated or at least supported a change that we made 
when we moved off a reduction on the corporate tax and 
provided the relief instead to the small-business sector, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It will be very much part of the record that when the NDP had 
the chance, in a difficult economic time, when they had a 
chance to support the small-business sector, they stood up in 
their place just last week and one by one, including the Leader 
of the Opposition, voted against a tax reduction for small 
businesses that create 80 per cent of the jobs in this province. 
Mr. Speaker, it is that side of the House that has some 
explaining to do. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Lots of rhetoric, Mr. Speaker, but the Premier 
clearly didn’t answer my question at all. And the Premier 
doesn’t get it. Mr. Speaker, there are 6,400 fewer Saskatchewan 
people with a job today than a year ago. In fact no other 
province saw a larger drop in the number of people working as 
Saskatchewan did last month. But the Sask Party’s new 
giveaway doesn’t help any of those people and doesn’t help real 
small businesses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the member from Nutana asked the minister 
if she had an estimate of how many jobs this tax giveaway 
would create, the minister scoffed and said she did not. And 
when she asked if they had engaged any experts to do the 
analysis for this bill, the minister said, “No.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, no wonder the Sask Party are failing workers so 
badly. Instead of reciting the same old lines and ignoring the 
reality being faced by Saskatchewan people, will the Premier 



3238 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2017 

admit that their heartless cuts to important programs and 
services and tax breaks for the wealthy and well connected are 
hurting people and only making the struggle to find a job here 
in Saskatchewan even harder? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I guess in this 
House in question period you’re going to hear from members 
on that side of the House, and then often, not always, but often 
it’ll be in disagreement with members on this side of the House. 
 
And then I think it’s fair on a question like that where there is 
some debate or division about, for example, who this tax 
reduction benefits, that we would go to those who represent the 
stakeholders involved, that we might check with those who 
represent independent small businesses in the province rather 
than check with the NDP whose track record, Mr. Speaker, in 
economic development was to lose for this province a 
generation of young people. Well you might want to check with 
chambers of commerce and the Federation of Independent 
Business who, Mr. Speaker, in principle, support the changes 
that members voted against. 
 
But I congratulate the fact that the hon. member is happy to ask 
questions on it day after day. Because each time she does, it 
exposes the NDP as worse than really the same old NDP that 
was responsible for losing a generation of people. It exposes an 
NDP, Mr. Speaker, that has lost touch with Saskatchewan 
people, that is disconnected from those who create and sustain 
jobs for Saskatchewan people. If she opposes a business 
reduction for small businesses, she’s welcome to that position, 
Mr. Speaker.  
 
On this side of the House, a side of the House that has presided 
over the last 10 years, over the second-best job creation record 
in the country versus dead last for the last 10 years of the NDP 
. . . She can carry on with her position. Saskatchewan people 
have made their choice, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Support for Northern Post-Secondary Education 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite should be 
less smug. There were 6,400 fewer people working this 
November than last November. And the cuts are making things 
worse. 
 
The Minister of Education’s condescending words about treaty 
education raised a lot of concern over the last month. But the 
cuts to indigenous education that she led as Advanced 
Education minister have already had concrete consequences. It 
was just last spring that she led the charge to destroy NORTEP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Jerrilynn McKay is a Métis woman from 
Cumberland House. She was a second-year student in 
NORPAC [Northern Professional Access College], about to 
transfer to the NORTEP program. She wants to teach in the 
North. Like many, many others, she was forced out of school 
when the Sask Party scrapped NORTEP-NORPAC. 
 

Mr. Speaker, Jerrilynn had a question for the Minister of 
Education, so I’ll ask on her behalf: “Why would she take 
something away that was running successfully for 41 years?” 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’d like to 
take this opportunity to welcome our two guests here tonight. 
We’re glad to see you in the Assembly this afternoon. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, our government is absolutely remaining 
committed to delivering quality post-secondary education to 
northern communities. And the consolidation of the educational 
program in the North is all about expanding programs, Mr. 
Speaker, and enhancing the access for northern students, while 
we also can ensure that that program remains at high quality 
and it is sustainable. 
 
And I can confirm, Mr. Speaker, today that student supports, as 
per the board motion passed by Northlands on April 21st of this 
year, will be honoured. And after, Mr. Speaker, after we 
discovered the supports promised were not being honoured, the 
former minister asked officials to take corrective measures and 
ensure all supports were going to be provided to NORTEP. 
 
We acknowledge, Mr. Speaker, that this transition has been a 
challenge for the community, and we are confident that the 
enrolments will increase as Northlands College continues its 
recruitment efforts. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Mr. Speaker, again, they’re making it up as 
they go along. The minister is talking about expanding and 
enhancing programs. Students knew their program was being 
cut, but they didn’t know what supports would be available to 
them. These are not families that can afford to plan around so 
much uncertainty. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the selection committee from the North 
unanimously chose Gabriel Dumont Institute, but the former 
minister responsible said she knew best and overrode that 
decision. And the confusion that came afterward is costing 
these students and the North dearly. Jerrilynn put it clearly 
when she said, “In the North, we have hardly anything. 
Indigenous people always get the short end of the stick.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the current Minister of Advanced Education 
admit that these consequences are serious? And will he commit 
to no further cuts to indigenous teacher training programs like 
SUNTEP [Saskatchewan urban native teacher education 
program] for example? 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll once again 
repeat that education in the North is very important to us and 
that consolidation was about expanding. And furthermore, Mr. 



December 4, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3239 

Speaker, Northlands College has over 40 years experience in 
educating northerners, and I think they’re very capable of 
continuing. And since that time we’ve seen significant increases 
in their university education. 
 
I’ll just give you an example. Since 2007, Mr. Speaker, the 
university education programing has increased by 226 per cent 
or some 232 students. Many of the aspects of this program, Mr. 
Speaker, will not change for the transitioning students including 
the teaching facilities, the delivery model, and at least three of 
the longest serving NORPAC-NORTEP instructors. But, Mr. 
Speaker, in the communities of Air Ronge and La Ronge of 
approximately 3,700 people, we felt the best use of taxpayers’ 
money was to reduce duplication in that area. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — That minister knows that his party doesn’t 
do enough for the North. NORTEP gave hope and opportunity 
to communities that needed more of both, but still they cut and 
look at what happened. Mr. Speaker, as Rob Clarke said in their 
last leadership debate, “They drew a line from Melfort to 
Saskatoon to North Battleford and neglected the North.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 10 years, unless there has been a tragedy, the 
Premier almost never comes to the North. Why does the Sask 
Party ignore the North except when they want to make more 
cuts? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And once again I’ll 
just repeat that our government is committed to continue 
working with First Nations, Métis, and our northern 
communities on delivering a high-quality education. Across 
government, Mr. Speaker, this year we provided $425 million 
for First Nations and Métis education since 2007-2008, Mr. 
Speaker. Advanced Education alone, Mr. Speaker, has invested 
$17 million in 2017-18 targeted funding for First Nations. In La 
Loche, Mr. Speaker, the ministries of Advanced Ed and 
Education have partnered with the First Nations University of 
Canada to offer a Dene Teacher Education Program, the DTEP. 
 
We’re going to continue working with our northern partners, 
Mr. Speaker, and certainly we’re going to watch as they 
progress. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Benefits of Carbon Capture and Storage 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, for one last time the Premier 
recently travelled out of province to brag about Boundary 
dam 3 and carbon capture. While there he signed a 
memorandum of understanding, while there he signed a 
memorandum of understanding  with three American states to 
advance carbon capture research and technology. Mr. Speaker, 
the Premier said that the partnership means that we are 
“. . . committed to sharing knowledge on this important 
technology . . .” 

Really? We have to wonder if the Premier is truly sharing all of 
his knowledge about carbon capture with the three partner 
states. Did he tell them how often the facility is down for 
maintenance? Or how in the past year, it’s been operating on 
average at just 63 per cent capacity? Did he tell them that? Did 
he mention how SaskPower’s own CEO is recommending 
against any plans to expand CCS in the future? Mr. Speaker, did 
the Premier tell all of this to the states that he signed this 
agreement with? And will he tell us just how many more 
hundreds of millions of dollars he will make Saskatchewan 
people pay for the Sask Party’s CCS experiment? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I am very happy to confirm, in wake of the member’s 
question, that we did sign an MOU with Montana, North 
Dakota, and Wyoming. They are very much interested in what 
we’ve done here and the leadership that we have demonstrated 
on the CCS file, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We talked about a number of things. We noted for example that 
the International Energy Agency is saying that if the world is 
going to meet Paris targets, that CCS must deliver on 14 per 
cent of the emissions reductions worldwide. We noted that there 
are 1,600 coal plants being built around the world, and we 
needed an answer to clean that coal up. We absolutely talked 
about the fact there were commission-year challenges with this 
new technology. We noted the boilerplate capacity of the plant 
and how that capacity was not met in that first year, in the first 
number of months. 
 
We also noted though that last month, the month of October, 
85 000 tonnes captured, Mr. Speaker. We noted there was 1.75 
million tonnes of CO2 captured, Mr. Speaker, and used for EOR 
[enhanced oil recovery], Mr. Speaker. And the other states that 
are involved understand that CCS is part of the solution. The 
United Nations understands that CCS is part of the solution.  
 
The only folks that don’t understand it is the Saskatchewan 
NDP and yes, we may have talked a little bit about them too. I 
said, back home I had an opposition party that would shut down 
the coal industry because that’s what the member said. Back 
home we have an opposition party whose critic that just 
answered the question supports the Leap Manifesto, Mr. 
Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, I assured them with the good work 
on this side of the House, they needn’t worry because those 
opposition members would stay opposition members. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Global Transportation Hub  
and Details of Land Transactions 

 
Ms. Sproule: — Talk about getting it wrong, Mr. Speaker. But 
the problem is, is that the waste keeps on piling up. We’ve 
spent a lot of time these past few weeks uncovering new 
examples of mismanagement, scandal, and waste at the GTH 
[Global Transportation Hub], and more and more details keep 
emerging about this government’s troubling land-buying 
practices at the GTH. 
 



3240 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2017 

Mr. Speaker, on April 3rd in 2012, the Yanke Group of 
Companies purchased property at the GTH for just $40,000 per 
acre. But on that same day, Mr. Speaker, Highways bought 
back a parcel of land from Loblaw for $160,000 per acre. Mr. 
Speaker, why did Highways pay four times the price for this 
land than they charged for the land just across the street? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment, 
GTH, and SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have to say I’m a little disappointed, only one 
question from the member on carbon capture and sequestration, 
especially on a day like today where we have some 
made-in-Saskatchewan climate change plan, in which the 
members have asked for a made-in-Saskatchewan plan. We’ve 
delivered it. One that includes a tech fund, we’ve delivered it, 
Mr. Speaker. So it’ll be interesting to see whether or not the 
members go with the carbon tax, cap-and-trade, or a 
made-in-Saskatchewan plan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to the member’s question, Mr. 
Speaker, with respect to the member’s question, obviously we’ll 
have to look into exactly the land that the member’s talking 
about. Perhaps it was serviced land compared to unserviced 
land, developed land, undeveloped land, bare land compared to 
land that’s already been developed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think, as I’ve said before, this is a 
generational opportunity for the province of Saskatchewan, one 
that has created nearly $500 million, half a billion dollars in 
private sector investment in just a half a dozen years, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re going to work to see that it’s a success moving 
forward. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, either Highways overpaid 
Loblaw or Yanke got a sweetheart deal from the GTH, and 
either way Saskatchewan taxpayers got hosed. Once again the 
Sask Party can’t seem to understand that the GTH is supposed 
to be in the making money by selling land business, and not the 
losing money for overpaying for land business. Mr. Speaker, 
the GTH is giving land away at low prices to private 
corporations with one hand and then buying it back at 
exorbitant prices with the other. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister is unable to explain why Highways 
paid such a price for the land that they bought from Loblaw 
when at the same time, on the same day, the GTH sold a similar 
parcel of land to a private company for far less. So, will the 
minister provide the appraisals that led Highways to pay 
$160,000 per acre for the Loblaw land but sell similar land on 
the same day for a quarter of that price? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Global 
Transportation Hub. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member from 
Athabasca wants another speech, so I’ll give him another 
speech, Mr. Speaker. On March 4th, 2013, this is what that 
member had to say: 

. . . this opportunity that the NDP envisioned in ’06 [that 
they envisioned in 2006, so the GTH, the Global 
Transportation Hub, their idea], that it would be absolutely 
phenomenal for the city to work in concert with these 
companies to encourage job creation, to encourage 
investment. 

 
Mr. Speaker, 862 full-time jobs, Mr. Speaker, 1,804 
construction jobs, Mr. Speaker, and $485 million in 
private-sector investment — in terms of the standards that that 
member opposite in this House brought forth, well I think 
we’ve met both of those. And we’re only a couple of years in 
operation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With respect to the member from Nutana and her question, I 
don’t exactly know the land descriptions that she’s talking 
about. I don’t know if it’s bare land compared to developed 
land, whether there were improvements on the land. Obviously 
that member opposite would have to take that into account if 
she’s asking for an apples-to-apples comparison. In her case it 
may be an apples-to-Volkswagens comparison for all I know. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Amalgamation of Health Regions 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, from land sales to health care 
services, the Sask Party can’t seem to get their facts straight or 
get the jobs done right. 
 
Today is the first day of the new provincial health authority. 
This is a huge change for our province. It has already cost 
taxpayers $4 million in executive severance packages alone. 
And the very first thing they did was stack the board with Sask 
Party supporters. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people are understandably concerned about what’s 
coming next, but the minister says everything is under control 
and there’s nothing to worry about. But a report last week 
showed Nova Scotia is still working through problems with the 
amalgamations of health authorities that they started more than 
four years ago. Mr. Speaker, after all the Sask Party cuts, what 
concrete assurances can the minister give Saskatchewan people 
that our health services are not in jeopardy? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
amalgamation of the health regions is the result of a very 
well-done report by a three-person panel that was released last 
year around the end of the year, Mr. Speaker. We are 
implementing all the recommendations that that panel 
suggested. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a huge undertaking. There’s 40-some 
thousand people that work in the health care field in this 
province. It’s going to be in excess of a $5 billion budget, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s a huge undertaking. 
 
We are learning from what happened in other provinces, in 
Nova Scotia as the member opposite suggested, and Alberta. 
Recently there was a conference, Mr. Speaker, and some of the 



December 4, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3241 

speakers were from Alberta. The Alberta Health Services 
vice-president of collaborative practice, nursing and health 
professions, Sean Chilton, Mr. Speaker, was one of the people 
that addressed the crowd. He said that in Alberta about $600 
million has been saved in administrative costs since the 
amalgamation of the health regions. Mr. Speaker, this is a huge 
undertaking, this is an important milestone along the way and, 
Mr. Speaker, I look forward to subsequent questions. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Funding for Task Force and Mental Health 
 and Addictions Issues 

 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, last spring the Minister of 
Health said Saskatchewan’s meth crisis was hard to predict. He 
should talk to his colleagues because in 2004 the Premier, the 
then leader of the opposition, asked, “Does the government 
have a handle on the prevalence of it?” Mr. Speaker, the crisis 
the Premier was talking about has really spiked since 2015, and 
it took until last spring for the government to put together a task 
force. If only they’d given the task force the money they need.  
 
Mr. Speaker, these are good people working hard and doing 
what they can. But in the very beginning the Saskatoon Health 
Region addictions consultant, Dr. Peter Butt, said, “The 
frustration is that it’s being done in the context of significant 
fiscal restraints.” Mr. Speaker, instead of bragging about the 
task force or defending the government’s cuts from social 
services to health care, can the minister commit to more funding 
to address this crisis? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, the minister wasn’t bragging 
about the amalgamation of the health regions. Mr. Speaker, 
that’s a very important step towards providing consistency of 
health care to everyone across the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the issue on addictions and crystal meth, we 
take that issue very seriously. It’s been a topic of discussion at 
federal-provincial-territorial Health ministers’ meetings for 
quite some time, Mr. Speaker. We take the issue of all 
addictions very seriously. We’ve continued to fund mental 
health and addictions, Mr. Speaker. We’ll continue to do that. 
We are looking forward to making appropriate use of every 
dollar that the federal government has earmarked for mental 
health for the provinces. Mr. Speaker, I just don’t agree with the 
premise of the member’s question; we take this matter very 
seriously. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Support for Northern Education 
 
Ms. Beck: —Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Back to the North: last 
spring when I asked the then minister of Education, he indicated 
that changes to northern governance of the K to 12 
[kindergarten to grade 12] system could be undertaken as early 
as this fall. But like their commitment not to allow cuts to 

support programs for pre-schoolers, that promise faded into the 
sun. Mr. Speaker, we saw with NORTEP-NORPAC, and as we 
should all know, that changes made to any community, but 
especially in the North, these must be done in close consultation 
if they’re to be successful. 
 
[14:30] 
 
To quote from a briefing note to the minister this August: 
“Otherwise communities will view these changes as being done 
to them rather than with them.” Mr. Speaker, can the minister 
provide an update on the plans for government changes in 
northern divisions and will she commit today to ensuring full 
and complete consultations before imposing any changes? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
answer is absolutely yes. And we’ve been very clear on that 
point, Mr. Speaker, that no changes will be made without 
fulsome consultations in that and other regards, particularly as 
impact a boundary and other changes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think it’s important in the context of the overall picture in the 
North that we emphasize that those supports stretch across 
ministries and across government, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 
provided a total of $425 million for First Nations and Métis 
education and training initiatives since ’07-08. These are 
relevant to this context, Mr. Speaker. In ’17-18 the ministries of 
Advanced Education and Economy have provided nearly 23 
million for income supports, post-secondary education and 
training programs in the North. 
 
The Minister for Advanced Education has referenced the Dene 
Teacher Education Program. Northlands College is training 
future northern teachers right now across the North in La 
Ronge, Buffalo Narrows, Creighton, and Ile-a-la-Crosse. Mr. 
Speaker, several of many commitments to the North. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Understandably people 
in the North are looking for more than just nice words from that 
minister. They’re looking for plans, detailed plans around these 
consultations. Mr. Speaker, this is a chance for that minister to 
redeem herself after all the mistakes that she made in shutting 
down NORTEP and NORPAC, and after her controversy 
around her commitments to treaty education. If the minister 
hopefully has learned that she doesn’t actually know best and 
that consultation will be key to ensuring that any of these 
changes actually meet the needs of people in the North, so this 
is a simple question. I’m asking for details today, Mr. Speaker.  
 
What is stopping that minister from providing details to a full 
and complete consultation before they make any changes to 
northern governance? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, we’ve 
already committed to that, Mr. Speaker. And so to reassert the 
commitment to the North, I think it’s important that we 



3242 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2017 

remember what has actually been accomplished for the North, 
Mr. Speaker. When we formed government in ’07 the 
student/teacher ratio in the North was 18. Today it’s 16.5. Since 
’07-08, funding has increased to our northern school divisions 
by 28.5 per cent. The number of school-based educators has 
increased, Mr. Speaker, by 4.7 per cent. 
 
When we formed government, we have increased the number of 
teachers since then in the North and increased school division 
funding levels, despite the fact that student enrolment has 
declined by 2.2 per cent, Mr. Speaker — important action 
versus talk. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Government House Leader on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Point of order. 
 
The Speaker: — I’ll hear the point of order. I recognize the 
member. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — At roughly the 17 minute of question 
period, I heard the member from Athabasca yell from his seat, 
that’s a lie. That is considered unparliamentary language. I 
would ask that you ask the member to withdraw and apologize 
for that remark. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure what the member 
opposite is referring to in terms of the remarks attributed to the 
member from Athabasca. I’d urge you to review the tape to see 
if that is in fact what had happened and return to the House with 
a ruling further, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I was listening carefully during question 
period. I would like to remind members, you cannot heckle 
what you cannot say on your feet. However, I did not hear 
specifically what the member from Athabasca heckled, and I 
will have to review what was captured. I will return with my 
ruling at a later date. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 

Release of Saskatchewan Climate Change Strategy 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
in October’s Speech from the Throne, the government 
committed to introducing further actions to reduce emissions 
while we continue to oppose a federal carbon tax on 
Saskatchewan.  
 
Today our government has honoured that commitment with the 
release of a strategy called Prairie Resilience: A 
Made-in-Saskatchewan Climate Change Strategy. Today we 
released a comprehensive, forward-looking climate change 
strategy designed to make Saskatchewan more ready and more 
resilient to the impacts of climate change. It is an innovative 
and flexible approach that includes multiple options for 

facilities in the province that emit greenhouse gases. The 
strategy includes new output-based performance standards for 
large emitting facilities as well as a new offset system and 
technology fund. 
 
The strategy supports the province and its people by curbing 
emissions and preparing for changing conditions, all without a 
tax. A responsible climate change strategy needs to protect our 
industries and can’t focus on a tax that unfairly burdens a 
province such as ours, where we rely on natural resources and 
trade, where we produce food and commodities, and provide 
technology for the rest of the world. 
 
A responsible climate change strategy also needs to 
acknowledge that even if we reduce our emissions to zero, 
global climate change will continue to affect our province. We 
need to be ready and resilient to the effects of a changing 
climate, and I want to stress what we mean by resilience and 
why it’s important. 
 
Resilience is a much stronger indicator of effective climate 
action than simply measuring reductions in greenhouse gas 
emissions, because it measures our overall ability to adapt, 
innovate, and even thrive. Multiple systems need to be 
strengthened to improve the resilience of the province as a 
whole. This includes the ability of Saskatchewan’s natural 
systems, including our land, water, and forests; infrastructure; 
communities; and economy to adapt and thrive in a changing 
low carbon economy. 
 
In the strategy you’ll see actions proposed in key areas 
including natural systems; physical infrastructure; economic 
sustainability; community preparedness; and measuring, 
monitoring, and reporting. Each section includes a list of policy 
commitments that we will further develop and engage 
stakeholders on. We will implement sector-specific 
output-based performance standards for facilities that emit more 
than 25 000 tonnes of emissions per year. In Saskatchewan this 
includes uranium mines, gas plants, refineries, steel 
manufacturing, and upstream oil and gas activities. 
 
These facilities will have flexible options, including an offset 
purchase; a best performance credit; engaging in market 
mechanisms outlined in the Paris Agreement — specifically, 
internationally transferred mitigation outcomes; or paying in to 
a technology fund. A provincial tech fund will be enacted to 
meet performance standard obligations and provide investment 
in transformative technologies and innovation. 
 
We will develop and implement an offset system that creates 
additional value for actions that sequester carbon and reduce 
emissions, especially from our cropping systems and forest 
management practices. The offset system is designed to 
recognize the agricultural community and other land 
management practices in our province that are already 
addressing greenhouse gas emissions. These performance 
standards for large-emitting facilities will be developed in 
consultation with industry for implementation in early 2019. 
 
In addition, we will continue to work with companies in 
upstream oil and gas to develop sensible and effective 
regulations for greenhouse gas emissions, and we appreciate the 
work that some producers are already pursuing in this regard. 



December 4, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3243 

To address emissions from methane produced in oil and gas, 
policies will be explored to create market demand for this 
potential resource. These measures are expected to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions from Saskatchewan’s upstream oil 
and gas industry by 40 to 45 per cent of 2015 levels, or between 
four and four and a half megatonnes. 
 
Regarding physical infrastructure, we will introduce regulations 
governing emissions from electricity generation from 
SaskPower and independent power producers and meet the 
province’s commitment of up to 50 per cent electrical capacity 
from renewables by 2030. 
 
We will also implement strategies around transportation and 
related infrastructure to look for opportunities for fuel 
efficiency and other impacts. We’ll adopt the National Building 
Code and National Energy Code, and look for other energy 
performance measures in homes and buildings. And we will 
prepare our communities for the effects of climate change with 
flood plain mapping, preparedness plans, and municipal 
projects. 
 
We believe the strategy is more thought out, more responsible, 
more innovative than any carbon pricing plan in Canada, and 
especially will be more effective than a singular and harmful 
carbon tax. The strategy we’re releasing today is a 
made-in-Saskatchewan climate change action plan that meets 
the needs of our businesses, our residents, our economy, and 
our environment. Our plan outlines the province’s strategic 
direction to kick off a new, more comprehensive conversation 
on how we’re preparing for climate change. 
 
Consultation and engagement will strengthen our ability to 
implement a plan that meets the needs and characteristics of our 
province. I know our strategy will make us resilient to the 
effects of climate change while still addressing emissions in key 
sectors. And I know this strategy will protect families, the 
employees, industries, and economies that Saskatchewan relies 
upon. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
thank the minister for providing his comments in advance so 
that we could have an opportunity to respond, and certainly my 
apologies for not using question period because I knew this 
opportunity was coming at this point in time. 
 
Anyways, Mr. Speaker, until now when we called for this, they 
said it was itself a carbon tax . . . Oh I’m sorry. Okay. Excuse 
me, Mr. Speaker; I got my pages mixed up. Okay. When we 
called for this plan, Mr. Speaker, they said it was a carbon tax. 
For years from the other side on this issue, their rhetoric has 
been forceful but their plan has been non-existent. And despite 
the big announcement today I’m not sure a whole lot has 
changed. 
 
We do have some concerns, Mr. Speaker. We have seen them 
present plans before and then refuse to act. And even if they do 
make it law, there are no clear targets highlighted in this plan. 
Almost a full decade, years, and a plan without targets is no 
plan at all. 

Whenever they get close to something concrete like the 
resilience measure, we keep seeing the words, “to be 
determined.” It seems like the minister himself has no idea if 
this plan will be enough to protect Saskatchewan from the 
federal carbon tax. That arrogance is already hurting 
Saskatchewan people. And shaking fists toward Ottawa may 
make them feel better, but it’s not enough to stop the federal 
tax. To truly protect ourselves from the federal carbon tax, we 
need a truly made-in-Saskatchewan true plan. 
 
Now we’re happy to see that methane was included but, again, 
there’s no actual plan. It’s also good to see that Saskatchewan 
people’s homes and buildings were also considered, but these 
initiatives need to be part of a full, fleshed-out plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have played a lot of politics 
with this issue. But now that they’re claiming to have a plan, 
the problem is it’s actually an announcement without a plan. 
We need to make sure that it actually protects the air that we 
breathe, the water we drink, and that it serves the needs of 
Saskatchewan families. Instead of this assurance, we have “to 
be determined.” We have no targets and we have no guarantee 
that it will even protect us from the federal carbon tax. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I am glad that the minister finally made an 
announcement of some kind, and I applaud that. It’s a first step 
from a party that has, until now, preferred to scream from the 
sidelines. But now we look forward to seeing the details from 
this announcement, getting them laid out, hearing from 
stakeholders. And I hope the minister and the members opposite 
see this as a starting point. And I hope they’re open to building 
on what they announced today and working with us and the 
experts to build something that we can truly call both 
made-in-Saskatchewan and a solution. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 113 — The Planning and Development  
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doke: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of Bill No. 113, The Planning and Development 
Amendment Act, 2017. The Planning and Development Act, 
2007 provides the legislative framework for municipalities to 
manage and facilitate development of their communities. This 
framework supports municipalities with the tools to achieve 
economic growth, environmental stewardship, and social and 
cultural well-being for their communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this bill will incrementally improve 
Saskatchewan’s land use planning framework and save 
taxpayers money. The bill strengthens existing legislation to 
help municipalities plan regionally, support opportunities for 
municipal and provincial infrastructure to service department, 
clarify a planning process for the use of municipal reserves for 
school purposes, and address miscellaneous items. 



3244 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2017 

[14:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of Government Relations consulted 
extensively with internal and external stakeholders to prepare 
this bill. Preliminary engagement sessions were undertaken in 
2014 and 2015. In 2016 and 2017, the ministry undertook 25 
engagement sessions involving stakeholders representing 59 
different organizations. 
 
As part of the ministry’s engagement strategy, individual 
meetings were conducted with the following key organizations: 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, cities of 
Saskatoon and Regina, the Saskatoon and Region 
Homebuilders’ Association, the Regina & Region Home 
Builders’ Association, public and Catholic school divisions, and 
the ministries of Highways and Infrastructure, Education, and 
Agriculture. Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank these and other 
organizations which participated in the consultations. The input 
from these consultations provide valuable insight into 
developing this bill and will contribute to the development of 
vibrant, safe, and self-reliant communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to take just a few minutes to share the 
details of the bill. Regional partnerships can make it easier and 
more cost-effective for municipalities to grow together in the 
future. Additional flexibility is being proposed in this bill for 
those municipalities wanting to plan regionally and manage 
areas of common interest. The existing legislation allows 
regional planning authorities to include a city and adjacent rural 
municipalities. During consultation, stakeholders requested 
additional flexibility to use this type of regional partnership 
tool. In response, this bill enables multiple urban and rural 
municipalities to enter into this type of regional partnership. 
 
Mr. Speaker, schools are necessary to educate the children of 
our growing province. Schools, along with other public 
buildings and recreational facilities, are allowed on municipal 
reserve land under existing legislation. Locating schools on 
municipal reserve land saves the taxpayers of this province 
money. For example, Mr. Speaker, the government’s decision 
to locate nine joint-use schools on municipal reserve in 2014 
saved 36 million in land acquisition costs. 
 
To ensure clarity for all stakeholders involving and planning for 
future schools, amendments to the existing legislation are 
necessary. The bill supports collaboration between 
municipalities, school divisions, and the Ministry of Education 
to jointly develop policies to ensure municipal reserve lands are 
available for school purposes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the provincial highway network benefits from 
residential and business development in our communities. 
Municipalities currently have authority to collect servicing 
agreement fees for public highways. In addition, the Ministry of 
Highways and Infrastructure currently has a transportation 
partnership agreement process for development that will 
increase demand on the highway network. This bill will provide 
the opportunity to coordinate the subdivision process with the 
Ministry of Highways and Infrastructure process. In doing so, 
this bill will help facilitate the appropriate level of public 
highway services. 
 

Mr. Speaker, a number of miscellaneous amendments will 
improve the efficiency of the legislation. These include 
improving public safety by requiring municipalities to have 
land-use planning policies for development adjacent to railway 
operations, streamlining the process for approving authorities to 
enter into development levy agreements, improving procedures 
of the Saskatchewan Municipal Board’s planning appeals 
committee, and modernizing the maximum fee for appeals to 
local development appeal boards. The existing fee of $50 was 
reset in 1973. Changing the maximum fee to $300 accounts for 
inflation and helps offset municipal costs associated with the 
appeal hearings. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I’m confident that this bill will 
improve opportunities for regional planning, clarify municipal 
servicing, and improve planning for municipal reserve lands. 
Together this will facilitate the development of vibrant, safe, 
and self-reliant communities and regions in Saskatchewan. I 
urge every member of the House to review and support this bill. 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill 113. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Government 
Relations has moved second reading of Bill 113, The Planning 
and Development Amendment Act, 2017. Is the Assembly ready 
for the question? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As has 
become the norm in this particular Assembly, I’m pleased on 
behalf of the official opposition to be the first to speak on the 
second reading stage of this particular bill from the opposition 
perspective, Mr. Speaker. And I want to speak very briefly 
about the bill and certainly what the bill intends to do. And 
obviously I also want to take this opportunity to congratulate 
the new Minister of Municipal Government, and certainly I’m 
looking forward to establishing a long-lasting relationship 
maybe for about three more years. And then, Mr. Speaker, then 
we’ll bring in the appropriate government to make the 
significant changes that are required. 
 
But on that note, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that under The 
Planning and Development Amendment Act it talks about the 
conflict of interest provisions that apply to members of a district 
development appeals board and members of any regional 
planning authorities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the bill goes on to explain that there are currently 
10 cities in Saskatchewan that have been granted approving 
authority status. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to speak about that as 
I go down through the bill, but I want to talk a bit about that 
later on. But the important thing right now is this bill speaks 
about the fact that 10 cities in Saskatchewan have the ability to 
have the approval process, and certainly have approval 
authority status, as is pointed out. 
 
An amendment will allow the minister to modify some of the 
terms of an order granting authority status to achieve provincial 
interest. And for example, they used the example they used the 
land for P3 schools. And any other order a minister issues under 
this new section must be published in the Gazette. 
 
Mr. Speaker, currently the ability to apply policies for site plan 
control is limited to commercial and industrial lands. And now, 
Mr. Speaker, this particular bill expands that ability to include 



December 4, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3245 

institutional and mixed-use development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, municipal planning bylaws are now submitted to 
the director of community planning instead of the Minister of 
Government Relations. We need to know who the director of 
community planning is and how they’ll be guided in their 
decision-making process, and what significant difference does it 
make in terms of the rules and regulations and authority as 
compared to the minister himself or herself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it also points out that the minister had and still 
continues to have “. . . the ability to require municipalities to 
amend their official community plan to achieve consistency 
with provincial interests.” 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there’s been a new section of the bill that 
adds some flexibility to timelines that the municipalities have to 
abide by, by the minister’s orders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another section requires “. . . municipalities to 
develop their school site policies collaboratively with the 
Minister of Education, any local school divisions, and any 
municipality(s) that the Ministry of Education determines is 
necessary . . .” 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are changes throughout the bill that’ll impact 
municipalities and how they can plan, how they can develop 
and address regional issues. And this is the important note, Mr. 
Speaker, that this is a fairly significant step in terms of trying to 
understand the relationship between not only the ministry of 
Municipal Government, Mr. Speaker, but also the Ministry of 
Education and, Mr. Speaker, especially with those cities that 
have district development and regional planning authorities 
granted to them under this particular bill. 
 
So this has a fairly significant shift in understanding the 
relationship between the municipal authority boards and the 
Ministry of Education, the Municipal Affairs department, and 
so on and so forth. So it’s important for us to take the time to 
speak to some of the folks that are part of the governance 
structure across the province of Saskatchewan, whether those 
individuals be members of SARM or whether those individuals 
be members of SUMA. Mr. Speaker, we obviously have to also 
talk to the members of the school division, because obviously 
there is some ministerial of Education overlapping here in terms 
of school sites and school zoning and so on and so forth. 
 
So this Act really takes into effect a lot of different components 
as it pertains to planning and development overall and not just 
granting the municipal body — in this case the 10 cities that I 
made reference to — total control over decision making, that 
there is a lot of interaction, inter-collaboration. And of course, 
as we point out, the importance is to make sure that there is 
conflict-of-interest guidelines being imposed on this particular 
process, and that Saskatchewan people’s interests would 
certainly be paramount in some of the discussions. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as you begin to look at the regional 
development opportunities around our cities, it’s quite amazing 
as to what the cities can come up with. Their imagination 
certainly is limitless, Mr. Speaker, and their aspirations to build 
stronger and vibrant and interconnected communities. Even 
though they’re large centres, Mr. Speaker, they do have a 

relationship with their neighbouring communities. And we’ve 
seen some of the beautiful opportunities in planning that many 
of our larger centres undertake, not only for their citizens in 
their immediate area but engaging other communities in the 
vicinity of their particular city. It makes great synergies. It 
makes great opportunities. It makes great vision, and it certainly 
makes for great planning. And, Mr. Speaker, this bill speaks of 
those particular values, and it’s certainly something that we’ll 
pay attention to. 
 
It’s important, Mr. Speaker, to note that I made great reference 
to our city planners and the people that work within SARM and 
SUMA and the fact that they have some very solid experience 
in how to do these things. And the last thing you want to be able 
to do is have a government that has had as sad a record that the 
Saskatchewan Party has had over the last number of years in 
zoning. And you need look no further than the GTH, Mr. 
Speaker, on how they somehow bungled that up right from the 
start. 
 
And this is the worry I think a lot of cities would have under 
this particular bill, is dealing with the party that doesn’t have a 
very good track record when it comes to planning and 
development overall, Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen evidence of that 
day after day after day in this particular Assembly. And I say 
shame to the Saskatchewan Party. I say shame to every single 
member of that caucus that allowed the things that have 
surfaced under the GTH, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the same bill speaks about oversight. The same bill speaks 
about conflict of interest. The same bill talks about a lot of the 
challenges that we see in the opposition that are very paramount 
and apparent within the Sask Party caucus. So it’s almost kind 
of a . . . It’s almost hypocritical, Mr. Speaker, that we see on 
one hand a bill advocating for sound development and being 
above board and addressing conflict of interest to the 
municipalities, in this case the 10 cities. And yet when you see 
the government of Saskatchewan named the Sask Party 
advocating for this, and people turn around saying, okay well, 
Saskatchewan Party government, why don’t you guys take a 
look in your own backyard? And don’t look any further than, as 
I said, the GTH and see how they bungled that up right from the 
start, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it’s kind of an odd message that we’re getting from this 
particular bill, and that’s why it’s important to go to the 
municipalities. We need to talk to the RMs [rural 
municipalities] in and around the cities. We need to talk to the 
people that have gone through this process with the 
Saskatchewan Party government, and really begin to ask them 
what exactly was your experience with this government that’s 
now advocating sound policy development, addressing conflict 
of interest, collaboration, certainly oversight from a number of 
other organizations within government, whether it be health or 
economic development or education. We’re going to ask them 
how they perceive the role of the Saskatchewan Party, as it 
pertains to their experience, when it comes to regional 
development overall, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And again, I go back to the GTH scandal, Mr. Speaker. This is 
something that’s not going to go away, and this is an example, 
Mr. Speaker, that the Saskatchewan Party caucus has given to 
the opposition party. This is the gift that keeps giving and 



3246 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2017 

giving and giving. And yet, Mr. Speaker, to come along with 
bills of this sort, which I think would make a lot of different 
municipalities across the province kind of smile — well that’s 
actually not a smile; it would be considered a smirk, Mr. 
Speaker — because of their experience around how the 
government somehow bungled a great opportunity called the 
Regina bypass and certainly made a joke out of the Global 
Transportation Hub. And, Mr. Speaker, there’ll be more of that 
GTH scandal as we continue, as the opposition, calling these 
folks into account as to how, somehow, they bungled even land 
sales which were something that the people of Saskatchewan 
have a right to know. 
 
So the intent of the development Act, Mr. Speaker, should 
apply to the province of Saskatchewan as well — that if there is 
a conflict of interest there should be oversight. There should be 
immediate repercussions. There should be a ministerial order. 
There should’ve been some action on behalf of the government 
to address the GTH land scandal, Mr. Speaker. Obviously it 
didn’t happen. So now several months later, they prepare a bill 
basically telling the RMs or basically telling the cities in this 
case, Mr. Speaker, here are the rules in which you will develop 
your region and these rules will talk about oversight bias. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, I think the opposition has done a remarkable job 
in providing oversight on their GTH scandal. 
 
[15:00] 
 
So perhaps the Saskatchewan Party should get a mirror and 
have a look at themselves when it comes to the intent behind 
this bill, because quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, they have bungled 
every opportunity around the GTH. They have somehow taken 
good intent and the regional planning that in this case the city of 
Regina undertook and, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party 
somehow interfered. They removed safety barriers that would 
really shine a lot of light in terms of what activity happened in 
that particular area. And, Mr. Speaker, I dare say today that the 
Saskatchewan Party government, as a result of this bill, should 
actually look at themselves in the mirror as opposed to trying to 
scold and certainly trying to direct municipalities as it pertains 
to regional planning authorities. 
 
So I say that to the Saskatchewan Party. Shame on you. You 
should’ve had this all figured out when you guys were 
developing the GTH. And all of a sudden the rules now are 
different because you’re government. Now you put in these 
different rules for cities that have to follow your rules. And, Mr. 
Speaker, again as I’ve said, if you would’ve followed your rules 
then perhaps some of the problems we have today with the 
GTH would have surfaced earlier. There would have been 
severe repercussions and the people of Saskatchewan — the 
taxpayers — would not be out a great number or millions of 
dollars, Mr. Speaker. And that’s the situation. That’s where 
we’re at in this day and age. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out in northern 
Saskatchewan we also watch what the Saskatchewan Party do. 
And I say to the people of Saskatchewan this: that in the 
province as a whole, as you look at this particular bill, a lot of 
the cities as I said in this particular bill, they have these regional 
planning authorities. And in these regional planning authorities 
in and around the cities, Mr. Speaker, there’s some good 
synergies between the private sector, the city aspirations, and, 

as I pointed out, some of the planning around schools. So 
there’s a lot of different issues at play, but there are some very 
good, valuable people involved with city planning. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the regional planning authorities do some very, very 
comprehensive analysis of many opportunities that come their 
way. 
 
So the cities themselves have regional planning authorities, Mr. 
Speaker. The RMs, the rural part of Saskatchewan, have 
SARM, Mr. Speaker. SARM, through the strength of their 
organization and the fact that they have a great number of RMs 
throughout the province, well they have an avenue, and they 
have a process that they can undertake if they wish to regionally 
plan as well. And SUMA . . . And when you look at the towns 
and villages, Mr. Speaker, that also want to lobby and be part of 
the process, not only are they connected with SARM, they’re 
connected to the cities, but they also have what we call SUMA, 
the association of municipal governments across the province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So all these entities . . . You look at the province as a whole. 
The RMs have SARM, and of course the RMs have their land in 
which they are responsible for development and developing 
opportunities as well. And then you look at the cities and towns. 
Cities have these regional planning units. The towns and 
villages have SUMA. And, Mr. Speaker, what does the North 
have? 
 
The North at one time had fur blocks. And, Mr. Speaker, you 
look at some of the typical, if you want to use the phrase, the 
carving of areas in northern Saskatchewan, they had fur blocks. 
And the fur block system had been in place for many, many 
years, and the fur blocks were really our own version of RMs. 
And now we’re hearing that the Saskatchewan Party is trying to 
do away not only with the fur industry, Mr. Speaker, but with 
the fur block system as well. 
 
And I want to say to the Saskatchewan Party, similar to the 
interests behind regional planning authorities, similar to the 
interests behind the creation of RMs under the SARM support, 
similar to how the cities and . . . or the towns and villages 
migrate to SUMA to represent their interests, in northern 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, people have a strong connection to 
that land. And a lot of times the trappers are the conscience of 
that land. 
 
And yet, Mr. Speaker, we see time and time again when it 
comes to any regional planning or any aspirations that we have 
from the northern communities’ perspective, whether it be 
trapping or whether it be harvesting, Mr. Speaker, there is a 
resistance by governments such as the Saskatchewan Party 
government in trying to recognize that authority that exists 
within the people’s inherent right to continue using that land, 
Mr. Speaker. We have seen that time and time again where they 
have fought against the interests of not only the trappers, Mr. 
Speaker, but the commercial fishing industry. And even if 
people want to put a cabin a mile past, a mile into the bush, Mr. 
Speaker, we see incredible resistance by the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So I say to the people of the province, yes, under this bill, under 
this bill you have regional planning authorities for the cities. 
You have SARM and the whole notion of the RMs throughout 



December 4, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3247 

the southern part of Saskatchewan that are being monitored and 
controlled by a local board of people, Mr. Speaker. And in the 
North we had the fur block system. We had the fur block 
system, Mr. Speaker, and these people have lived in these 
communities for years and years and years and years. And yet is 
there any effort, any interest in trying to develop what we see as 
our comparable version of fur blocks as it pertains to RMs in 
the South that the northern and the indigenous people together, 
northern and indigenous people, Mr. Speaker, have been 
working at developing this fur block system in place so they can 
have control and authority around development in and around 
their communities? But when it comes to the senior 
governments such as the Saskatchewan Party government, they 
have no interest whatsoever to protect not only the fur block 
system but the fur industry as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They have steadfastly threatened the existence of the 
commercial fishing industry, Mr. Speaker. They have 
steadfastly resisted the option and opportunity of people of 
building a cabin in and around their communities because they 
simply don’t want to see the Aboriginal, indigenous people 
continue owning land in that region, Mr. Speaker. They have 
consistently trying to push people off that land, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this is one of the messages that I have for them today, Mr. 
Speaker, and that the North is going to get organized. And I say 
this with all respect. I say this in particular note to the minister 
of SERM [Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management] who is here today, that the northern people will 
not be pushed around anymore when it comes to allocation of 
land. They will not take a second seat anymore when it comes 
to protecting their inherent right to access and to harvest lands 
in and around their communities. They will not continue sitting 
by as you grant forestry permits to companies from BC [British 
Columbia] at the expense of local people, Mr. Speaker. They 
will not continue sitting by and hoping, and hoping that you’ll 
have a change of heart. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we speak, the people of the North are beginning 
to organize. We think it’s a fantastic idea in a sense that they’re 
going to work together; they’re going to collaborate together. 
And I say to the First Nations organizations within 
Saskatchewan — the Federation of Sovereign Indigenous 
Nations and, Mr. Speaker, the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan 
and, Mr. Speaker, New North and, Mr. Speaker, all the partners 
that strengthen the North — that now is the time, as we talk 
about regional planning and this particular bill, to send a 
message to the government saying that we are not taking a back 
seat anymore. 
 
As I’ve said time and time again, the northern people have to 
assert themselves on their own land, that we have to say, in the 
words of our former MP [Member of Parliament], take that step 
forward in claiming our land and the opportunities attached to 
the land so we can continue building for the future and stop 
suffering the degradation of our people and our communities 
that we see today, Mr. Speaker. That’s exactly what we intend 
to do. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that fight is coming from many corners. That 
fight is coming from many corners. And I say to you today that 
one of the things that really excites me as an MLA, after being 
here for many years, is the fight coming from the communities. 

And I can say today that the community of Turnor Lake . . . 
And they share borders with the First Nations community of 
Birch Narrows, Mr. Speaker. Both the First Nations of Birch 
Narrows and the hamlet of Turnor Lake, Mr. Speaker, there’s 
First Nations and Métis people, along with non-Aboriginal 
people, that are working together, Mr. Speaker, to protect 
Turnor Lake and Birch Narrows’ future interests. And I’m 
seeing that collaboration over the years, Mr. Speaker, finally 
come together as a united front. And I’m very pleased that I’m 
going to be attending a meeting next week to talk to the elders 
about the fight that’s going to be coming out of the North, when 
we tell people, if the Government of Saskatchewan do not care 
what happens in the North, it is time for us to take matters into 
our own hands. 
 
And the first step is to assert ourselves over our traditional lands 
and territory that we had enjoyed for centuries, Mr. Speaker. 
And this is something that we’re hearing on a consistent, 
continual basis. And as the MLA for the area, Mr. Speaker, I 
am very proud of that message that I got from my constituents 
that are saying to me that, as their MLA, you put the message 
forward that we’re not going to tolerate this anymore. We’re not 
second-class citizens, and we have a right to enjoy the resources 
based on that land as we had for centuries, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is an important matter I think that is not going away. And I 
think 2018, you’re going to see a resurgence and a re-energized 
group of people that are coming forward. And we’re going to 
start asserting ourselves and we’re going to start establishing 
ourselves. And we’re going to dream for our future generations 
that we can have a regional planning authority like this bill 
dictates, as it comes to having powers and abilities to make a 
difference in our own communities, Mr. Speaker, especially 
when they see the current Sask Party government doesn’t care 
for the North or has no plans for the North in any future, Mr. 
Speaker. We can see that very, very clearly and this is the 
reason why I’m quite happy, I’m quite honoured that this 
meeting’s going to be the first of many meetings. And we’re 
going to tell the people, we’re going to tell the people as an 
MLA that we need to continue that fight to have that authority 
granted to us either through the courts, Mr. Speaker, or either 
through discussion or, Mr. Speaker, but we’ve got to have that 
assertive position. 
 
And I can tell the people of Saskatchewan today right across the 
province, as I mentioned, the cities have these planning regions 
as identified in this bill. The RMs have their rural municipal 
boundaries, Mr. Speaker. They have influence in and around the 
lands of their RMs. The towns and villages certainly have their 
authorities through SUMA, Mr. Speaker. In the North, we have 
nothing. 
 
It’s a wide-open field for the Saskatchewan Party to play as to 
who gets a hunting licence, who gets a cabin, who gets our 
forestry, who gets our oil and gas. They make all the decisions 
and the people of northern Saskatchewan sit by and watch all 
the resources get hauled out as we deal and grapple with many 
of the social issues that I spoke about earlier, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And our people have a better plan for themselves, and a better 
vision. And I’m so glad that the work to assert themselves in 
and around their community, the same manner in which this 
development Act allows the cities to assert themselves in and 



3248 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2017 

around their planning areas, their regional planning authorities, 
Mr. Speaker . . . I say to the people of the North, the time has 
come. We’re going to assert ourselves and I’m going to be a 
proud part of that, a proud partner to rally as many people as we 
can to begin that fight. 
 
So I’m giving notice today to the Saskatchewan Party 
government that the North will not take a back seat any longer. 
We are going to be coming at you, and coming at you steady till 
you begin to recognize and respect the fact that we are tired of 
going through the same process of trying to build a cabin, we 
are tired when the same process of trying to harvest an 
opportunity on the resources in and around our communities for 
our children and our grandchildren, and we are tired of being 
nice — being nice to the point where we’re always asking for 
permission to do what is right for our communities and our 
people. And, Mr. Speaker, every time we do that, we are turned 
away. 
 
So as much as people want to fantasize about continuing on 
how they’ve been operating and treating the northern people, 
Mr. Speaker, that movie is over. We are now going to start a 
fresh approach and a fresh chapter. And I’m going to tell the 
trappers, the commercial fishing industry, the traditional 
resource users, and people of the North, the people of the North 
— and that includes First Nations; that includes Métis; that 
includes the non-Aboriginal community people that have made 
northern Saskatchewan their home — that I think it’s time we 
stand together and we start demanding our own way of 
governing in northern Saskatchewan and stop taking orders 
from the Saskatchewan Party government that do not have our 
interests at heart. 
 
And that’s an important message that I have for the people of 
Saskatchewan today. We do not do this out of disrespect or 
disregard to the Saskatchewan people, who we know in their 
hearts and minds have this compassion for northern 
Saskatchewan, have this understanding, and have the belief that 
the North can make a significant difference on their own if they 
are afforded the authority and the tools to make that difference. 
And the Saskatchewan Party has not done that. They have 
punished the North, Mr. Speaker, and they continue punishing 
the North. And sooner or later, you punish a people long 
enough and hard enough that they will rebel, that they will fight 
back and they will organize and they will assert themselves on 
their own land. 
 
[15:15] 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s important to tell people once again as I 
summarize this bill, the cities have planning regions. They’ve 
done a wonderful job. The RMs have SARM in which they 
have authority and control in certain areas of their land within 
their RM boundaries. The towns and villages have SUMA, Mr. 
Speaker, that really works with them very closely. 
 
What does the North have? The North have fur blocks, Mr. 
Speaker, and now the fur blocks are being threatened by the 
Saskatchewan Party government. Land and resource 
development Acts are changing how land is being allocated, 
Mr. Speaker, and bit by bit the Saskatchewan Party is 
destroying the future of the North. Bit by bit they’re eroding the 
authority and opportunity people see and should have on their 

lands, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think that the northern people have been pushed far 
enough. Now it’s time for a fight, and I say to them that this 
opportunity through this bill will afford us that fight. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we have just begun. And I want to serve notice to the 
Saskatchewan Party government that we’re not going to go 
away, that we’re going to do what is right. We’re going to do 
what is right, done by a lot of people in the province of 
Saskatchewan. They have fought for their land. The northern 
and Aboriginal people will fight for their land as well. 
 
It is a fight they understand. It is a fight that they can respect, 
Mr. Speaker, and if we want to build a better future we’ve got 
to have that authority and ability to be able to have decisions in 
and around our community, made by us, Mr. Speaker, for our 
interests and without having to go through the provincial 
government for every piece of land that people want to build a 
cabin on or for every opportunity we have to harvest, whether it 
is plants, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s berries, whether it’s 
animals. We have to have full engagement and the same 
opportunities as identified in this particular bill, Mr. Speaker. 
The North needs that opportunity as well. And any government 
that denies the people of the North their right to assert 
themselves on their land, I say shame on them. And if they 
continue denying that opportunity, the people will only be 
pushed so far and then they’ll start to push back; they’ll start to 
organize. And they certainly will do this in a very intelligent, 
responsible manner, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I think it’s important that people of Saskatchewan know this 
is our belief. This is our desire. This is our vision. This is our 
fight from this day forward. And we ask that you respect that 
fight because certainly we need to change the direction that the 
North is currently facing. The future’s not bright because we 
have been patient long enough, and we continue having 
Saskatchewan . . . governments like the Sask Party government 
that ignore the North and are ignorant of the challenges in fact 
that northern people face. I think, Mr. Speaker, enough is 
enough. On that note, Mr. Speaker, I would encourage people 
of the province to understand what the North is going through 
and to show them that the fight has just begun. 
 
On that note, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 113. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 113. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 114 — The Vehicles for Hire Act 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I am pleased to rise today to move second reading of Bill 114, 
An Act respecting Vehicles for Hire and making consequential 
amendments to other Acts. 
 



December 4, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3249 

The Act, administered by Saskatchewan Government Insurance, 
outlines the regulations for transportation network companies, 
also known as ride-sharing companies. This Act provides a 
framework for these companies to operate safely in our 
province, and sets out requirements for companies and drivers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, technology is moving swiftly, and we have heard 
significant interest from Saskatchewan residents in having 
access to ride sharing. Our government believes in being 
prepared for new ways of doing business, and this Act paves the 
road for ride-sharing services to operate here. 
 
Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, we also know that impaired driving 
is a problem in Saskatchewan. Combatting impaired driving is a 
priority for our government. We introduced tough measures in 
2014, and bolstered them at the start of this year. A few weeks 
ago, we introduced stronger penalties for people who drive 
impaired with children in the vehicle. Impaired driving is the 
leading cause of fatalities on Saskatchewan roads, and any tool 
we can use to combat this issue is welcome. 
 
Ride-sharing services are another alternative to driving while 
impaired, which makes it worth our consideration. It is not the 
whole answer, Mr. Speaker, but it can be part of a solution. 
 
The Act sets out important regulations for ride-sharing 
companies, making it clear what is required for these companies 
to operate in Saskatchewan. Licensing of the businesses will be 
required, Mr. Speaker. The proposed Act also addresses who 
will be able to drive for these services and what skills they need 
to do so. Drivers will require a prescribed licence and will not 
be able to drive for a ride share if they have been convicted of 
certain criminal offences. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, these ride-sharing companies will need to 
file written evidence of motor vehicle liability insurance with 
SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance], and they are 
required to insure every vehicle that provides service under the 
automobile insurance Act. These regulations are being created 
with the safety of everyone on the road in mind. Finally it is 
very important to note that the authority to pass bylaws 
regulating these companies will rest with municipalities, very 
similar to how taxi companies are already regulated. Mr. 
Speaker, one more thing I’d like to highlight is that we have 
studied other jurisdictions in the creation of this Act and looked 
at how these regulations should be applied here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I speak in my role as Minister of SGI, I 
often end my remarks by reminding people to plan a safe ride 
home and take care out there. I’m confident that people of 
Saskatchewan will welcome this new option that will help them 
do just that. Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill 114, An 
Act respecting Vehicles for Hire and making consequential 
amendments to other Acts. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Crown Investments has 
moved second reading of Bill No. 114. Is the Assembly ready 
for the question? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Certainly for my opening comments I want to say that . . . I’ll 
preface my opening comments with the fact that they’ll be very, 
very brief on this particular bill. Many members of my caucus 

will be certainly elaborating on this particular bill as time 
progresses and as the bill makes its way through the Assembly. 
I think it’s important to note that there’s a lot of information 
here that we have to certainly digest and to also share and to 
network feedback points as well. So I will just be very brief in 
my opening statements on Bill 114. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the summary on this particular bill: transportation 
network companies require a licence issued by the municipality, 
and the municipality can make bylaws around licensing, 
standard fees, and records and so on and so forth. And, Mr. 
Speaker, there’s also discussion around the trips between 
municipal governments, municipalities of course, and the 
bylaws of each of the municipalities where the trip originated 
from apply. Of course all drivers must have a driver’s licence. 
All vehicles must be registered as required by The Traffic Safety 
Act. The transportation network company must prove they have 
insurance. Information to be provided to the insurance is name 
and place of business, name and address of drivers, lists of 
vehicles providing that service, geographic service or area of 
service, proof of licence to operate, etc. This, of course, 
information has to be provided, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The government still retains the power to suspend or cancel a 
registration permit to a transportation network company if they 
fail to comply with the Act and regulations. Government have 
regulating powers on defining vehicles, prescribing classes of 
driver’s licences, prescribing a special feature indicating that a 
vehicle may be used for vehicle-for-hire services, prescribing 
insurance premiums, and procedures for suspending and 
cancelling a licence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s no question that this particular bill has 
co-operation required on many levels, and obviously the 
municipalities will play a key role in which they will license 
and create the bylaws for this particular industry. Ultimately it’s 
up to the province to ensure the safety of the communities, 
consumers, and drivers. As the minister indicated, and as I 
pointed out, that we’ll be taking this bill to committee and 
looking for clarification from the minister and for input from all 
the stakeholders that may be involved. And we would invite 
that very publicly here today. 
 
And of course, Mr. Speaker, regulations that affect taxi 
companies have been developed for decades to protect both the 
public and the drivers. And, Mr. Speaker, no one is saying no to 
bringing in ride-sharing companies, but regulations are needed 
to be in place to ensure the safety of consumers and drivers. 
And that is the role of the provincial government and, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s identified in this particular bill. And we’ll be 
looking forward to bringing this bill to committee to flesh out 
these details with the minister. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, about the only closing comment I’d have on 
this particular bill is that I would ask a lot of people for their 
valued input. It’s important to note we need to have that advice. 
As we’ve said time and time again, it is my opinion that this 
government doesn’t know what it’s doing on 99.99 per cent of 
their files. And it’s important that we get networks in place to 
have people give us advice and how, as the official opposition, 
we could warn this current government of what they’re doing 
wrong, different people that are being affected by these bills, 
and in this case Bill 114, that if there’s certain perspectives we 



3250 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2017 

can offer as the opposition . . . 
 
Our interests of course are the consumer. The interests of course 
are the safety of the consumer and making sure that these 
operations are licensed properly. And certainly I think 
regulatory processes must be undertaken. But before we get to 
that stage, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got to have that network. We’ve 
got to have that input. And we’ve certainly got to have that 
advice from various people that are being impacted. 
 
So on that note, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 114, 
The Vehicles for Hire Act. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has adjourned 
debate on Bill No. 114. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 100 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 100 — The 
Agrologists Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure today 
to rise and enter into debate on Bill No. 100. And this is The 
Agrologists Amendment Act, as has been noted, a piece of 
proposed legislation that would update this Act. I believe that 
the last substantive changes came in in 1994. 
 
The Agrologists Act, just for a bit of a history lesson, we were at 
the forefront in this province, Mr. Speaker, with regard to this 
Act. In 1946 . . . Or I guess we were the second jurisdiction in 
Canada after Quebec to regulate the profession of agrology. 
And this is an Act that has served the profession and the people 
of Saskatchewan well, Mr. Speaker, over the years. But as 
happens when you have legislation in place for that long, it is in 
need of periodic updates, and that certainly is the case here. 
 
We’ve heard from the agrologists themselves that they have 
been asking for a number of changes over the last several years. 
We had opportunity on a number of occasions to speak with 
them, and they have certainly indicated to us that these changes 
are in line with what they’ve been asking for. 
 
I’ll maybe just briefly go through some of the changes that are 
proposed with Bill No. 100. And they do pertain almost 
exclusively to those practising agrology in the province, but it’s 
worth going through. 
 
One of the things that Bill 100 does is broadens the scope, the 
definition of what it is to practise agrology. This is a definition 
that a profession — as many have, as you can imagine, Mr. 

Speaker — over the last 70 years, or 60 or 70 years, the 
profession has grown and the scope has changed. So this 
definition proposes to sort of keep pace with the profession of 
agrology as it’s practised in this province today, and in fact as 
it’s practised in other jurisdictions across Canada. This 
modernizes the definition and sort of broadens the scope to 
include fields such as bioresources and environmental 
remediation — certainly growing fields in this province and 
across the country. I think when this Act was first brought forth 
in 1946, the profession of agrology would have focused mainly 
on crops and cattle production and sciences around those, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This change also allows for the alignment of that definition, as 
noted, with other jurisdictions in Canada. In fact I believe most 
jurisdictions in Canada have this sort of broadened scope of 
practice, and it would make sense for a whole host of reasons to 
update that to ensure that when you talk about an agrologist in 
Manitoba and Saskatchewan and Ontario, that that would be a 
similar or the same definition. And this was one of the updates 
that the agrologists as well had asked for. 
 
[15:30] 
 
It also updates the terms, a number of terms, such as moving the 
term “membership certification” to “licence.” And this is 
something that also was asked for by the agrologists, and it 
really updates and reflects the model professions Act, as we’ve 
seen other bodies, such as the nurses, move to. So that I think is 
a very reasonable update and one that’s contained in this bill. 
 
There are some other changes that are proposed here. One is 
allowing independence for people who have less than a 
four-year degree — I’m just looking for it here — that it would 
allow them to have a bit of a provisional licence in the province. 
Those with less than a four-year degree would be allowed to 
practise independently but would have a restricted licence. And 
this is something that we do see in other professions. 
 
It also exempts professional engineers, geoscientists, and 
forestry workers from the right to practise . . . to having to be 
members of SIA, the Saskatchewan Institute of Agrologists. 
And that is a change that is required because we do have this 
overlap of scope of practice, for example the professional 
engineers and geoscientists. And that is something that the 
minister and the ministry had consulted with APEGS, the 
Association of Professional Engineers and Geoscientists of 
Saskatchewan. And in conversation with Mr. Robert 
McDonald, the ED [executive director] and registrar of APEGS, 
certainly they concur that that seems like a reasonable provision 
within this Act. 
 
So often in this Assembly I find I’m standing up to speak to 
bills with a lot of questions and not being entirely certain about 
what the changes or what the proposed legislation is meant to 
do, who’s calling for it, who’s been consulted, and what the 
intended outcomes are here. And as I did mention to the 
minister last week, I think it is really appreciated when it’s 
really nicely set out. Both in the explanatory notes in the bill 
and in second reading comments, those questions are answered 
for us: again, you know, what the intent is of the legislation, 
who was consulted, what the intended outcome is. 
 



December 4, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3251 

And it also allows us to meet with those stakeholders. I know in 
the second reading comments by the minister, they noted that 
they had had consultation with employers of agrologists; 
educational institutions, both in this province and in other 
provinces; as well as impacted ministries, as noted, Sask 
Environment and the Water Security Agency. 
 
I noted really general support for these proposals, and that has 
been the case for us as well when we’ve talked to those groups, 
as I noted. I know Al Scholz from SIA has been here on a 
number of occasions, and we’ve had good opportunity to 
discuss this with him, as well as APEGS and other impacted 
organizations and agencies. 
 
We’ve also had correspondence with SIA just asking about 
expedited . . . or passage, you know, making sure that we’ve 
had opportunity to fully look at the proposed changes, to meet, 
to consult with those groups impacted. And that is afforded to 
us when that type of consultation has gone on and there’s such a 
clear indication in second reading comments about what it is 
that is proposed by the legislation. 
 
Just if I could read into the record . . . At the end of my 
comments today, I am going to move a motion to send this bill 
to committee because I think it is reasonable, and for reasons 
that I will outline in comments here by SIA, that when it makes 
sense for us, there’s . . . You know, the role of opposition is to 
ask those questions. It is to provide that oversight, ensure that 
there’s transparency. But when it makes sense on both sides of 
the House and there’s a benefit, a reasonable benefit to those 
that we represent, we have no problem with ensuring swift 
passage of legislation like that. Again that I think is reasonable. 
 
If I could, to read into the record from SIA and from Al Scholz: 
“If the Bill 100 amendments come into place before January 
1st, 2018, it would allow SIA to present the required bylaw 
amendments to the general meeting, which is held in April, and 
allow the agricultural technologists to practise independently by 
April 30th, 2018.” Obviously that would be all pushed back by 
another year if this bill were to be held over to the spring 
session.  
 
So again in light of those timelines as well as our consultation 
and the minister’s consultation with people impacted in the 
industry, and as well as I think we’ve had a chance . . . We’ll 
have some opportunity this evening in committee, but having a 
full opportunity to do our due diligence on this side of the 
House, I think that we are more than comfortable to move this 
bill to committee and have an opportunity to allow passage 
potentially this week. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will conclude my remarks and 
move to move Bill 100, The Agrologists Amendment Act, to 
committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the member that Bill No. 100 be now read a second time. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill No. 100, The 
Agrologists Amendment Act, 2017 be committed to the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 85 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 85 — The 
Reclaimed Industrial Sites Amendment Act, 2017 be now read 
a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise today to enter into adjourned debates on Bill 85, The 
Reclaimed Industrial Sites Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
So of course when we’re talking about a reclaimed industrial 
site, we’re talking about a site where the government accepts 
responsibility for land that, in consequence of development and 
use, requires long-term monitoring and sometimes maintenance. 
So these are some important sites that exist across our province 
that we need to be able to look after. So we need to give 
important consideration to changes to this legislation. 
 
So what this legislation . . . What this bill proposes is that the 
minister now requires that a site holder has provided acceptable 
financial assurance before a closed site can be accepted into an 
institutional control program. A new section outlines that the 
minister can transfer a closed site from the ICP [institutional 
control program] to a responsible person. 
 
There’s a new section that allows a minister to appoint a fund 
advisory committee to advise on the Institutional Control 
Monitoring and Maintenance Fund, and this is mostly on 
long-term investments of the funds. There’s definitely a concern 
that I have around this piece, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where this 
committee they’re proposing is exempt from liability for 
investment decisions. There becomes a question about who’s 
accepting the liability for the decisions it makes. It seems that 
the committee is likely going to be composed of Econ 
employees. So that is a question that I have, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, about who is ultimately responsible for those 
decisions. 
 
The bill also maintains that the minister must conduct a review 
of the Act every five years, but it removes the specifics on who 
this review must consult and the requirement to review that 
money and the funds is sufficient to meet the needs of the sites 
accepted into the program. So we have some serious concerns 
about removing specific agencies or entities from this process. 
In the explanatory notes, it was identified that the stakeholders 
consulted strongly support the five-year-review process. So I 



3252 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2017 

think that we need to be able to maintain the integrity of that in 
this process as well. But there is definitely a question emerging 
around who is involved in that process and who conducts that 
review. 
 
So many of these . . . Many of us have these sites in our riding, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, whether we’re talking about a former gas 
station or a mine site that has been closed. Many of these sites 
could have been closed for various reasons. This is the second 
time we’ve reviewed this bill because this is part of the 
five-year-review process that we’re working on. So in 
accordance with that fact, we’re reviewing it now. I think 
government has an important role to play here, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, in protecting these sites and also protecting the 
citizens that exist here. And the ICP or the institutional control 
program has the responsibility to remediate these lands and to 
monitor cleanup. So there’s an important responsibility that is 
held by this program. 
 
I understand that these mechanisms can be beneficial to both 
industry and to the environment. So it serves the industry in 
making sure that we have someone responsible for monitoring 
cleanup of the sites. It also protects our environment and makes 
sure that we are . . . Or the goal is to protect the environment 
and make sure that we are passing along that appropriately to 
the next generation. 
 
And I understand that the minister has indicated that 
stakeholders from industry, many different stakeholders from 
industry have been consulted, which is an important part of any 
of this, building any of these bills, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where 
we want to be able to consult with industry. We want to be able 
to make sure that relevant stakeholders have been consulted, but 
I’d be interested to learn about the depth of that consultation, 
specifically what feedback has been received from those 
individuals. 
 
And I want to raise something here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
my colleague from Regina Lakeview identified, some 
thoughtful comments that I would like to echo here. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I am quoting Hansard from November 29th, where my 
colleague from Regina Lakeview said: 
 

There’s also a new section that outlines that the minister 
can transfer a closed site from the institutional control 
program to a responsible person or entity. This is 
something I do have a lot of questions about. It’s not really 
explained in the second readings why, once a site goes into 
ICP, I’m not sure what the incentive would be to pull it 
back out and transfer control to a private entity. When it is 
in the ICP, there are certain oversights, and certainly the 
review of this legislation is one of those oversights. 

 
So she talks about how there wasn’t really an explanation for 
this provided. Maybe it came out of consultations, but that’s not 
really clear. It seems like this is a significant change so it would 
be good to pinpoint what reasons exist for this change, and 
perhaps we’ll get a chance to discuss that a little bit more in 
committee as a key piece, as a key change to this proposed bill. 
 
As I understand it currently, once the lands are transferred into 
the ICP they remain there, so this is a significant divergence 
from what we have seen up to this point. So we should 

definitely be talking about it and finding out a little bit more on 
why this change exists, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’re talking 
about something quite different here that’s being proposed than 
what we have seen in the past. 
 
Certainly I know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that when we’re talking 
about Bill 85, many of my colleagues will have more to say 
about this particular piece of legislation. We’ll have some more 
questions in committee, and the critic will have some more 
questions. But with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to 
move that we adjourn debates on Bill 85. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 
Fairview has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 85, The 
Reclaimed Industrial Sites Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 86 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Merriman that Bill No. 86 — The 
Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2017 be now read 
a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s a pleasure to rise today and enter into this debate on Bill 
No. 86, An Act to amend The Child and Family Services Act. 
And it’s one that I’ve been following very closely in the last 10 
years largely because, for many of those years, I was the critic 
for Social Services, and was so in 2009 when the 
then-children’s youth advocate, or advocate for the child at the 
time, released a damning report, a stinging report called A 
Breach of Trust. And in that A Breach of Trust report he called 
on the government to report, to fix The Child and Family 
Services Act in many ways, but one particularly was around the 
issue around best interests of the child. It would be interesting 
. . . The Children’s Advocate at the time, Marv Bernstein, at the 
time really talked a lot about how important that was and 
whether or not this work that is before us today would meet that 
test. 
 
Now I do want to say that this issue has been facing . . . This is 
a tough, tough, tough, tough issue. It’s a tough one for everyone 
in this province. We all want the very best for our families and 
we all want the very best for children. Children are so 
vulnerable, and it is a difficult thing to know. Families are 
sacrosanct in the sense that we do not want to pass judgment or 
make a cultural decision or let racist or other types of 
stereotypes interfere with our willingness to do well and help 
other families who may be at risk in our communities. It’s a 
very difficult balancing act and whether . . . 
 
I just want to say that, and I want to acknowledge that this is 
one that’s challenging, challenging for the people who work in 



December 4, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3253 

social services, and has been ever since the inception of 
community really because we do want to do our very best. But 
we have to make sure that we do it in an appropriate and 
cultural-sensitive way, and we do have to think about what’s in 
the interest of the child, what’s in the very best interest of the 
child. 
 
And this is not easy because, and particularly when we see, and 
rightfully so, the Children’s Advocate is rightfully named, the 
advocate for the child because the child is in a vulnerable 
circumstance because of age, because of knowledge, because of 
experience, cannot make the kind of judgments, cannot have the 
kind of responsibility that the adults in their circumstance might 
have. And so we’ve often had, I know in my office, parents 
come forward and say, hey I feel like I’m being mistreated; I’m 
not being understood. I’m the parent. I should be heard more 
because I do have the children’s interest at heart. And actually 
in many ways, I’ve counselled the parents to say you have your 
rights, your interests at heart. You’re the parent and you do 
have rights, but they’re not necessarily . . . Often, often they 
align with the child but sometimes they may not. And so while I 
counsel them to make sure they’re treated fairly by the 
government, that would mean going to the Ombudsman or 
some other advocate, because it’s so clearly, clearly to me that 
there are many perspectives in this situation before us. 
 
So this report, A Breach of Trust, came to us in the end of 
February of 2009 and I know that . . . And it was done, it was 
done really in the sense of the urgency around overcrowding for 
kids in foster homes. And I was the critic at the time and we had 
asked many, many questions about that. We saw this situation 
happening in Manitoba. We saw it happening in other provinces 
where overcrowding of foster care homes was reaching an 
epidemic, and we clearly needed, clearly needed to do 
something. And the Children’s Advocate at the time identified 
many, many fronts on which action was needed. And some of 
them, I have to say, I have questions still for the government of 
the day. But in many ways I would say we often reached out to 
the government of the day. 
 
And I look at what happened in British Columbia, where they 
have a standing committee for the child and family, the standing 
committee on youth, children, and families, something along 
those lines. And it was done, it was done also sort of in the 
same sort of scenario we had here. It was done and a report was 
done by a retired judge, a retired judge actually from 
Saskatchewan. He said we need to take the politics out of this. 
We need to take the politics out of this. 
 
And I couldn’t agree more. I couldn’t agree more, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, because there were too many times where as critic I 
was saying and criticizing the government of the day, the 
minister of the day. And we had too many situations where I 
think the child’s best interests were not being served, but we 
made it political because we were not working together. 
 
You know the government, the ministry would try to, in many 
ways, contain the issue, whatever was happening. And that 
meant not letting many people know. And in fact, in many 
ways, that kind of blew up. It blew up on the government 
because at the end of the day, and rightfully so, we have a 
Children’s Advocate who will investigate, who will investigate. 
That’s why we have that legislative officer who will be neutral 

but do the best job to investigate and act on the best interests of 
the child. 
 
And so it makes the adults in the room not look all that adult 
because we’re not working together to support them, but really 
we should. And it’s been something I’ve called for in the last 
several years because of my reading. It just seems to me that the 
children of our communities right across this province deserve, 
they deserve so much more. They deserve a higher duty of care, 
and we have big questions about that. I’ve had questions and I 
continue to have questions about it. And I know the deep irony 
of this, the very deepest irony of this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
here we’ve gone through a period of boom and we’ve not seen 
the kind of impact . . . The children who are the most vulnerable 
still are suffering. 
 
And you know, I know the people that work in foster care are 
just doing such a phenomenal job but it’s challenging. It’s super 
challenging. And I know the First Nations community and I 
know the Métis community are stepping up as best as they can. 
But still we are where we are today, and now we are looking at 
a bill that is some eight years . . . has been called for eight years 
now and even perhaps longer, that I know was called for in 
February 25th, 2009, that report. And the minister at the time 
said that they would conclude the consultations and conclude 
that work, and we would be coming forward with a report of 
amendments for The Child and Family Services Act, 
particularly around the section 4 that deals with the statement 
regarding best interests of the child. 
 
And you know, I took a look back to see, so I see there were 
some notes and the comments that say that they weren’t really 
changed all that much. There’s some words changed in one 
particular phrase around cultural interests, where it’s inserted. 
And I’ll talk more about that. That’s very important. But 
generally the last time that section, section 4, was amended was 
in 1989. 
 
And so clearly it hasn’t been as updated as it might be. And it 
would be very interesting to go back and talk to the children’s 
youth advocate. And I hope that the critic will do that, say, so 
you called for this in A Breach of Trust. Now we do have a new 
children’s youth advocate. And I hope that he is current and has 
read A Breach of Trust. I’m sure he has because that is one that 
was really, for this government, the Sask Party government, set 
a lot of the direction for where we are. And one of the things, 
the primary things, were to fix the “best interests” statement in 
the Act. 
 
So we will be looking and finding out, did that actually . . . does 
it meet the benchmarks, the expectation of the youth advocate, 
and is that the case? Does it meet the benchmarks of the First 
Nations community? Is it adequate for them when they reflect 
on their children, what’s in the best interest for their children, 
and in terms of the Métis communities and other communities 
too? I think this is very, very important. 
 
So there is a lot here. And while the minister talks about this 
being the first of the change . . . And of course we actually read 
in the paper, I think it was today or over the weekend, the 
changes that are forthcoming. We’re going to be looking very 
closely at these because they are overdue. 
 



3254 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2017 

Now we have seen some changes, and I do want to take a 
minute and just highlight some of the changes that have 
happened. One of the most promising, and I use that word 
cautiously, is what we’ve heard from the federal government 
around Jordan’s principle, and the fact that the Jordan’s 
principle speaks to the concept or the idea that a child presented 
in a health care facility, such as a hospital or emergency care, 
will be dealt with and get the services that they need right away. 
And then after the fact, after the fact, they determine, they will 
determine who is the payer for those services because if the 
child is from, well we could say, would say, on-reserve or is 
with a First Nations Band, then that would be the federal 
government paying for that. And that’s very important that they 
do pay their share. 
 
But the issue is not . . . don’t determine that before. And we’ve 
had . . . In fact that’s the name of the principle. It comes from a 
young child who suffered and, if I’m not wrong, I think actually 
passed away in terms of the care or lack of care being provided 
because of a squabble over whose jurisdiction was going to pay 
for the services that that child needed. And that’s just wrong. 
Now the federal government has taken it to court several times 
to, what they would say, we need more clarification on this 
interpretation of this principle. We think the principle is 
straightforward. 
 
And I remember when the concept came forward, and many of 
us celebrated it and thought this is a really good thing and we 
should make this one of our key operating principles — we will 
provide services for children, no matter who is the payer. We 
can always find out who pays the bill after the fact, but not 
before the fact. But the federal government saw it a different 
way, saw that they needed to determine first who was going to 
pay. And that became a nightmare, a nightmare for parents who 
face these issues daily when their child was sick and needed 
health care and the issue was going to be, at the hospital, who 
was going to look after the bill. And that’s just wrong. 
 
We have heard just . . . [inaudible] . . . the last few days, that 
Minister Philpott has decided that they are not going to actually 
ask the courts for clarification, that they are going to accept the 
principle and work . . . make that happen. And so that’s very, 
very good. 
 
The other issue though I’d still . . . And I’m not sure, maybe 
others can clarify with me, but the other issue around human 
rights and the fact that Cindy Blackstock raised in terms of 
financing for First Nations children in care and how much 
money was being spent per child compared to children off 
reserve, and how much money was being spent on them, and 
called it what it was. It was a case of human rights and it was 
racist in terms of the care, the commitment that the federal 
government had towards First Nations children and the 
outcomes that we saw. And it was no fault of the social workers 
but it was the fault of the resources that the government of the 
day was providing for First Nations children. And that was 
something that Cindy Blackstock had taken to the federal 
Human Rights Tribunal I think two or three times and won 
several times. So it’s just a matter of having it operationalized, 
and we sure hope that it does. 
 
[16:00] 
 

So these changes that we see before us, The Child and Family 
Services Act, the amendments, are ones that we think are 
critically, critically important in the sense that they’re done 
right and that we will have to go back to these stakeholders and 
say, is this the right move that you see us making? Because it is 
so critical that they’re not done poorly or we have unintended 
consequences, and it’s a huge, huge issue. 
 
You know, one of the issues that I often raised and raised in the 
House in question period was around the issue of the number of 
deaths in care for kids who had died while in care of the 
government and the Minister of Social Services. So I read with 
interest that one of the changes will be more clarity around the 
term “parent” because that is one that is often used to describe 
the Minister of Social Services, that they in fact act in lieu of 
the parents, the natural parents. And this is not a small thing. 
This is a hugely important thing, and so what is the legal 
implication of this change, this, what they would say is a 
clarification? Is it a more narrow definition to escape some 
more responsibility? I don’t know. I’m not trained in that area. 
I’m not trained at all in law, so I won’t say I’m trained in that 
area of law because that would be misleading as well. But I 
don’t know. I just have to say that is a flag that I would raise. 
 
And so I want to say that there is many things that have focused 
our attention in this legislature in my period of time. And of 
course it goes back to the death of baby Andy on the Montreal 
reserve, Montreal Lake reserve. And so these issues are no 
stranger to any government, but it’s one that we need to make 
sure we get it right and that we balance being bold and taking 
good steps for our children, but also making sure we don’t put 
them at further risk and that in fact we can do better for them 
because we know . . . Well I mean I don’t have to go into the 
reasons why we know kids are our future. I think we can all 
relate to that. But they are so vulnerable. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I do want to just reflect on a few things 
here that I’ll now . . . I’m sort of getting to the main part of my 
speech here and talk about what the minister had said. He talked 
about taking a phased approach to rewriting the child welfare 
program legislation, and the amendments in this bill 
demonstrate this continued progress. And he talked about some 
earlier works talking about disclosure of information and 
strengthening provisions governing the ministry’s delegation 
agreements with First Nations Child and Family Services 
agencies, and we saw how that played out. I think it was either 
last June or the June before where the Saskatoon Tribal Council 
ended up going to court over this issue. And I’m not sure how 
that ended or if it’s still in play. 
 
But again, you know, we’d like to see, and I think what’s really 
important and that if we had a road map, a plan of how this was 
going to be implemented. How are these details going to be 
rolled out? Where are we going at the end of this? What does 
that look like? Is it continued, just you know . . . And 
sometimes this is what this government seems to do is careen 
from one crisis to another and it’s crashing from one crisis to 
another crisis to another crisis without having a clear vision put 
forward. And I really worry that this is the kind of thing that 
happens when we have this kind of, trust me; we know where 
we’re going. And we really have to say, do you really know 
where you’re going, you know, and is there really a plan? Are 
you bringing people along with you? Are you heading towards 



December 4, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3255 

something or running away from something? 
 
And I think this is really, really worrisome that we have a 
situation that’s so critical, that is so critical, and I know 
members over there are very keen on this issue, but it is really 
important. It really is important when we talk about children in 
care. So where are we going with this? Where are we going? 
And I didn’t see, or I didn’t read that vision. I didn’t read that 
vision in the minister’s comments, you know. He just talked 
about a phased approach, and really the underlining thing is that 
it’s in many ways a bureaucratic response to this. 
 
You know, it was interesting that he talks about some of the 
things that were in The Child and Family Services Act before, 
and part of them were the panels, the review panels, and how 
they didn’t become implemented, and that . . . I mean it was 
really sort of no reflection whether that was a loss or a gain or 
just a reflection on what actually happened, but talked about 
how in some way that they were never operationalized. The 
establishment of this out-of-court mechanisms were well 
intended but never operationalized, and the premise of the time 
were review panel boards would consist of volunteer 
community members. And the plan lacked both infrastructure 
support and a mechanism to ensure consistent access and 
application across the province. The ministry was also unable to 
support the First Nations community to operationalize these 
mechanisms. 
 
In many ways that sounds like a lot of those faults would lie 
with the government in terms of not providing infrastructure 
support or the mechanism to ensure consistent access and 
applications across the province. So what was really happening? 
I think we need . . . We haven’t really heard that, and that was 
really, really unfortunate that we haven’t seen this. 
 
And of course the idea around Person of Sufficient Interest 
program was something that we’ve seen that’s new and it’s 
been prioritized, but a transformational change that we see for 
the government in its new . . . [inaudible]. 
 
So you know, Mr. Speaker, he ends by saying, “The proposed 
amendments outlined today are a demonstration of the 
government’s commitment to improve the lives of vulnerable 
families, children, and youth who receive child welfare services 
in this province.” And you know, I have to say that over the 
years that I’ve been involved, the 10 years I’ve been actively 
involved in this role, but over the 16 years that I’ve been here, 
some of the issues that we’ve seen have really caused us to ask 
a lot of questions about the government’s commitment. We’ve 
raised the issues about the child deaths in the care of the 
government. We’ve seen now that this has taken some . . . since 
2009 when the A Breach of Trust report called for a better 
definition around statement of best interests of the child. 
 
And one of the other issues, and I’ve raised this so many times, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can remember the minister at the time 
talking about the kids in foster care. And she was referring to 
them as library cards, and keeping track as if they were books. 
And the system of the day, she said, was no better than the 
system of library cards, so she was going to do something 
better. She was going to get this new computerized system. 
 
And if you remember, I think the first estimates of the cost were 

going to be maybe 5 million, $6 million. And this was in 2010, 
not that long ago, Mr. Speaker, not that long ago. The last time I 
heard, and this was about four years ago, it was knocking on 
$40 million, this Linkin system, $40 million. Now how many 
kids do we have in care? You know, and now the last I would 
have records for, Mr. Speaker, was before the 2016 campaign, 
but I think it’s about 4,000, 4,500 kids in care, somewhere 
around 5,000. Five thousand kids, but a program that cost $40 
million to track 5,000 kids. 
 
You know, I come from a school system . . . I haven’t been 
there teaching in Saskatoon Public since 2001, but we had over 
20,000 kids and we implemented a new computer system and 
they just did it. They just did it. There was no $40 million 
Linkin Cadillac computer system that was needed to be 
implemented. And this is the kind of priority system this 
government has when it deals with some of their issues. They’re 
attracted by bright, shiny things, and the bright, shiny thing of 
the day was this Linkin computer system that cost tens of 
millions of dollars. And I would even hazard a guess it’s up to 
$50 million now. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is an issue that people are 
watching very carefully. This is not going to be one that’s going 
to go quietly into the good night. I know the Children’s 
Advocate, we all have to check for sure what they think of this, 
and also the state of affairs with foster care and for children 
who are in care. Because we have high expectations. We have 
the highest expectations of this government to do the right 
thing, to absolutely do the right thing. 
 
So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we will have lots of 
questions in committee. And I know lots of people will have 
lots to say in the days and months ahead as we take another 
look and check to make sure there has actually been full 
consultation. And this is the priority. And what is the game 
plan? What is the road map? What is the road map ahead? 
 
Because we don’t want just another shiny thing to spend 
millions of dollars on. We really want real action for kids. And 
if the federal government is stepping up, then it’s time this 
government step up with them and make sure that kids right 
across this province have seamless care and that every night is a 
safe good night for them. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would 
move adjournment of Bill No. 86, An Act to amend The Child 
and Family Services Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 86. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 87 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 87 — The Data 
Matching Agreements Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 



3256 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2017 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
was just chatting with my colleague and he realized that he had 
other things to say on that other bill. But one of us can bring it 
forward, so for sure no shortage of that. 
 
This bill today is an interesting bill, and it’s one that’s being 
brought forward to I think assist the Privacy Commissioner in 
some of the issues that arise when we are dealing with large 
volumes of data. And as you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, data 
has become king in the last few years. And sometimes I wonder 
if perhaps data is the master and we are the slaves because we 
see that often the data drives the approach; data drives the 
measurement; data drives the choice of allocation of resources. 
And certainly I know from being a public servant for seventeen 
and a half years, quite often management was more driven by 
fitting numbers into spreadsheets than really looking at the need 
for the work, which often isn’t something you can put in a little 
square on a spreadsheet. 
 
And so we see now that the Privacy Commissioner is looking 
for a way to make sure that when a government agency is 
accessing data that it’s done properly, and the data matching is 
an attempt to access government information from other 
ministries or agencies and making sure that all the data is 
available to a particular agency if and when it’s needed. There 
are a number of obvious privacy concerns that come out of this 
type of access to information and it needs to be handled with 
care. 
 
And of course we’ve seen a couple of examples from this 
government where I’m not sure they have the capacity to handle 
this with care. We look at, for example, the Premier himself and 
his troubles with his emails. And we see the response has been 
very confusing at best because we have a government . . . 
Premier who’s saying his server wasn’t working, but we have a 
Minister Responsible for Central Services who told us she 
doesn’t really care, and then we have no evidence or any report 
that the Premier’s server wasn’t working. And yet he continues 
to use his private email almost proudly, Mr. Speaker, and I 
think that’s something that . . . That attitude is one that is 
concerning. 
 
[16:15] 
 
Another area where we have seen concerns expressed by the 
Privacy Commissioner himself and backed up of course by — 
I’m just going to pull this up — by an award that was recently 
awarded. It was the Code of Silence Award. And we have the 
Canadian Association of Journalists giving to the Ministry of 
Highways an award for the most secretive ministry in Canada. 
And this is as a result of a number of access to information 
requests that were not properly delivered, weren’t delivered on 
time — they weren’t even delivered — and had several rebukes 
from the Privacy Commissioner himself to that ministry saying 
they’re not following the intent of the law. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the atmosphere that we’re looking at this 
bill in, and I think it’s one that we need to be concerned about. I 
think it’s one that the public needs to be concerned about 
because, Mr. Speaker, access to information is gold in this day 
and age. And we know that that’s how determinations are made. 
That’s how things are proven. That’s how stories are written, 
and that’s how governments are judged. And when we see a 

provincial ministry receiving a national award for being the 
most secretive in the nation, I think that’s a sign that this 
government has become tired and old and insulated. And 
they’re not listening to the public anymore, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and that’s a good example. 
 
So when they bring forward a bill about matching data from one 
ministry to another, you’ve got to wonder what’s going to 
happen when Highways is asked to provide information. If 
they’re the . . . I think it’s the partner. There’s two new terms 
that are introduced in the bill, Mr. Speaker. There’s two parties 
to this: one is the initiating organization and then there’s the 
participating organization. Well God help us if Highways is the 
participating organization because we don’t know, under their 
code of secrecy, what kind of information that they will be 
providing. And obviously when we have our own Privacy 
Commissioner weighing in with those concerns then we have to 
wonder how effective this bill is going to be. 
 
So basically the agreement itself is the data matching 
agreement, and there’s a definition. Basically . . . I’ll read the 
definition just for the record: 
 

“data matching” means the matching or linking of 
information in one database in the possession and control 
of an initiating organization with information in one or 
more other databases in the possession and control of a 
participating organization without the consent of the 
individuals who are the subjects of the information. 

 
So people’s private information is being collected by all sorts of 
government organizations and this will allow for transfer of that 
information from one to the other without the consent of the 
individual. So this is a very important aspect of privacy that I 
think is a big step. But again, it reflects the way data is driving 
the bus these days, Mr. Speaker. And I know it makes sense that 
if information is available, you shouldn’t have to gather it 
twice. And God knows, I don’t want to fill out two forms every 
time I’m, you know, accessing or using government services or 
programs. So it’s an important way of sharing information and I 
think, given the modern technologies that we have, it is 
information that we want to have access to. 
 
I just want to call up the Privacy Commissioner’s response to 
this . . . and I’m afraid my cellphone’s not going to co-operate 
with me. But he basically had some comments about when this 
bill was introduced. There was a press release from the Privacy 
Commissioner and he said this is something that has been called 
for, and as Privacy Commissioner he wants to make sure that 
it’s done to protect people’s privacy. And that’s why he’s 
saying we need some sort of government mechanism to deal 
with these issues. 
 
And I remember when I used to work with the federal 
government and the Department of Indian Affairs and Northern 
Development, and again there was a lot of private information 
that the First Nations individuals had to give to the government. 
The government was responsible for their treaty card 
information. It was responsible for treaty payments, and what 
families they belonged to and all the records that went down the 
many hundreds . . . not many hundreds, many decades of data 
collection, basically, for First Nations people. And then there 
was provincial programs like social services or various health 



December 4, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3257 

agencies that would require information from the federal 
government. And it was complicated, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
that’s people’s private information that was being shared. 
 
So the protection of your privacy is of utmost importance. We 
know it’s a right under our Charter, the right of privacy. So we 
have to make sure that these programs will make that the 
priority. I think that’s what this bill is attempting to do. As I 
indicated before, there’s the initiating organization who are 
ones that are undertaking the data-matching project, and then 
there will be a participating organization which could be a 
government institution or a local authority. So, Mr. Speaker, 
we’re now talking about health authorities, perhaps school 
boards. We’re talking about municipalities, urban and rural. 
And I’m not even sure where First Nations or federal authorities 
fit into this picture. And perhaps that will be the next step in the 
evolution of this type of work. 
 
So the bill sort of sets out what has to happen before a 
data-matching project is initiated. We have section 5 that details 
what has to be done. And the person requesting the information 
has a number of steps that they have to go through. Then at the 
end of the project they also are . . . There’s a section regarding 
the retention and destruction of the information and what the 
schedule for destruction will be. So obviously this information 
can’t just sit around for years. It has to be dealt with properly. 
 
There’s several . . . There’s a section regarding the reporting. 
And so I guess the big question then is, who is going to be 
managing this? And according to the Privacy Commissioner 
there was a need to have a government-appointed person to be 
responsible for these data-matching projects. 
 
So what’s going to happen, Mr. Speaker, is they’re going to 
create a new position within the Privacy Commissioner’s office 
called the government access coordinator. And that would be 
. . . We have to have some amendments to The Freedom of 
Information and Protection of Privacy Act to allow for the 
creation of this new government position. So that person is 
going to be the one that is the coordinator responsible for . . . 
And here’s the duties in section 10: giving advice and direction 
to government institutions to promote compliance with this Act, 
prepare the form of the data matching agreement required, and 
to prepare the form of report. So there will be an official that 
will be responsible for all of this. 
 
There’s also a commissioner, and in this case it is the 
Information and Privacy Commissioner that currently is in 
place. And there’s a number of significant new duties for the 
commissioner. They can offer comment on implications for 
privacy. They can make recommendations on the project. And 
then they can also make recommendations for seizing or 
modifying data matching if it contravenes this Act, The 
Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act, The 
Local Authority Freedom of Information and Protection of 
Privacy Act, or The Health Information Protection Act. And I 
think most of our personal information that’s stored within 
government agencies would be our health information. And of 
course the importance of privacy in that context cannot be 
underestimated. 
 
The commissioner can also carry out investigations of these 
initiating organizations, so there’s considerable scope of power 

now that’s being provided to the Privacy Commissioner in order 
to ensure that . . . I mean the Act is the protection of privacy 
Act, and again that’s paramount. There’s a number of offences 
that are outlined. Immunity, nobody’s immune from 
prosecution, or proceedings are not prohibited. I think what’s 
interesting as well is the duties and functions . . . Oh yes, we 
have to amend the freedom of information and freedom of 
privacy Act to create this government access coordinator 
position. And the duties of the government access coordinator 
are really being expanded beyond the scope of this Act, Mr. 
Speaker, because now also under The Freedom of Information 
and Protection of Privacy Act, the new duties of this new 
position would also include receiving and responding to 
applications and communications pursuant to the freedom of 
information Act. 
 
So again I’m thinking about Ministry of Highways and 
Infrastructure, and this poor government access coordinator is 
going to have to deal with recalcitrant and unresponsive 
ministries. And I’m not sure . . . I feel like the Privacy 
Commissioner has already hit his wall when it comes to 
ensuring that ministries provide the information that’s 
requested. It’s going to be interesting to see how this new 
position, the government access coordinator, will be able to 
maybe assist individuals who are seeking information or not. 
And I don’t know. They’re not really being given any extra 
scope of the duties, but they’re certainly getting a very broad 
job description here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Receiving and responding to applications communications 
pursuant to The Freedom of Information and Protection of 
Privacy Act, so I guess it’s always kind of a wait-and-see thing. 
I know one of the questions I always have is, who is asking for 
this? Maybe HIPA [The Health Information Protection Act] is 
people that are working . . . maybe I assume it’s the Privacy 
Commissioner himself. Because he certainly in his press release 
indicated that there’s a need for some way to get agreements 
around matching of data. So I think, given the world that we 
live in now where data is king, it’s obviously an important 
procedural change to the way freedom of information is 
handled. 
 
I wish the person who gets the job all the best, because I think 
when you have government agencies and ministries winning 
national awards for not being co-operative, that puts us in a 
very precarious place. And you can create all the positions you 
want, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but if ministries don’t comply, then 
I think the only next step is enforcement. And I’m not sure 
whether the Privacy Commissioner’s at that spot yet, but it 
wouldn’t look very good if we started prosecuting our own 
ministries for failure to comply with providing access to 
information. 
 
And of course the information that’s often being sought is not 
personal information. This case is very public information. It’s 
not relating to individuals at all, Mr. Speaker, so it’s 
concerning. But I think once we get into committee we’ll have, 
we’ll certainly have some questions about the mechanics of this 
and the, you know . . . Who was consulted? Who was asking for 
these changes? And we’ll get more information from the 
minister and the officials at that time. 
 
So at this point I’m prepared to adjourn the debate on Bill 



3258 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2017 

No. 87, An Act respecting Data Matching Agreements and 
making consequential amendments to The Freedom of 
Information and Protection of Privacy Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 87. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 88 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 88 — The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
enter into adjourned debates on Bill 88, The Automobile 
Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
I know when we start talking about automobile insurance, ears 
perk up and people want to know how these changes impact 
them. It’s some exciting legislation to be able to talk about, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So what this bill proposes to do is a few different things. So it 
changes the definition of chargeable incident, which is moved 
into the regulations. So according to the minister, when the 
minister was giving a second reading of this speech, he 
indicated that this is a way of eliminating unnecessary 
duplication that existed in the legislation. So that part appears 
like it’s part of a housekeeping or an administrative change, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Another thing that it does is it changes the process for appeals 
for driver safety ratings. So it moves the procedures, fees, and 
required documents from the legislation into the regulations. So 
the minister’s argument for why this should take place is that it 
would be more in line with what’s actually happening. So for 
example, if a driver contacts the board instead of the board 
contacting the driver to schedule a hearing, it allows them to be 
a little bit more nimble and reflect what’s actually going on in 
the field as opposed to having to make those changes to 
legislation every time. So it takes that piece out of the 
legislation. 
 
A new section also clarifies that the insurer has the right to 
recover money paid to an injured customer, or a family of a 
deceased customer, from an injured person who has been 
convicted of a specific criminal code offence. So this is based 
on the addition of new criminal negligence offences, and SGI 
needs to be able to collect recovery against a convicted driver. 
So that’s the reason that was provided for making this change. 
 
[16:30] 
 
And also this bill proposes to allow for insurers to collect debts 

owed in instalments. So in talking about recovering insurance 
money from drivers, this is a piece, in terms of the fact that 
there are changes to the driver safety program, where there is 
increased penalty for riskier drivers. And better rewards for 
good drivers could mean that they end up paying a larger 
amount. And if a larger amount is owed to the insurance 
company, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it makes sense that they would 
have an opportunity to pay that amount in instalments. So 
collecting debts in instalments is logical with the fact that they 
could end up paying a little bit more. 
 
Both of these last two sections, it was identified that they come 
from oversight in the January revisions, so they’re meant to 
reflect housekeeping amendments with these changes in mind. 
 
So some of the changes that we’re talking about to the safe 
driver recognition program, I just pulled some of them up off 
the SGI website. And these changes were from October 2016. 
SGI indicated that this was in response to customer input and 
analysis undertaken by SGI. So the first change was that the 
safety rating scale grew up to +25, so this can allow for a 
discount of 25 per cent for the safest drivers. 
 
The second change, the at-fault collision threshold increased 
from $305 to $700. So this change means that you could be 
deducted four or six points, based on the auto fund payout 
amounts. 
 
The third change is that financial penalties have doubled from 
$25 to $50 per point in the penalty zone, so this is essentially 
doubling the penalties that exist. And this was identified by the 
minister I believe as well. 
 
And the fourth change, drivers lose two points for less severe 
speeding infractions. So when we’re talking about this driver 
safety record, we know we are going to have appeals about it if 
people believe they have been treated unfairly or the situation 
does not reflect what they perceive. So this bill relates to some 
of these appeals and what this process looks like. 
 
Regarding the changes to safety driver ratings, Mr. Speaker, 
moving the procedures and fees from the legislation seems like 
a prudent step, but I also have some concerns here with the 
level of scrutiny these future changes will face. Right now, 
changes are debated here in the Assembly because of the fact 
that we are amending legislation. And removing some of the 
details from that legislation makes me question the level of 
oversight that we’re going to have, the level of oversight that’s 
going to exist after these changes go through. 
 
The points system is quite meaningful to people as well. People 
are afraid to get points taken off their rating, so the appeal 
process seems like an important piece. And this financial 
penalty comes around, you know, when you’re renewing your 
driver’s licence. People consider it very closely. It’s something 
that’s important to them when that time of year comes, as it did 
for me this past month, Mr. Speaker. Not too many additional 
penalties on my record, thankfully. But I know that it can be 
quite the financial burden and, you know, something that the 
people take very closely, especially considering the fact that the 
penalties are harsher now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we talk about SGI, I think it’s also 



December 4, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3259 

important for us to talk about how valued this Crown 
corporation is in our province. We rely on SGI to keep our rates 
low, to keep our insurance affordable. I had, while I was 
growing up I had cousins that lived in other provinces that did 
not have the benefit of a Crown corporation, and the cost for 
their insurance was prohibitive. They could afford to buy a car, 
but they couldn’t afford to be able to drive it. And I remember 
going to visit them and seeing cars sitting there that, you know, 
I was like, oh I’m so jealous that you have your own car. But 
they were like, yes, it doesn’t really get me anywhere. I have to 
walk. I have to walk everywhere. So SGI is important in 
keeping our rates low. We’re thankful to be able to have a 
Crown here. And I know that many people feel the same, and 
that they feel that we’ve been able to keep good jobs in this 
province as a result of this, through this Crown corporation, as 
well. 
 
Now of course despite the fact that rates are lower, the 
government has actually made it more expensive for us to get 
insurance recently with the addition of PST being added. So 
they’re making life affordable by taxing our insurance. We’re 
the only province in Canada to add PST to health and life 
insurance. So this is something that is making life less 
affordable for people and something that is creating a barrier as 
well. So I don’t think we can talk about insurance without 
bringing that up as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know that there’s going to be a lot 
more that we want to talk about in this bill. We want to take a 
close look at this legislation and ensure that these changes are in 
the best interest of our province and also for our citizens, so 
we’ll have some questions that we’ll be asking in committee. 
But for now, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 88, The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment 
Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 
Fairview has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 88. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 89 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Eyre that Bill No. 89 — The School 
Choice Protection Act/Loi sur la protection du choix d’école 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 
Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Good to join debates on Bill No. 89, The School Choice 
Protection Act, stand in my place, say my piece. 
 
I guess there are a few thoughts that occur, Mr. Speaker, to 
myself watching this debate. First of all one of my political 
heroes in this life is Allan Blakeney. And the debate around the 
notwithstanding clause over the years that has taken place, Mr. 
Speaker, I thought that the position of Mr. Blakeney always had 

a lot to recommend it in terms of the bar should be high, 
certainly, for the invocation of the notwithstanding clause. But 
it shouldn’t be ruled out of hand absolutely, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The notwithstanding clause was very much what helped to 
mediate the regional differences in the patriation of the 
constitution and the bringing the constitution to Canada, 
removing it from British hands ultimately, Mr. Speaker, and to 
put in place the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. And that 
balance, that dynamic tension that should exist in those things, 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of making sure that the will of the elected 
representatives of the people, that there should be that . . . That 
should be held in check certainly by the Charter of Rights and 
Freedoms, but the Charter of Rights and Freedoms didn’t come 
to us down Mount Sinai, Mr. Speaker. They’re not carved in 
stone. They’re hugely valuable, but societies do evolve and 
different of these things need to be kept in that evolution, in that 
dynamic tension, with the will of the people as expressed 
through their elected representatives. 
 
So you know, I guess early on in this debate, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker . . . I’ve never counted myself as one who looked upon 
utilization of the notwithstanding clause in and of itself as 
something that a provincial government or a territory or . . . that 
it shouldn’t be forever behind the break glass, Mr. Speaker, 
never to be brought to bear. I guess what I do have a problem 
with is going to such lengths to further . . . in proclaiming 
clarity and proclaiming protection of parental choice in what 
school system you’re going to be going to, be it, you know, pick 
your branch of our publicly funded system, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And again I say this as someone who has no small amount of 
experience and exposure to the great education that’s on offer at 
Sacred Heart Community School, part of the Regina Catholic 
school board system and a school that is well regarded for 
innovation, for working with populations that often does not 
have a lot of diversity, but also challenge alongside that, Mr. 
Speaker, but that it’s a school that has risen to challenges, that 
provides academic excellence, and an atmosphere of love and 
support and spiritual nurturing as well for those students. I think 
it’s a wonderful example of what a school can and should be. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, this bill coming forward in the wake of 
the Theodore decision from the Court of Queen’s Bench in 
Saskatchewan, and the way that that bench has sought to 
mediate the differences arising out of Theodore and to try and 
negotiate, you know, who should and should not be going to 
this school or that. Or whether a Catholic school in the case of 
Theodore, Mr. Speaker, was properly constituted or whether it 
was a means by which to get beyond school closure. 
 
And again how that feeds into things like community choice, 
like community priorities, Mr. Speaker, and how that interacts 
or does not with the Education ministry and in this case, Mr. 
Speaker, the Premier’s office. And the changes that have been 
made to local education authorities, Mr. Speaker, the body of 
school boards. There are a lot of different issues that go into this 
debate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And arguably that before appeals that seek that further clarity, 
that seek further certainty for parents, Mr. Speaker, that the 
notwithstanding clause is being invoked ahead of all of that, 



3260 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2017 

Mr. Speaker, it makes one question the motivation. And is this 
about providing certainty and peace of mind for parents that are 
making decisions about where to send their kids for schooling? 
And what choices are available to them accordingly? 
 
Or are we seeing this take place in a time where you’ve got a 
government that has a problem with dealing in good faith and in 
good will with teachers, with the sector, and how that in turn 
impacts the education offerings that are there for students? Is it 
about a diversion from that day-to-day reality which gets 
acknowledged in the more honest moments of the Sask Party 
leadership contest? 
 
The difficulties, the challenge that this government has in terms 
of mending those fences with people that are tasked with the 
day-to-day work in the education sector, you know, is that 
where the work should be placed? Or is it in terms of this 
ongoing drive that we see on the part of this government to 
seemingly centralize and consolidate power and authority? And 
we’ve certainly seen that with Bill 63 and the way that this 
government has taken power for itself in the education sector, 
which in its best days there’s always been that partnership 
between communities and the provincial government, Mr. 
Speaker. Or they’re tilting that balance very much so that 
decisions are made out of the Education minister’s office. And I 
dare say not so much even out of the Education minister’s 
office, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but out of the Premier’s office. 
 
And I guess I don’t understand how it is that a political group 
that calls themselves the Saskatchewan Party in actual fact is 
more the Regina party. And again I say this as a member of the 
Legislative Assembly that’s very proud to represent Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre, but I wouldn’t presume to run everything 
out of Regina Elphinstone-Centre or out of the Premier’s office 
should I be on the government side, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[16:45] 
 
In terms of the partnership that has succeeded and has served 
our students and teachers and families well over the years, Mr. 
Speaker, and the evolution that has taken place in that sector — 
absolutely. But the power grab that has gone on in recent days 
on the part of this government and the power grab that has seen 
power consolidated into Regina and into the Premier’s office 
again, Mr. Speaker — I think this is why we’re here today in 
some parts to discuss Bill No. 89. Because while that power 
grab goes on and while that conflict gets worsened, Mr. 
Speaker, between the Premier’s office and that government and 
everybody else in the sector, you know, they’re looking for 
diversions. 
 
They’re looking for ways that they can say, you know, look 
over here. Don’t pay any attention to what’s going on in our 
classrooms where we’re, you know, as a province paying more 
and getting less, and the students pay the price for that. Don’t 
pay any attention to that; rather watch as we head off on some 
kind of Charter challenge or attempt to invoke the 
notwithstanding clause on the outcome of the Theodore 
decision before the appeals on the Theodore decision are even 
heard, Mr. Speaker. And then what’s the go-forward plan there? 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the folks that have been 
tasked with seeing that through, you know, I’ll be very 

interested to see what happens in committee around this and the 
way that the answers are forthcoming or not to the questions 
that people have, and that certainly they have been providing to 
us to ask of this government, as to how this all works or does 
not, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So again I think the notwithstanding clause is not something in 
and of itself that a government would never invoke. And I know 
enough about history to know times where governments of 
different stripes throughout the West have sought to go their 
own way, and the kind of tension and conflict that that has 
engendered, and how that in turn held up the notwithstanding 
clause as a remedy to bring about that agreement and the 
assurance of the balance that must exist for provincial rights in 
a federation. 
 
I am not one to write off the notwithstanding clause out of hand, 
Mr. Speaker. But in terms of the way that it is brought forward, 
the juncture that it is brought forward in the history of this 
province and, you know, the context in which this particular 
piece of legislation is coming forward, it makes me more than a 
little suspicious about the motivations on the part of this 
government. 
 
And it also makes me wonder, again in terms of . . . for a party 
that calls themselves for the name of this province and the way 
that you’d think that would involve the importance of all of the 
people of this province, the way that they not just want to 
consolidate power in Regina, Mr. Speaker, or even in the 
Education minister’s office but in the Premier’s office, I think 
is, you know, kind of hard to understand and kind of directly at 
odds with the proclaimed mission of the so-called 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, I know that other of my colleagues will 
have, I’m sure, much more insightful things to say about this 
legislation than I, and I certainly look forward to that. But with 
that, Mr. Speaker, I’d move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 89, 
The School Choice Protection Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 89, The School Choice 
Protection Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 90 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Makowsky that Bill No. 90 — The 
Heritage Property Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To join in 
on Bill No. 90, The Heritage Property Amendment Act, 2017. I 
just wanted to talk a little bit, I guess, about heritage parks and 
heritage sites. There’s different places, whether it’s a building, 



December 4, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3261 

whether it’s a park. We’ve got many people that, you know, go 
and visit our heritage sites that are identified. And there’s a 
process and sometimes it is confusing, wondering . . . 
[inaudible] . . . different people saying if it’s a heritage site, and 
sometimes it’s federal, provincial. So there’s different ways. 
 
And I’m no expert on it but I know at the end of the day we 
have had many people, whether they come from other 
provinces, other parts of, you know, other countries, they come 
here into the province of Saskatchewan and that’s what they 
look for. They look for heritage sites that they want to see. And 
there might be interest. 
 
And some people I know that have come over . . . and even up 
north when I’ve seen some of them coming to visit up there, 
they talk about certain sites that mean something to them. 
Families, there’s some way they found out that they have family 
members. And it’s amazing to see how those different things 
. . . And they’ll talk about it, and I have sat there listening in 
restaurants, and you start a conversation with somebody who’s 
a tourist, and before you know it, you find out you’re talking 
about the great things, and the great things that they want to see 
in our province. And it’s heritage like that. And we should all 
be proud, and I know many of us are proud of that. 
 
But I guess to go through, you know, the bill and looking at it, I 
mean, there is that . . . Whether it’s our schools, we have our 
classrooms. I think about my grandkids and my kids. They 
would go on trips in the summertime, and that’s exactly what 
they did. It’s a part of the education because some kids never 
. . . and I know out of the North, you know, there was times 
where — and some smaller communities, rural communities — 
maybe they don’t get a chance to get out to some of the areas. 
Whether they come to Regina and they get a chance to see some 
of the sites that are here, and the heritage sites that are here and 
get to share as a class and kids, to understand that. It’s 
important and they do that. 
 
And again, I give those teachers that take the time . . . And it’s 
not always easy to decide whether some of them are fundraising 
. . . well again, because of the cuts government has given to 
education, maybe there isn’t as much dollars to make sure that 
you get out and bring students out. So having said that, they still 
could do it. 
 
But having said that as well, I know myself and my kids, my 
grandkids, they have had an opportunity and have gone to see 
certain sites. And it is amazing when you stop, people, along 
the side of the roads and you look at certain areas where they’ll 
have a heritage site and you read the . . . There’s these plaques 
on them, and you read those. Sometimes it’s amazing. I don’t 
know, you know, how many people stop for all of those, but I 
have done that, where you . . . All of a sudden, you don’t know 
what it’s there for. You stop and you pull over and you see it, a 
little building, and for whatever reason . . . It might have been a 
school. 
 
And I think about that. I think about that back in the Duck Lake 
area when visiting, where actually my late mother went to 
school. And it’s interesting when we see some of those sites. 
And it’s amazing that she went there and, you know, they’re a 
little bit of a story. So it’s that connection to all of us, that many 
of us have connections to heritage sites. Not all of us but many 

of us do, and it is good. And it’s good to see that they’re 
protected. 
 
But going back into this bill, and it’s interesting. I don’t know 
why all of a sudden there’s amendments to this bill, and you 
have . . . And maybe, you know, somebody has brought it 
forward to the government that there’s a problem and there’s a 
situation where there could be a conflict. When you have a 
board that . . . From my understanding, the amendments that are 
being made here, is you have an individual or a board that’s 
appointed, gets to have hearings and decide who will actually 
be designated a heritage site. But then there’s also funding that, 
you know, they get some funding for a heritage site. 
 
And I’ve heard different people, even in my office, come in 
trying to find out. There might be a site or an area where they 
would like to protect, and they’re trying to find the information. 
And we’ve tried to assist them through my office, how you go 
about going through . . . It’s not, from my understanding, it’s 
not an easy process to get a site, you know, designated a 
heritage site. So there’s a lot of work and, I think, commitment 
by those individuals, and I give those individuals credit that 
want to do that. But when they do that, they want to make sure 
that they’ve got a fair chance to have, you know, their proposal 
being looked at fairly. 
 
So I think, by what I’m getting out of this, there could have 
been some conflict or potential conflict. So they’re taking three 
out of the board, and they will do a different role versus what 
. . . the funding. So you’ll have one who designates, and one 
that does the funding, approves funding. So there are some 
proposed changes that they’re doing. 
 
But also on that, I didn’t even know this, that apparently they 
have hearings where you can go to when they’re designating . . . 
And it’s interesting; like I would have never known if you 
weren’t talking about this, that when individuals bring forward 
a proposal to have a heritage site, that the public has a right to 
hear. And I’m curious to see further in this if you’re . . . And I 
guess maybe it’s out of the public that I’m getting out of it. And 
I know we’re going to have to go through committee . . . 
[inaudible] . . . but if you’re proposing to maybe demolish or 
take down a heritage site, there’s a process, whether it’s 
hearings. And that’s where I know it’s going to be interesting to 
see, are they proposing that? And there’s changes in there with 
that. And who have they consulted with and who they’ve talked 
with? And these might be changes that are needed. And like I 
say, sometimes people bring them forward. 
 
So having said that, I’m not sure. And I know we’re going to 
have, you know, more opportunity when we get into committee 
to ask questions. And my colleagues will have . . . the minister 
and the officials exactly, why is this being asked? And like I 
said, and maybe we’ll be able to find out was there a conflict at 
some point? And was there a feeling that somebody was getting 
an advantage because . . . 
 
Like I don’t know who gets who appointed. So I guess maybe 
that’s the other thing. In the whole process, maybe the 
government appoints those that are on this board. So I assume 
that’s the way it is, but I don’t know that for sure. So it’s going 
to give us an opportunity to ask some of those questions too to 
get clarification. And is that where this has been a problem? 



3262 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2017 

Where somebody’s feeling like if you separate them, like I said, 
so that there is no conflict, or we don’t want to see there being a 
conflict, and it’s a fair process. We like to see that, that people 
have a fair process. Not like I can say in many of the other, you 
know, concerns that have been raised by many Saskatchewan 
people, that sometimes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it hasn’t been a 
fair process, and some people maybe aren’t happy. 
 
In this case they’re making some amendments. And maybe it’s 
because someone’s come forward and has decided to say, hey 
there is some challenges or some concerns, so we would like to 
make some amendments. And I don’t know if the government 
woke up, you know, last week and decided they want to do that, 
or somebody’s brought it forward, or from the board and 
they’re listening to recommendations from the board. But 
having said that, I know at the end of the day we’re going to get 
a lot of opportunity, and we’ll go to committee. And we can 
find out exactly, you know, detail that we want as far as we 
want to go in committee in the time that’s allowed to ask some 
tough questions and get some answers if we need that. 
 
And maybe we can do a little bit of work on our side to find out 
who exactly did they consult with and who do we talk to. 
Because I know there’s groups out there that do a great job and 
a service to many of our communities, that work hard, you 
know, making sure heritage sites are protected, making sure 
they’re designated. And there are. There are people who put 
many hours into photos and everything. Like you look, the 
work that those individuals, and I thank them, that they do. 
 
So we want to make sure the public and those people that are 
doing the good work make sure, at the end of the day, that as a 
government they’re doing what they need to do, but we’re also 
protecting the good work they are doing and, when they come 
forward, that it’s a fair process, a meaningful process to those 
individuals who put the good time into it and want it 
designated. So at this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t have 
any further comments, and I would like to adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 90. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 90, The Heritage Property 
Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, so that the committees may 
do their work this evening, I move that this House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that this House adjourns. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:59.] 
 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3231 
  Sarauer .......................................................................................................................................................................... 3231, 3233 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3231 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3231 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3231 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 3232 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3232 
  Bonk ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3232 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3232 
  Nerlien ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3232 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3233 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3233 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3233 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3233 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3234 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3234 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3234 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3234 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3235 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3235 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Teepee Project at Victoria School 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3235 
 Memorandum of Understanding on Carbon Capture and Storage 
  Carr .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3235 
 International Day of Persons with Disabilities 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3236 
  Buckingham ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3236 
 Members Raise Funds During Movember Campaign 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3236 
 Soccer Teams Medal in Provincial Tournament 
  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3236 
 Climate Change Strategy 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3237 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Effects of Tax Legislation on Businesses 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3237 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3237 
 Support for Northern Post-Secondary Education 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3238 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3238 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3239 
 Benefits of Carbon Capture and Storage 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3239 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3239 
 Global Transportation Hub and Details of Land Transactions 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3239 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3240 
 Amalgamation of Health Regions 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3240 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3240 
 Funding for Task Force and Mental Health and Addictions Issues 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3241 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3241 
 Support for Northern Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3241 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3241 
POINT OF ORDER 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3242 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3242 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3242 



 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Release of Saskatchewan Climate Change Strategy 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3242 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3243 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 113 — The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2017 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3243 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3244 
 Bill No. 114 — The Vehicles for Hire Act 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3248 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3249 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 100 — The Agrologists Amendment Act, 2017 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3250 
  Brkich (referral to Economy Committee) ............................................................................................................................. 3251 
 Bill No. 85 — The Reclaimed Industrial Sites Amendment Act, 2017 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3251 
 Bill No. 86 — The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2017 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3252 
 Bill No. 87 — The Data Matching Agreements Act 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3256 
 Bill No. 88 — The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2017 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3258 
 Bill No. 89 — The School Choice Protection Act/Loi sur la protection du choix d’école 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3259 
 Bill No. 90 — The Heritage Property Amendment Act, 2017 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3260 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

 
Hon. Steven Bonk 

Minister of the Economy 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 
Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Larry Doke 
Minister of Government Relations  

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 
Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Nancy Heppner 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Gene Makowsky 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  
and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 


