






















































Hansard: March 15, 2017


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 58A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 15, 2017, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 

 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 

Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 

 

 

 
 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 

Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 

Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 

Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 

Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 

Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 

Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 

Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 

Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 

Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 

Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 

Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 

Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 

D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 

Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 

Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 

Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 

Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 

Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 

Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 

Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 

Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 

Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 

Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 

Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 

Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 

Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 

Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 

Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 

Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 

Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 

McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 

Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 

Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 

Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 

Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 

Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 

Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 

Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 

Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 

Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 

Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 

Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 

Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 

Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 

Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 

Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 

Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 

Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 

Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 

Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 

Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 

Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 

Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 

Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 

Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 

Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 

Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 

 

 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 11 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1685 
 March 15, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — With leave for an extended introduction 
of guests, please. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, it’s my pleasure to introduce a group of French 
students from Monseigneur de Laval here in Regina. 
 
With the students and the chaperones from Laval, we also have 
some other representation from the francophone community, 
known in Saskatchewan as the Fransaskois, joining us today. 
Françoise Sigur-Cloutier is the president of the Assemblée 
communautaire fransaskoise, an organization that helps to build 
and strengthen the francophone community here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d also like to welcome Dominique Liboiron and Guy 
Michaud. Would our honoured guests please stand? There you 
are. We welcome you to your Legislative Assembly. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take this 
opportunity to officially proclaim March 2nd to 22nd as 
Rendez-vous de la Francophonie 2017 in Saskatchewan. 
Rendez-vous offers a chance for residents to join people all over 
the country to celebrate Canada’s rich francophone heritage and 
culture. Rendez-vous is held annually throughout Canada in 
March to promote French language and francophone culture. It 
also coincides with the international day of la Francophonie on 
March 20th. 
 
This year we focus la Francophonie in 3-D: diversity, duality, 
and dynamism. We are proud to have such a vibrant 
francophonie community that helps all of us in Saskatchewan 
thrive. I encourage all citizens, no matter their language or their 
culture, to join us in celebrating la francophonie in 
Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like 
to welcome members of the Assemblée communautaire 
fransaskoise. 
 
J’ai eu le plaisir de faire leur connaissance la semaine dernière. 
 
[Translation: I had the pleasure of making their acquaintance 

last week.] 
 
We met last week. We discussed French education in the 
province, including the challenges in recruiting French 
immersion teachers, the fact we have only one Type A French 
immersion school in Saskatchewan, and of course French 
post-secondary programming. I undertook to be an advocate for 
them and for the value of French language in Saskatchewan, 
something I feel very strongly about. 
 
Je vous salue. Bienvenue à votre Chambre législative. 
 
[Translation: Greetings. Welcome to your Legislative 
Chamber.] 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to welcome the group 
of Fransaskois as well to this Chamber. 
 
Je suis très, très content de les voir içi. On est vraiment fier 
d’avoir un culture si fort ici en Saskatchewan de la 
fransaskoisie, la francophonie. 
 
Je veux mentionner en particulier deux personnes. Il y a 
Françoise Sigur-Cloutier, la présidente de l’Assemblée 
communautaire fransaskoise, et aussi Dominique Liboiron — 
bonjour, Françoise — et aussi Dominique Liboiron. Dominique 
a fait un voyage particulièrement exceptionel. Il est allé de 
Medicine Hat jusqu’à Nouvelle Orléans en canoë. 
 
[Translation: I am very, very pleased to see them here. We are 
very proud to have such a strong Fransaskois, francophone 
culture here in Saskatchewan.] 
 
I would like to mention in particular two people. There is 
Françoise Sigur-Cloutier, the president of l’Assemblée 
communautaire fransaskoise, and also Dominique Liboiron — 
hello Françoise — and also Dominique Liboiron. Dominique 
made a particularly exceptional trip. He went from Medicine 
Hat to New Orleans by canoe.] 
 
We have Françoise Sigur-Cloutier, is the president of the 
Assemblée communautaire fransaskoise. We also have 
Dominique Liboiron who did an exceptional voyage. He 
travelled all the way from Medicine Hat to New Orleans, a 
journey of eight months, a journey of exceptional courage and 
stamina. And we’re very impressed to have him today here to 
. . . He was able to present to members downstairs as well as 
speak to all of the students and inspire them in their future 
endeavours. 
 
Alors encore un fois, je veux dire bienvenue et bonjour et merci 
d’être venu. 
 
[Translation: So once again, I would like to say welcome and 
hello and thank you for coming.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 



1686 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2017 

Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Et comme présidente 
le d’Assemblée parlementaire de la Francophonie pour 
l’assemblé de Saskatchewan, je voudrais aussi dire bienvenue à 
tous les francophones qui sont ici aujourd’hui, et merci 
beaucoup d’être si fiers de l’héritage et le culture francophone 
en Saskatchewan. Ma mère est fransaskoise, et je suis une fière 
francophone aussi. Alors merci beaucoup pour tout le travail et 
tout ce que vous faites en Saskatchewan. Alors bienvenue à tous 
les francophones ici. 
 
[Translation: And as the president of the Assemblée 
parlementaire de la Francophonie for the Saskatchewan 
Assembly, I would like to also say welcome to all the 
francophones who are here today, and thank you very much for 
being so proud of the Francophone heritage and culture here in 
Saskatchewan. My mother is Fransaskois, and I am a proud 
francophone as well. So thank you very much for all the work 
and all that you do in Saskatchewan. So, welcome to all the 
francophones here today.] 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I would also like to 
welcome a producer here today from Pangman, Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Jim Liggett. I want to welcome him to his Legislative 
Assembly. He’s been a farmer in Saskatchewan for many 
decades and is very interested in politics as well. So I want to 
welcome him to the Assembly, and thank you for keeping 
Saskatchewan growing strong. Thank you, Mr. . . . and I would 
ask everyone to welcome him. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
University. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — I ask for leave for an extended 
introduction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — This is not going to be in 
French. Mr. Speaker, it’s my great pleasure to welcome some 
individuals, some young leaders from my constituency. They 
are individuals from the Paul Hill School of Business. They 
were the winners of the JDC [Jeux du commerce] West 
competition earlier this year in January. They won 11 — I 
counted 11 — awards, including school of the year, which I 
would like my other university colleagues, alumni, to know, 
that the U of R [University of Regina] won the school of the 
year. 
 
I would like to introduce some of those. I don’t know if they’re 
all here but I’m going to mention all of their names anyway, 
and if you are here would you give a wave, please. So first their 
instructor, Randy Linton, is with us today. Miranda Rosin is 
with us today; Eric Holloway, I don’t know if he’s here but 
most of us know him as well; Brady Parker; Brandon Rickets; 
Conrad Hewitt is here today; Stephen Bardutz; Marissa 
Burwell; Rachel Langen; Brayden Colin; Tris Nyhus; and 
Cyreana Lockert. 

And I would just like to read into the record, Mr. Speaker, the 
awards that they’ve won. They won not only the school of the 
year, first place, but they won finance, first place. They won 
international business, first place; second place in the debate; 
second place in marketing; third place in accounting. I love this 
one — charitable volunteer hours, Mr. Speaker, first place with 
3,377 hours. Participation, first place; social, first place; sport, 
third place; and executive of the year, Cari-Lynn Schoettler and 
Danielle Lane. They also . . . Some of these students are also 
participating this week in the 5 Days for the Homeless which 
raises money for Carmichael Outreach. 
 
And so I invite my colleagues to join me in welcoming these 
fine young people to our Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, I’d like to add my welcome and my congratulations to this 
group of students from the Paul Hill School of Business and 
their success in the JDC West competition. It’s very impressive 
to have such a group of leaders for the economy of the future, 
and in particular to hear the way that you are making those 
connections between economics and the needs of those most 
vulnerable in our society. Thank you for that and welcome to 
your Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Willowgrove. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I ask for leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s my pleasure to introduce a group of 20 public 
servant employees seated in the Speaker’s gallery. If you could 
give us a wave. They’re here today to take part in the 
parliamentary program for the public service. The participants 
are employees from the following ministries: Advanced 
Education, Agriculture, Economy, Education, Environment, 
Government Relations, Health, Highways and Infrastructure, 
Justice, Municipal Affairs, Parks, Culture and Sport, as well as 
employees from the Office of the Provincial Auditor and the 
Legislative Assembly Service. 
 
The program includes an in-depth history and tour of the 
Legislative Building; briefings presented by the Legislative 
Library, Legislative Assembly committees branch, and 
Executive Council; an opportunity to sit in the public galleries 
to observe question period and other House business; and a 
briefing with members from both sides of the House. I ask all 
members to help me welcome these fine public servants to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to 
you, no stranger to this Legislative Assembly, Michelle Englot. 



March 15, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1687 

Michelle, if you could stand up and give us a wave. All right. 
Recently Michelle made her ninth appearance in the Scotties 
Tournament of Hearts as the skip for Team Manitoba. It has 
been said, Mr. Speaker, that never have so many 
Saskatchewanians cheered for a team from Manitoba. Certainly 
not the Bombers. Maybe the Winnipeg Jets, but not the 
Bombers. 
 
Curling out of the Granite Curling Club in Winnipeg, 
Michelle’s team consisted of lead Raunora Westcott, second 
Leslie Wilson, third Kate Cameron, alternate Krysten 
Karwacki, and coach Ron Westcott. Finishing with an 
impressive 10-1 record in the preliminary rounds, Michelle 
ended up losing a close game in the finals to Ontario’s Rachel 
Homan. 
 
Though representing Manitoba at the Scotties this year, 
Michelle has a long history of representing Saskatchewan on 
the curling ice. Through her career, Michelle brought 
Saskatchewan two back-to-back bronze medals from the 
Scotties in 1988 and 1989. She also represented Saskatchewan 
in the 1983 Canada Winter Games. Mr. Speaker, I ask all 
members to help me in welcoming Michelle to her Legislative 
Assembly and to tell her how proud we are of her. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I guess 
I’d seek leave to make an extended response to the introduction 
of the minister, if I might. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. And to 
colleagues, certainly thanks for agreeing to an extended 
response to the introduction. But first off, as the opposition 
critic for the Public Service Commission, I’m very glad to see 
yet another group of interested, engaged public servants here at 
their Legislative Assembly. 
 
It’s certainly a valuable program and, you know, enriches the 
experience of public servants and I think aids them in the work 
that they do serving the public in Saskatchewan. And it’s 
critical work that is very valuable, Mr. Speaker. And I guess the 
hope is that once they come away with a better understanding of 
how things work in this Assembly, that they might then go back 
and help the government figure a few things out themselves, 
Mr. Speaker. But I look forward to meeting with them later on 
today. And certainly I want to say on behalf of the official 
opposition, thank you very much for the work that you do each 
and every day for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, of course I want to say a word of hello and 
congratulations to Michelle Englot. As someone with roots out 
in the Montmartre neck of the woods, we’re always glad to see 
Englots doing good things the world over. And certainly there’s 
always going to be room on home ice back in Saskatchewan for 
Michelle Englot certainly, Mr. Speaker, but that pride is not 
diminished in this individual’s many accomplishments and the 

amazing work in curling.  
 
Anyway, so I join with the minister in welcoming these public 
servants and Michelle Englot to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, it’s my pleasure 
to introduce, in the west gallery with the school group up there, 
my niece from Regina, Petra Ottenbreit-Born. So I would ask 
all members to welcome my niece to her Legislative Assembly. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
want to join my colleagues in recognizing our French-speaking 
delegation that are here today. As many of you may or may not 
know, I’m one of the few indigenous members of the 
Assembly, and we’re considered Métis. And of course Métis of 
course is a French word. And as an Aboriginal person growing 
up having a French grandfather and an Aboriginal grandmother, 
we tended to be exposed to both the Cree language and the 
French language. So growing up I could understand the words 
like “la table” and “la porte,” “la fourchette,” “le couteau.” 
[Translation: the table, the door, the fork, the knife.] 
 
I can hear all these words when I was a kid, but I could also 
hear the Cree words of: 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 
 
So what happens in our culture is the Aboriginal community 
and the French community actually intermarried and they 
created their own customs. They also created their own 
language called Michif. So a lot of times you will see there will 
be a lot of words in our Cree language that are married to the 
French words, and often we confuse ourselves, never mind the 
average person. 
 
So I want to say that one of the things we aspire to do in the 
Aboriginal community is to connect with our other history. And 
one of the things I want to do with the member from Riversdale 
and the member from Saskatoon Nutana, who both speak 
French, I want to be able to speak French more to connect with 
my French heritage and stay very strong with my Aboriginal 
roots as well. 
 
So merci beaucoup, monsieur le Président. [Translation: Thank 
you very much, Mr. Speaker.] And when I’m asked if I speak 
French, I always say, un petit peu. [Translation: a little bit.] So 
thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you and to all members of this Legislative Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce an individual seated in your gallery, Ms. Crystal 
Giesbrecht. She is here on behalf of PATHS [Provincial 
Association of Transition Houses and Services of 



1688 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2017 

Saskatchewan]. She works there as their director of research 
and communications. PATHS, Mr. Speaker, for those who 
don’t know, stands for the Provincial Association of Transition 
Houses and Services of Saskatchewan, and they do great work 
throughout the province, both as a communication and support 
network for all of the shelters in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And since Crystal can’t tell me that I can’t say this — I do 
know her a little bit personally — although she does amazing 
work as a full-time job, she also does some incredible work in 
her volunteer capacities as a social justice advocate, especially 
in Regina but in the province. She’s a field worker for Amnesty 
International’s Regina chapter, and she is formerly a board 
member for the Regina Sexual Assault Centre, Mr. Speaker. So 
she’s quite an amazing woman. I’m very happy to have her here 
today, and I ask that all members join me in welcoming her to 
her Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
join my colleague from Regina Douglas Park in welcoming 
Crystal. 
 
But some other activists that are in your gallery, in the east 
gallery, have come out in support of victims of domestic 
violence. And in your gallery today with us are Catherine 
Gendron from SEIU-West [Service Employees International 
Union-West]. She can give a wave. And also Terrilyn St. 
Amour from SEIU-West young workers committee. They’ve 
been really active in searching for positive solutions to this 
horrible thing in our province. 
 
As well in the east gallery we have Larry Hubich, the president 
of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, as well as Lori Johb, 
also with the SFL [Saskatchewan Federation of Labour] 
executive. They’ve also been activists in this. 
 
And I’ve been looking around, scouring. There’s two more that 
are with us or will be joining us shortly, and that is Darla 
Deguire from Canadian Labour Congress and Wendy Daku also 
from the Canadian Labour Congress, also very active in 
reaching out for supports for people fleeing domestic violence. 
 
So I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming them to their 
legislature today. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier and Minister 
of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the member opposite in welcoming these people to the 
Assembly today. We appreciate that there are difficult times in 
labour negotiations, but we should never forget the fact that we 
thank these people very much for the great work that they do 
that continues to make our province the wonderful place that it 
is, and that this Assembly is a place that they can always come 
so that their voices are heard. And that’s something that should 
be paramount for all of us. So on behalf of all the members on 
this side, I want to thank them for what they do, and we will 
work and endeavour to the do the best we can to get through 
some issues. And we thank them for being here. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to join with the member opposite in welcoming Crystal 
Giesbrecht to the House today on behalf of PATHS. PATHS is 
one of the organizations, Mr. Speaker, that my ministry engages 
with on a regular basis, Mr. Speaker, to help guide the 
development of policy within the Ministry of Justice, relative to 
the issue of domestic violence. So I’d like to welcome her to the 
House, Mr. Speaker, and those others in the House that are here 
in support of this very important issue. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again to present a petition to reverse the cuts to the Lighthouse 
program, Mr. Speaker. The petitioners point out that in April 
2014 the minister of Social Services said that the Lighthouse in 
Saskatoon would “. . . take pressure off existing detox facilities, 
hospitals, and police cells while keeping people safe, especially 
in our brutally cold winters.” That same day, Mr. Speaker, the 
petitioners point out that the minister of Health said, “We want 
to ensure that individuals who have mental health and 
addictions issues have a safe place to stay.” 
 
And it’s important to note, Mr. Speaker, that this government 
has repeatedly indicated that the Lighthouse stabilization unit 
keeps individuals out of hospital emergency rooms and jail 
cells. On this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, we couldn’t agree 
more. We only need to look at over capacity at our hospitals in 
Saskatoon for example, where people are waiting for a very 
long time in emergency rooms where folks get turned away 
from the Lighthouse and often end up at the emergency at St. 
Paul’s or in our police cells, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to read the 
prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately reverse 
their recent cuts to funding that allows extremely 
vulnerable people to access the services of the Lighthouse 
stabilization unit in Saskatoon, and revisit their imposition 
of a strict and narrow definition of homelessness in 
November of 2015 which forced the Lighthouse to cut 
back its hours of essential service in February of 2016; and 
take immediate steps to ensure that homeless people in 
Saskatchewan have emergency shelter, clothing, and food 
available to them before more lives are lost. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens of 
Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 



March 15, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1689 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on this 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of Melfort, 
Naicam, Gronlid, Beatty, Spalding, Fairy Glen, Pleasantdale, 
Nipawin, Englefeld, Kinistino, and LeRoy. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 
again I rise in my place to petition the provincial government to 
build a second bridge for Prince Albert. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
need for a second bridge for Prince Albert has never been 
clearer than it is today. Prince Albert, communities north of 
Prince Albert, and the business community that send people and 
products through Prince Albert require a solution and 
leadership. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Respectfully, we request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan ask that the Sask Party government stop 
stalling, hiding behind rhetoric, and refusing to listen to the 
people calling for action, and to begin immediately to plan 
and then quickly commence the construction of a second 
bridge for Prince Albert, using federal and provincial 
dollars. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition, as I 
say day in and day out, are from all throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan. And on these particular pages they’re from 
Saskatoon. They’re from Carrot River. They’re from Holbein 
and, as I mentioned, they’re also from Prince Albert. So on that 
note, Mr. Speaker, I do so present these petitions today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m always pleased 
to rise in the House to present petitions, and this particular one 
is a petition opposed to Bill 40 and the potential 49 per cent 
Crown corporation sell-off. The individuals who are signing 
this petition wish to bring to the attention of the Assembly the 
following: that Sask Party’s Bill 40 creates a new definition for 
privatization that allows the government to wind down, 
dissolve, or sell up to 49 per cent of the shares of a Crown 
corporation without holding a referendum. That in 2015-16 
alone, Saskatchewan Crown corporations returned $297.2 
million in dividends to pay for schools, roads, and hospitals. 
Those dividends should go to the people of Saskatchewan, not 
private investors. 
 
That our Crown corporations employ thousands of 
Saskatchewan people across the province, and that under 
section 149 of the Income Tax Act of Canada, Crown 
corporations are exempt from corporate income tax provided 
not less than 90 per cent of the shares are held by a government 
or a province. 
 
The Sask Party’s proposal would allow up to 49 per cent of a 
Crown to be sold without being considered privatized. And so 
this short-sighted legislation risks sending millions of dollars to 

Ottawa, of Crown dividends to Ottawa rather than to the people 
of Saskatchewan. And I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

The prayer reads as follows: they respectfully request that 
the Government of Saskatchewan immediately stop the 
passage of Bill 40, The Interpretation Amendment Act, and 
start protecting jobs and our Crown corporations instead of 
selling them off to pay for Sask Party mismanagement. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the individuals who are signing this petition 
are from the city of Prince Albert. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to 
present a petition regarding pay equity here in Saskatchewan. 
The people signing this petition want to bring to our attention 
the following: that the citizens of this province believe in an 
economy powered by transparency, accountability, security, and 
equity; and that all women should be paid equitably, and that 
women are powerful drivers of economic growth and their 
economic empowerment benefits us all. 
 
Research published by the World Bank suggests that closing the 
gender wage gap could be worth the equivalent of 10 per cent of 
Canada’s GDP [gross domestic product]. The Canadian Centre 
for Policy Alternatives found that in Saskatoon in 2016, women 
earned on average 63 cents for every dollar that a man makes, 
and in Regina women earned on average 73 cents for every 
dollar a man makes. According to the most recent StatsCan 
data, the national gender wage gap for full-time workers is 72 
cents for every dollar a man makes. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan eliminate 
the wage gap between women and men across all sectors 
where the Government of Saskatchewan has jurisdiction, 
provide a framework under which this can be done within 
the term of this Assembly, and that the Saskatchewan 
government call upon workplaces within Saskatchewan 
within the private sector to eliminate the wage gap between 
women and men. 

 
And the people signing the petition today come from the city of 
Saskatoon, Martensville, and Grandora. I do so present, Mr. 
Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition in support of sexual child abuse prevention curriculum 
in Saskatchewan. Those who have signed the petition, Mr. 
Speaker, wish to draw our attention to the following: the fact 
that Saskatchewan has the second-highest rate of child sexual 
abuse in Canada; that child sexual abuse has lasting impacts 
throughout a child’s lifetime, and these effects include 
depression, anxiety, low self-esteem, decreased school 
attendance and achievement, as well as decreased productivity 
throughout the lifetime. Physical impacts include conversion 
disorder, and other impacts include heightened anger, alcohol 



1690 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2017 

and drug addiction, eating disorders, problems with 
relationships, dating, marriage, and parenting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, tragically, victims of childhood sexual abuse are 
four times more likely to commit suicide. And there is no 
comprehensive elementary or secondary curriculum regarding 
the prevention and the reporting of child sexual abuse in 
Saskatchewan. And as a province, it is our shared responsibility 
to protect children and youth and to educate them as every child 
has the right to be protected and safe. I will read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan, through the 
Ministry of Education, takes immediate and concrete 
action to develop and implement Erin’s law. Such 
legislation would ensure that a comprehensive health 
education program be developed and implemented which 
would require age-appropriate sexual abuse and assault 
awareness and prevention education in grades pre-K 
through 12, along with training for school staff on the 
prevention of sexual abuse. 

 
[14:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, those who are signing the petition today reside in 
Weyburn and Regina. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present petitions calling for a reverse to the cuts to the 
Aboriginal court worker program. Mr. Speaker, the undersigned 
residents of the province of Saskatchewan wish to bring to your 
attention the following: that the Government of Saskatchewan 
cut the budget for the Aboriginal court worker program in the 
2016-17 provincial budget. They point out that Aboriginal court 
workers play an important role in helping Aboriginal people in 
criminal and child apprehension cases. They point out that 
Aboriginal peoples are disproportionately represented in 
Saskatchewan’s correctional centres, and they point out that 
Aboriginal court workers successfully help to make our 
communities safer through reduced recidivism rates. 
 
These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, would also be well aware that 
when it came time for this government to demonstrate what 
they were doing on the calls to action from the Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission, they pointed to this program, sadly 
of course, Mr. Speaker, at the same as cutting this program: 
 

In the prayer that reads as follows, the petitioners 
respectfully request that the Government of Saskatchewan 
reverse its short-sighted and counterproductive cuts to the 
Aboriginal court worker program. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular set of petitions is signed by 
individuals from Stoughton, Esterhazy, Delisle, Marquis, and 
Moose Jaw. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present yet another petition to ensure job security for victims of 

domestic violence. The individuals who signed this petition 
today wish to bring attention to the following: Saskatchewan 
has the highest rate of domestic violence by intimate partners 
amongst all Canadian provinces. Citizens of Saskatchewan are 
concerned at the lack of support for victims of domestic 
violence. One in three Canadian workers have experienced 
domestic violence, and for many the violence follows them to 
work. Victims of domestic violence should not be further 
victimized at work. And employers lose $77.9 million annually 
due to the direct and indirect impacts of domestic violence. 
 
Manitoba’s already enacted such legislation, and Ontario is on 
its way to enacting legislation that ensures job security for 
victims of domestic violence. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan enact 
legislation that requires all employers to provide a 
minimum of five paid work days and a minimum of 17 
weeks unpaid work leave with the assurance of job security 
upon return for all victims of domestic abuse in 
Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing this petition today come 
from Yorkton, Regina, Lumsden, Cupar, Indian Head, and 
Melville. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I present today a petition to stop the 
redirection of the funding of the Northern Teacher Education 
Program Council, Inc. As we know, Mr. Speaker, NORTEP 
[northern teacher education program] is a very fine program, a 
program that has been operating for 40 years and has been 
educating people from the North to be teachers for students in 
the North. It has a very high rate of retention of those teachers 
within the profession of teaching and within the north of our 
province. And that is very much due, Mr. Speaker, to the 
control of this program by people from northern communities. 
 
This program has been very much in line with the 
recommendations of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, 
which recommends that we have more control by local 
organizations and that we have opportunities for young people 
to learn indigenous culture and indigenous language, Mr. 
Speaker, something NORTEP has excelled at. 
 
Today we’ve heard that this program may be going to another 
school, another organization’s control, a process that does not 
seem to have been followed according to the letter of the 
described process. We’re also very concerned to hear, Mr. 
Speaker, about potential risks to the accessibility of housing due 
to risk to the assets, housing assets that belong to NORTEP at 
this time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan call on the Saskatchewan Party government 
to immediately restore their five-year agreement to fund 
the Northern Teacher Education Program Council, Inc. and 
to continue to fund NORTEP-NORPAC programs in La 



March 15, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1691 

Ronge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from the 
communities of La Ronge, Air Ronge, Stanley Mission, Buffalo 
Narrows, Creighton, Southend, La Loche, Sandy Bay, and 
Cumberland House. I do so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Supporting Victims of Domestic Violence 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House today to 
recognize the hard work of groups like PATHS and 
Saskatchewan’s labour movement in addressing the very 
serious problems of domestic violence in our province. 
Saskatchewan has the highest rates of intimate partner violence, 
intimate partner homicide, and sexual assault of all Canadian 
provinces, and our women, young people, and indigenous 
populations are suffering the most. Mr. Speaker, right now 
victims of domestic violence in Saskatchewan do not have the 
supports that they need. Employers are not obligated to 
accommodate or give paid leave of absence to victims of 
domestic violence, and victims are not able to end rental 
agreements in order to leave dangerous situations. 
 
This is simply not okay, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan can and 
must do more to prevent domestic violence in our province and 
give women and children that face domestic violence the 
resources they need to flee violent home situations. 
 
This is why the work of PATHS, the SFL, CLC [Canadian 
Labour Congress], and SEIU-West young workers, as well as 
others are so important. PATHS, in partnership with our unions, 
is currently working on a three-year project to ensure job 
security and supports for victims of domestic violence. This 
project has the potential to create positive and long-lasting 
changes in regards to how our institutions and Saskatchewan 
people understand and react to domestic violence in the 
workplace. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me today in 
recognizing PATHS and Saskatchewan’s labour movement for 
working hard to educate the public and fight to change our 
province’s inadequate policies on domestic violence. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 
 

Women’s Suffrage in Saskatchewan 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday 
marked a very important day in Saskatchewan history. It was 
the 101st anniversary of some women obtaining the right to 
vote in Saskatchewan. Over 100 years ago, Violet Clara 
McNaughton, a farmer from Harris, led the Women’s Grain 
Growers’ Association in a successful suffrage campaign in 
partnership with Woman’s Christian Temperance Union and the 
Political Equality League. They worked tirelessly to obtain over 
10,000 signatures from citizens across the province to present 

petitions to the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 
 
After years of work and perseverance by many women across 
the province, March 14th, 1916, the bill granting some women 
in Saskatchewan the right to vote in provincial election received 
Royal Assent. I am proud to say that Saskatchewan was the 
second province in Canada to give some women the vote 
provincially, especially as the last province waited until 1951. 
Mr. Speaker, the work did not stop after 1916. Indigenous 
women obtained the right to vote in the 1960s in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, non-partisan organizations like the 
Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians encourage women to 
run for public office, whether it be municipal, provincial, or 
federal. It is so important to ensure that we have capable, 
competent women run for public office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is important that we remember and recognize 
the hard work that was undertaken to make sure that all women 
in Saskatchewan have the right to vote. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 

Co-operatives Pioneer Appointed to the Order of Canada 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I’m honoured to stand today and 
congratulate Harold Chapman of Saskatoon, one of this year’s 
distinguished recipients of the Order of Canada at a young and 
spry 99 years of age. Harold Chapman has been a leader in the 
co-operative movement for decades, helping people across 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Harold grew up on a Saskatchewan farm in the ’20s and ’30s 
where he learned the value of family, friends, and neighbours 
working co-operatively together from a young age. These 
experiences, along with his farm management education at the 
University of Saskatchewan, fostered his commitment to 
co-operatives. 
 
Harold has been a committed co-op organizer for over 80 years, 
a policy-maker, and an educator. He was a founding member of 
the Saskatoon Community Clinic, which paved the way for 
Canada’s universal health care system, and helped establish 
co-operatives for veterans, machinery co-ops, housing co-ops, 
shopping and fishing co-ops, and more. 
 
Harold recently published a memoir titled Sharing My Life: 
Building the Co-operative Movement, but he feels that his 
single greatest achievement was establishing the Co-operative 
College in 1955, an institute that, under his 18 years as 
principal, eventually became the Co-operative College of 
Canada. 
 
Harold and his good friend Joan Bell have been supporters and 
mentors of mine for a long time. I admire his accomplishments 
and look forward to celebrating his hundredth birthday this 
April. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like all members to join me today in 
congratulating Harold Chapman on his appointment to the 
Order of Canada, and in thanking him for all that he’s 



1692 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2017 

accomplished for the co-operative movement and for our 
province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 

Melfort Rink Wins Special Olympics Team of the Year 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
humbled and honoured and a little bit excited to speak today 
about the Melfort Special Olympics curling team, who were 
named the Canadian Special Olympics Team of the Year. Last 
year, the curling team won gold at the Special Olympics games 
in Corner Brook, Newfoundland against British Columbia, 
actually winning 7-6 in the last end without the hammer. 
 
The team is led by skip Danny Fiedelleck; his third, Scot Earl; 
second, Lorin Bussiere; alternates Rodney Mitchell and Neil 
Sullivan. And they were honoured in Toronto with this award 
last year. 
 
Due to health reasons, Neil Sullivan will no longer be able to 
curl anymore, but he is proud to have represented Saskatchewan 
on this team across Canada. Like Henry Burris, Neil will be 
going out on top. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on January 4th, the team was recognized at a 
Melfort Mustangs game to a welcoming crowd, later receiving 
their Team of the Year rings — and fantastic rings they are — 
as well as plaques at the Melfort Curling Club. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite all members to join me in congratulating 
the Special Olympics curling team on being named the Special 
Olympics Canadian Team of the Year. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 

Champions of Mental Health Dinner and Auction 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I had the 
pleasure of bringing greetings on behalf of the Premier last 
Monday at the Schizophrenia Society of Saskatchewan’s event 
for mental health awareness. The Champions of Mental Health 
dinner and auction was a moving evening, featuring Silken 
Laumann as a keynote speaker. 
 
Silken Laumann is a champion of both sports, mental health, 
and serves as an inspiration for us all. Ten weeks before she 
was to represent Canada in rowing at the 1992 Olympics, a 
devastating boat collision left her right leg shattered. While 
many would have given up . . . but she persevered. And after 
multiple surgeries she was able to compete and even brought 
home a bronze medal for Canada. Mr. Speaker, I was moved 
and inspired by this beloved Olympian who was born and raised 
in Ontario. 
 
The Schizophrenia Society has been active in our province for 
35 years and has been offering mental health services for the 
last 13 years. Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me 
in thanking the Schizophrenia Society for all the work they’re 
doing, bringing awareness to mental health. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 
 

Estevan Educator Named one of Canada’s  
Outstanding Principals 

 
Ms. Carr: — Mr. Speaker, it is with great pride that I recognize 
a member from the Estevan constituency, Cheri Haberstock. 
I’ve known her for the past 20 years when she started dating my 
cousin, Keith, who she’s now married to. 
 
Cheri was named one of Saskatchewan’s two outstanding 
principals of 2017 at the 13th annual Canada’s Outstanding 
Principals gala in Toronto on February 28th. She was 
nominated by her colleagues, staff members, and community 
for her dedication, hard work, and commitment to her students 
and her community. Mr. Speaker, she even writes her own 
musicals for the grades 6 to 8 class to perform each and every 
year. 
 
Recently Cheri led a fundraising campaign bringing in $75,000 
to build an inclusive playground to accommodate children with 
autism and mobility challenges, making Westview school’s 
playground a space for all children to have fun. And, Mr. 
Speaker, Cheri will now be participating in a five-day 
leadership training course at the University of Toronto’s 
Rotman School of Management. 
 
Upon receiving this award, Cheri immediately emphasized this 
award belongs to her entire school — a sign of her humility and 
community-mindedness. And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask 
all members to join me in congratulating Cheri Haberstock on 
being named one of Canada’s Outstanding Principals of 2017. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 

Business Women of Moose Jaw Annual Awards Gala 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Saturday the 
MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] from Moose Jaw 
North and I had the pleasure of attending the 4th annual PRISM 
[perseverance, role model, influential, successful, mentor] 
Awards of Excellence in Moose Jaw. This annual event, which 
is hosted by the Business Women of Moose Jaw, is an 
opportunity to recognize women in our community for their 
accomplishments and contributions in various work and 
volunteer environments. 
 
[14:15] 
 
The PRISM Awards represent outstanding qualities that are 
displayed by each award recipient. This year’s winners were: 
for perseverance, Marie Wright; for role model, Destiney 
Gibney; for influencer, Michelle Gallagher; for success, Yvette 
Moore; and Lorraine Arguin in the mentor category. Additional 
awards were the Lifetime Achievement Award won by Joyce 
Walter, and the Youth Achievement Award won by Haley 
Pearce. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the PRISM Awards are also a fundraiser to 
support the Moose Jaw Women’s Transition House. And since 
this event began, they have raised over $70,000 in support of 
Transition House. 
 
I would like to ask all members to join me in congratulating the 



March 15, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1693 

PRISM Award winners and in thanking the Business Women of 
Moose Jaw for not only hosting a wonderful event, but also for 
supporting this very important local cause. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Unparliamentary Language 
 
The Speaker: — Before we begin question period, I would like 
to bring to the attention of members on both sides of the 
Assembly that members have been using the phrase “making 
stuff up” and “making it up as they go along.” These phrases 
have been used in question period by the Leader of the 
Opposition and from other members off the record through 
heckling across the floor. I’ve ruled, as well as other Speakers 
have ruled, that these phrases are unparliamentarian. Therefore I 
would like to remind all members to be more cautious in their 
choice of words in this Assembly. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Auditor’s Report and Details of Land Transactions 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Deputy 
Premier refused to answer a very simple question about when 
he learned that the original seller of the GTH [Global 
Transportation Hub] land in the Sask Party’s scandal was the 
landlord to the former minister of the GTH. Of course he failed 
to answer that question, just as the Premier’s dodged it day after 
day after day. 
 
So today we’ll make this even a little more simple for him. This 
would be something that only the Deputy Premier would know. 
Can the Deputy Premier tell us does he, as the Deputy Premier, 
stand by the contract to buy this land, the land of course that the 
people of Saskatchewan paid way, were forced to pay way too 
much for, millions more, and of course made the Sask Party 
supporters $11 million. Does he stand by this contract? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Of 
course members know that the auditor has looked into this 
matter. The auditor has fully canvassed this matter. The auditor 
had access to all of the documents to which she requested 
access. The auditor had access to all of the individuals involved 
in the transaction. She availed herself of that access. She did a 
very thorough report, by her own testimony, at the Public 
Accounts Committee. She made a number of recommendations. 
The government accepts those recommendations. We are 
implementing or have implemented all of those 
recommendations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Further to that, the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] 
have said that they’re looking into the matter. We’ve pledged 
full co-operation with that investigation. Thanks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Regina Bypass Project 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Pretty sad, Mr. Speaker. The question 
was simple. Obviously too difficult for the Deputy Premier to 
take to his feet and offer an answer. I’ll try another question 
about another growing scandal and another contract, the one 
that they signed with the Regina bypass with a multinational 
conglomerate from France and beyond. 
 
Yesterday they tried to say that the contract was on the website, 
was online. Mr. Speaker, the title pages and the definitions are 
on line, but the agreements are blank and unsigned, and they 
include no facts, no details, no costing. Basically all that’s 
online is a Post-It Note, an IOU [I owe you]: $2 billion to Vinci 
with love. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the Sask Party hiding the details of this 
contract? That project is now well over a billion dollars over 
budget and they’re saying, just trust us. The Deputy Premier is 
standing behind their disgraceful plan to scrap the jobs of 250 
of the lowest wage public servants in this province at the same 
time as the Deputy Premier is unwilling to open up the contract 
and the billion-dollar-plus overrun with this conglomerate from 
France and beyond. Where is the justice in this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I answered this question yesterday. The contract 
document is online. The value-for-money report is online. The 
fairness opinion is online, as are a number of other documents 
relating to this contract, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There is significant transparency with respect to this agreement. 
And, Mr. Speaker, as he mentioned today . . . He starts talking 
about an IOU to Vinci, Mr. Speaker. I’ve mentioned in this 
House yesterday that over 70 per cent of the work that’s being 
done on that bypass is being done by Saskatchewan companies, 
good Saskatchewan companies like Graham Construction and 
Broda Construction, Mr. Speaker. There’s great value going 
back to the people of Saskatchewan, not only with respect to the 
contracts that are being performed on that bypass, Mr. Speaker, 
but the fact that the bypass is being built at all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This bypass was budgeted at $1.2 billion, Mr. Speaker, and it is 
on budget and it is on time. Mr. Speaker, he only has to look at 
the website, and if I had the website in front of me, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d tell him exactly where to look it up on the Internet. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, another question, no 
answer. A bunch of nonsense from the Justice minister who 
should take a look at what’s actually there. This is a project that 
went from 400 million to $2 billion. You know, the scope of 
this project could have doubled, which it didn’t, but this is a 
five-time increase on the original cost. You know, and of course 
they’re hiding the answer of how much of that $2 billion is 
actually staying in Saskatchewan, won’t answer that and any 
basic information like how much they’re spending on dirt, how 
much per kilometre for asphalt — all the kind of things that 
basically used to be order of the day to provide to this 



1694 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2017 

legislature. In fact they used to have signs beside these projects 
detailing these costs. Now it’s blanked out on a government 
website. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this morning the Deputy Premier of Saskatchewan 
shamefully announced that he wants to rip up contracts with 
teachers all across Saskatchewan, that he wants to cut $100 
million out of our kids’ under-resourced classrooms, and he 
says it won’t affect their education. It’s not believable and it’s 
damaging. 
 
So to the Deputy Premier: how can he justify going after the 
education of Saskatchewan kids at any time, but particularly 
when he refuses to open up a billion-dollar overrun in a contract 
that’s been mismanaged every step of the way by the Sask 
Party? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, if the interim Leader of the Opposition was to go 
online and actually look at the documents that are there, Mr. 
Speaker, he’ll see a fairness opinion, Mr. Speaker. And that 
fairness opinion points out that we’re saving, the taxpayers of 
this province are saving $380 million as a result of moving 
forward with the P3 [public-private partnership] project, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s 40 kilometres of dual lane highway, 12 
overpasses, Mr. Speaker. I’ve invited the interim leader to a 
technical briefing last year, Mr. Speaker, which he attended, 
notwithstanding the fact that he was prepared to draft his press 
release before he went there. But, Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you this: 
I’ll offer him a tour of the facility. I’ll take him out and show 
him every square kilometre of that project. And then let him 
stand up and say it’s not worth the money that we’re spending 
to build this facility, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Local Agreements and Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, that minister has already walked 
away from his signature on the teachers’ contract, and now he’s 
trying to justify ripping up their local agreements. In fact when 
asked point-blank by a CBC [Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation] reporter if he would like to rip up these 
agreements and withdraw even more supports from our kids’ 
classrooms, the minister coldly and callously responded, “Yes, I 
would.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, these agreements have been in place for years, in 
some cases more than a century. But now they’re using a 
massive deficit that they created as an excuse to attack 
Saskatchewan’s teachers. Mr. Speaker, it is unacceptable. How 
can the minister possibly think that it’s okay to rip up these 
agreements and cut even more from our kids’ classrooms? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite likes 

to twist and torque and take things out of context. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reality of it is simply this: we have in this 
province 28 school divisions. There are a variety of different 
local implemented agreements, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
would like to have the discussion at some point how those play 
out if we do something more appropriate with school divisions, 
whether we have teachers that have the ability to move back 
and forth between school divisions. There’s an inherent 
unfairness in those contracts across provinces. 
 
We want to do what’s best and what’s right for teachers. For 
them to put the spin on it that it’s somehow that we want to do 
something against teachers is just dead wrong. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t think the teachers are feeling 
the love on this one. The minister claims that this is about 
consistency, but let’s be very clear: this is about making more 
cuts to our children’s classrooms to pay for the massive deficit 
that they created. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has already made deep cuts to our 
kids’ classrooms which are under-resourced, understaffed, and 
overcrowded. The minister is threatening to take the reserves 
that have been saved for education, and now he wants to take 
the cuts even further by ripping up local agreements, and 
putting everything, from teacher prep time to our kids’ sports 
and extracurricular activities, on the chopping block. So will the 
minister admit that he was wrong this morning? Will he admit 
that cutting even deeper into our education system will 
obviously have a negative impact on our kids’ classrooms? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I take the caution that you 
gave to members at the beginning of this session very seriously. 
But what I would like to do is give the member of the opposite 
. . . I did no media today on anything, none whatsoever. So if 
she wants to make an accusation I did something in the media 
today — flat out wrong, didn’t do it, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to give her the chance to withdraw and apologize for that 
statement. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 

Provision of Teacher Education Programming 
in the North 

 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, these deep cuts that undermine our 
future, undermine our education, they just keep coming. We’ve 
now heard, Mr. Speaker, that Northlands will be taking over 
NORTEP. Handing it over without due process is a serious 
blow to the North. There are serious questions about why the 
minister wasn’t straight with students, with teachers, the whole 
community, Mr. Speaker. What’s next? Are their assets on the 
chopping block as well? Yesterday when we asked about the 
residence buildings, Mr. Speaker, they exaggerated the problem 
and shifted the blame. This from a government with a $1.5 
billion backlog in needed school repairs, $2.2 billion in 



March 15, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1695 

desperately needed repairs in our health centres and care homes. 
 
The minister cannot be so condescending when they’ve sold off 
and cut away the high ground. Now that the plan to sell out 
NORTEP is out in the open, can the minister at least commit to 
ensuring NORTEP’s residences will continue to house and 
provide access for students from across the North? Will she 
give that promise for those who are looking to benefit from the 
hope and opportunity that NORTEP has provided for 40 years? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Northlands College was chosen, and what we hope will be close 
collaboration between it and Gabriel Dumont Institute for 
teacher education programming, as well as the U of R and the U 
of S [University of Saskatchewan] on the advisory board 
because, Mr. Speaker, it makes good common sense. 
Northlands is already on the ground in La Ronge. It has a very 
well-respected, solid board made up exclusively of northerners. 
It’s also well experienced with providing full- and part-time 
university programming in La Ronge, but also to Creighton, 
Buffalo Narrows, and Ile-a-la-Crosse. 
 
Currently, Mr. Speaker, 160 students — 90 per cent Aboriginal, 
almost all northerners — are enrolled in Northlands in 
certificate and degree programs, including in nursing, business 
administration, and social work. And most of all, Mr. Speaker, 
Northlands wants to expand that university programming across 
the North so we can build on all its potential with a 
made-in-the-North solution, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Provision of Crop Insurance 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Jim Liggett is here 
today in the gallery, and he’s a producer for over 40 years. He 
lives down in Pangman. Over the last few years, Jim has 
struggled to deal with the real consequences of climate change, 
but he’s also struggled with a constant and costly battle with 
Crop Insurance. 
 
Crop insurance is supposed to be there for producers when they 
need it but, Mr. Speaker, it has not been there for Jim. And Jim 
is not alone; producers across the province are facing the same 
struggles. In his last letter from the appeal panel, Jim was told 
delayed seeding to control weeds is a management decision and 
therefore not an insurable cause for loss. 
 
Mr. Speaker, insurance provides no assurance if the only 
protection is to the fund and not to the farmers. Can the minister 
tell us why instead of insuring producers under the Sask Party, 
Crop Insurance is now telling them how to farm and punishing 
them for not predicting an unplanned 8 inches of rain? 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank 

the member for that question. Crop insurance is a very popular 
program, Mr. Speaker. It’s the fundamental farm program in 
this province. It’s the backbone of all of the basket of farm 
programs that we have. It’s the most well-used farm program 
that we have. In 2016 we insured a record 29 million acres, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Producers find that Crop Insurance is very fair to deal with, but 
there are some things that crop insurance doesn’t cover that are 
matters of management and choices the producers make that 
lead to claims down the road. And those things are just not 
covered. That’s clear upfront, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Regina Bypass Project 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Let me 
tell you about the Coquihalla Highway. It’s 186 kilometres. It 
cuts through the mountains of southwestern BC [British 
Columbia]. It has a bridge or overpass every 3 kilometres, 18 
interchanges, 19 underpasses, 38 bridge and overpass 
structures, and 50 pipeline crossings. 
 
In 1986 the total cost of that project, Mr. Speaker, was $848 
million. Mr. Speaker, $848 million. Now I know that people 
across the way have difficulties with numbers, so I’ll translate 
for them. Accounting for inflation, that’s about $1.7 billion, 
folks. Now I’ll put it another way. That highway through the 
Rockies cost a few hundred million dollars less, Mr. Speaker, 
less than the Sask Party’s 40-kilometre bypass being cut 
through the treacherous mountain range of our southern 
prairies. To the minister: how does it make any sense? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, that question’s 
laughable. Mr. Speaker, I mentioned time and time again in this 
House and at technical briefings that have been offered to the 
opposition, Mr. Speaker, that the value-for-money report that’s 
been filed, that’s been done by Ernst & Young, Mr. Speaker, 
identified a $380 million saving with respect to this bypass over 
a traditional build, Mr. Speaker. And we don’t just make those 
numbers up, Mr. Speaker. Those numbers come from 
professionals. Those numbers come from officials within the 
Ministry of Highways, Mr. Speaker. So we stand by the 
numbers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There is huge value in this bypass to the people of 
Saskatchewan, not only from an economic development 
perspective, Mr. Speaker, but from a safety perspective and 
from a job-creating perspective, Mr. Speaker. We stand by these 
numbers. And if the member opposite wants to stand up and 
criticize Ernst & Young, one of the foremost accounting firms 
in this country, Mr. Speaker, let him go ahead and do that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, we don’t need a technical 
briefing. We need some serious financial oversight, Mr. 
Speaker. And if they, if they are so confident, why don’t you 
show us the full contract? Why won’t you tell us how much of 



1696 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2017 

that $2 billion is going to stay in our province? We hear 
concerns about local contractors and workers who feel shut out 
of this project. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there’s no shortage of reason for concern 
when it comes to Vinci, as we have been speaking about. There 
have been some serious legal investigations in Russia, France, 
and Qatar. They are dealing with accusations for fraud and 
corruption. 
 
Two billion dollars, Mr. Speaker. What is the Sask Party hiding 
in this contract? And why are they shipping Saskatchewan 
dollars to an overseas corporation with a history like this 
instead of keeping all of the money, all of the contracts, and all 
of the jobs here in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, they can keep asking 
questions. The answers are going to be the same. Over 70 per 
cent of the work that’s being done on that bypass is being done 
by Saskatchewan companies, by Saskatchewan workers. Mr. 
Speaker, 8,200 construction jobs on this project alone, Mr. 
Speaker.  
 
The contract is online, Mr. Speaker, and the member knows and 
the interim Leader of the Opposition knows that all contracts 
are going to be redacted for commercially sensitive information, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s consistent, Mr. Speaker, that’s consistent 
with the Information and Privacy Commissioner’s guidelines, 
Mr. Speaker. He only has to look online to get the details of the 
contract. And while there’s commercially sensitive information 
that has been redacted, Mr. Speaker, that has been done 
consistent with the law. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

Donations to Political Parties 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, we have legislation before the 
House to take big money out of politics. And I was pleased 
earlier last week to hear that the Premier finally saw the writing 
on the wall and agreed to ditch his salary top-up funded by 
wealthy Sask Party donors. It seems that he was following the 
lead of BC Premier Christy Clark, who was the second-last 
premier to collect a salary top-up from a political party. 
 
But there are more changes afoot in BC that this Premier should 
follow up with here at home. On the eve of an election and in 
response to a scathing media report about big-time donors to 
her party, Premier Clark has announced that she will review 
corporate and union donations in that province too. Will this 
Sask Party government follow her lead and take action to get 
big money out of Saskatchewan politics? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is rich coming 
from that member, Mr. Speaker. In the last session of the 
legislature, Mr. Speaker, this was a party that was looking for 

corporate donations for a leadership dinner, Mr. Speaker, at the 
same time that that member was standing up and asking for us 
to do that, to cut corporate donations, Mr. Speaker. So as long 
as they’re sitting there going . . . It seems hypocritical to me, 
Mr. Speaker, that that member would stand up and ask this 
question when their party is out looking for corporate donations 
for their leader’s dinner, Mr. Speaker, at the time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have no plans of changing any of the 
legislation around this matter, Mr. Speaker. We’re proud of the 
Premier’s decision, the decision that he made a couple of weeks 
ago, Mr. Speaker. But as far as corporate donations, Mr. 
Speaker, or union donations, Mr. Speaker, we have no intention 
of changing those laws. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, that answer is so weak and out of 
touch with what people are talking about here in Saskatchewan. 
We in this House have been trusted to guard the sanctity of 
Saskatchewan democracy. People in Saskatchewan are 
concerned about where the party behind their government gets 
their money. 
 
With so much money on the table and the Sask Party attacking 
workers and families, people wonder who they’re working for. 
We need a cap on donation limits and a ban on corporate and 
union donations. Why won’t the Sask Party support our bill and 
get big money out of Saskatchewan politics today? Tens of 
thousands of donations from a lobbyist who used to work for 
the Sask Party, millions from big out-of-province corporations, 
individual donations of 5, 20, even $30,000 — don’t they see a 
problem with that? Don’t they agree that’s bad for democracy? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, Mr. Speaker, many of the 
corporations that provide donations to our party, Mr. Speaker, 
have workers in this province spending, earning money, paying 
their taxes in this province, Mr. Speaker. And so they deserve a 
voice, Mr. Speaker. I can tell you this, in over 16 years when 
they were in government, Mr. Speaker, this didn’t seem a 
problem for them when they were raking in union donations to 
support their party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I might also point out, Mr. Speaker, that nearly 
three-quarters of their election budget that they spent, Mr. 
Speaker, was spent on out-of-province companies, Mr. Speaker, 
during the last election. Mr. Speaker, we have no intention of 
making any change to this legislation at this time, at this time, 
Mr. Speaker, and we’ll continue on with the path that we’ve 
undertaken. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Legislative Supports for Victims of Domestic Violence 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not just public servants 
across the province who are concerned about the future of their 
jobs. Victims of domestic violence in our province have no 



March 15, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1697 

protection to keep their jobs while they try to escape a 
dangerous relationship. Saskatchewan employers have no 
obligation to make sure that victims of domestic violence are 
protected while they’re at work. Other provinces, Manitoba and 
Ontario have made progress on this front with common sense 
reforms. In Alberta all parties unanimously agreed to changes 
that help women get out of rental agreements without penalty 
when they’re fleeing domestic violence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s time for Saskatchewan to make sure our 
women and children are protected too. I know the Minister of 
Justice has spoken about taking action in the past, but when will 
he actually take meaningful action to help women facing 
domestic violence? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to thank the member opposite for raising a 
very important issue on the floor of this Assembly today, Mr. 
Speaker. And she and I have talked about legislative changes 
that I’d like to bring forward in this session of the legislature, 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to the very things that she’s talked 
about: job security, rental contracts, Mr. Speaker. I’ve also 
mentioned to her, Mr. Speaker, that I’ve instructed my officials 
at the Ministry of Justice to pursue the development of a 
long-term integrated domestic violence strategy for this 
province. 
 
There’s certainly no blinking at the fact, Mr. Speaker, that we 
have a problem in this province. And this government has spent 
some time and taken some concrete action over the last number 
of years to address it, Mr. Speaker. There’s certainly more to 
do, Mr. Speaker, and some of the examples that the members 
have brought forward from Alberta and Manitoba and Ontario 
certainly have some merit, Mr. Speaker. We will be moving 
forward with some legislative initiatives in this area, Mr. 
Speaker, and I thank the member opposite for raising it today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 

 
The Water Security Agency Amendment Act 

 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, concerns about this 
government’s mismanagement and ham-fisted handling of Bill 
44 is growing. There’s no question illegal drainage has been a 
huge problem in Saskatchewan and has been for years. But, Mr. 
Speaker, agricultural organizations, producers, and RMs [rural 
municipality] have concerns about some of the consequences of 
this new legislation. People are concerned about the loss of 
land, increased cost to producers, and loss of tax dollars to 
municipalities. And there are also concerns about how this new 
law will be enforced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, agriculture is a crucial part of our economy, and 
we certainly agree that we need to address illegal drainage. But 
we’re concerned that the Sask Party may be in over their head, 
and we worry about the consequences of their trademark 
shoot-first, ask-questions-later approach to policy. Has the Ag 
Minister done an impact assessment of this new legislation? 
And what’s his plan to address the overall economic impacts on 

farmers in particular and to Saskatchewan’s economy in 
general? Mr. Speaker, has he requested that analysis from his 
ministry and could he maybe share it with this House and the 
Saskatchewan people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 
thank the member opposite for the question with respect to 
agriculture and with respect to a topic that’s very, very pertinent 
to agriculture and the economic stability of agriculture here in 
the province of Saskatchewan. And I can assure you, Mr. 
Speaker, that there’s been adequate engagement and much 
engagement over the last number of years, starting back in 
2013, Mr. Speaker, with online surveys, continuing with the 
minister of Agriculture and myself, of the day, with 
consultations with agricultural groups. 
  
And that has continued, Mr. Speaker, throughout the weeks and 
throughout the years, Mr. Speaker, right up until yesterday and 
today at the SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities] convention, Mr. Speaker. Of which I would like 
to mention at the SARM convention, Mr. Speaker, all of the 
work and the effort that went in from the Government of 
Saskatchewan, and the members on this side, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And there was a couple of things that I did not see up there, Mr. 
Speaker. One of the things that I did not see, Mr. Speaker, was 
any support for a federally imposed carbon tax. That, Mr. 
Speaker, lies with members across the way, Mr. Speaker. And 
the second thing I did not see was members of the opposition up 
there talking to our rural people across the province to talk 
about what’s important to them. 
 
The Speaker: — Introduction of bills. I recognize the member 
from Regina Douglas Park. 
 
May I first ask why the Government House Leader is on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I will hear the point of order. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the 
beginning of today’s session, you reminded us all to be using 
our language very carefully. And the member for Meewasin 
used a phrase of “wasn’t straight with us,” which tends to lead 
. . . the line which would be directly from 47(2) of using 
provocative language, Mr. Speaker. And I’m wondering if you 
could rule on that, please. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, this one . . . How to put this 
accurately? I guess it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, from a side 
that comes forward with a lot of twisting and torquing in a lot of 
their rhetoric, Mr. Speaker, that suddenly when it comes to 



1698 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2017 

imagined slights, you know, from members opposite, suddenly 
they couldn’t be more enthusiastic about the rules. Mr. Speaker, 
I would submit that the member from Meewasin put his 
statement very much in accordance with the rules, and certainly 
that was the way that it was put and also the usage. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I would urge you to find the Government House 
Leader’s point of order to be not well taken. 
 
The Speaker: — I will review Hansard and make 
determination on that point of order at a later date. With that I 
will recognize Regina Douglas Park.  
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 603 — An Act to Provide Critical Supports for 
Victims of Domestic Violence 

 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 603, An Act 
to Provide Critical Supports for Victims of Domestic Violence 
be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Regina Douglas Park that Bill No. 603, An Act to Provide 
Critical Supports for Victims of Domestic Violence be now 
introduced and read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the member for Regina Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — At the next sitting of the Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 268 through 278. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 
to questions 268 to 278. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 43 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 43 — The 
Pipelines Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in on Bill 
No. 43, The Pipelines Amendment Act, 2016. I guess some of 
the comments, my opening comments I want to talk about, and I 
think expanding the licensing regulations to flow lines is a good 
thing. We support that. I think many, you know, our side and 
many Saskatchewan residents who are concerned about the 
environment and about our water protection have called for this, 
and we’re glad to see the government’s moving, bringing 
forward the licensing and regulations. And I guess they’re 
going to, and we’re hoping at the end of the day they will 
strengthen the regulations. 
 
And when you talk about the flow lines, and I believe right now 
flow lines are not being inspected. There might be different 
regulations, and if the government is actually strengthening 
those and going to make sure that there’s inspections of those 
flow lines. 
 
And I want to talk a little bit about the process that they’re 
going to use, the concerns that have been out there. We’ve seen 
what we’ve had. Pipeline oil has done tremendous damage to 
our environment, our water. I think about the North 
Saskatchewan River. I think about the many, many residents of 
this province that suffered and, you know, the damage to the 
environment, to wildlife, to the traditional lands. And you 
know, you heard the concerns from many of them. Many First 
Nations, Métis leaders, mayors, we heard the concerns. 
 
And I think it’s a wake-up call, and I hope it’s a wake-up call 
and the government’s saying, okay, it’s time. The people of this 
province are saying it’s time the government reacts and they do 
something to strengthen the regulations. But it’s not just about 
strengthening the regulations and giving powers to those that 
will do the inspection. And if we’re going to do inspections of 
pipelines . . . And I think about the last year, in Alberta they did 
over 2,000 inspections. My colleagues have expressed that and 
they’ve talked about that process that’s been there. Two 
thousand inspections. In Saskatchewan I think we did 
something like 78 inspections of pipelines. 
 
So if we’re going to come up with new regulations, new powers 
for inspectors, let’s make sure, Mr. Speaker, that those 
inspections happen; there’s penalties if you’re going to say that, 
you know, we’re going to do the inspections of the flow lines. 
Like I said earlier, the bigger pipelines where they flow into, 
that’s fine. They’re doing that. 
 
They’re not doing enough. That’s obviously what we’re 
hearing. We need more inspections. We’ve been calling for that. 
I think many leaders, First Nations communities, residents have 
been calling for that. Saskatchewan residents in general have 
been calling for that and asking and demanding the government 
take action on that. 
 
We don’t want to see any more incidents of oil spills when it 
comes through pipelines, and especially because they are not 
being inspected. And let’s just make sure at the end of the day 
that if we’re going to give credit to a government that is coming 
in with some new regulations and licensing to those flow lines, 
that they are inspecting them, that it’s not just, oh we’ll just put 
this out so . . . just for the public and so those people out in the 



March 15, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1699 

community that are raising this as a concern, or the opposition 
or those members. 
 
It’s not just a game; it’s serious. The people of this province, 
First Nations, those traditional land users, trappers, I think 
about them. Those people who . . . Medicines off the shorelines 
of the rivers where those lands that were contaminated. They 
want to make sure that this government is taking it serious, that 
you put in the regulations, the licensing. But the inspections are 
crucial. 
 
Giving powers to the inspectors to make sure, whether it’s fines 
and how that’s going to play out, it’ll be interesting to see as the 
ministry rolls this out, as the officials . . . And I’m hoping 
they’re consulting with many of our First Nations, our Métis, 
our mayors, those communities that have been impacted and 
those communities that are very concerned about the water, the 
environment. 
 
We’ve talked about that and we’ve seen that, and we’ve seen 
some of the challenges that some of the city . . . And I think 
about Prince Albert and I watched as we had the oil spill there, 
and I watched how many of the First Nations and the mayors 
came together to discuss and how to ensure that there was safe 
drinking water. 
 
And in Prince Albert, you know, you’ve seen the lines of water 
piped that was through the city, but also they had to find 
another source of water that was safe for Saskatchewan people. 
So I commend the good work of the city of Prince Albert and 
those that partnered with them to make sure there was good 
drinking water. But unfortunately I go back to these regulations, 
and like I said earlier, we want to make sure that those 
inspectors . . . If you’re going to hire inspectors, like who’s 
going to be doing it? Are we going to have more? Obviously we 
can’t do just 78 pipeline inspections on any type, whether it’s 
like I said, you know, the flow lines or your main pipeline. You 
have to make sure inspections are done to protect Saskatchewan 
people, to protect the water, the environment. 
 
And I’ve talked about that. It’s crucial and people want that and 
they’re demanding that of the government. So at the end of the 
day I hope . . . You know, I think from our side we have called 
for this. Many I’ve said have called for more inspection of the 
pipelines. It’s crucial that those individuals have the powers to 
do that. And it’s going to be crucial that the government put the 
proper resources to make sure that there are inspectors going 
out and doing what they need to do. 
 
Now overall I think on this side we’re saying, looking at the 
bill, I mean my colleagues have expressed great concern. Over 
time we’ve talked about this. But I’ve seen how my colleagues 
have talked about this bill, talking about what needs to happen, 
how we need to . . . [inaudible] . . . our environment for our 
next generation. It’s crucial. 
 
And we see change, and I think a lot of people are saying the 
economy is important, but the environment, the environment is 
so important, the waters that we all need to survive. We take 
many of our First Nations communities, and I was in North 
Battleford and met and was in a meeting where I’ve seen the 
chiefs talking about . . . And those that traditionally use certain 
areas that were impacted and their lands and their traditional 

lands that were impacted by the oil spill and the concerns they 
had. And they’re calling for more inspections and more . . . 
They want to be involved more consultation and more. 
 
So I’m hoping that the government will make sure that they’ve 
reached out to those individuals that were impacted, but 
reaching out to anyone in our province who are saying you want 
to get in and share your ideas, your concerns, your 
recommendations, here’s a government. So I’m hoping the 
government will work with the individuals, will work with the 
members opposite to come up with proper regulations. But 
inspections, like I say, that’s so crucial. We can have all the 
regulations and all the licences you want. If you’re not doing 
the inspections, then exactly what’s going to happen? 
 
We’ve had a number of oil spills, and how many times. The 
people of our province want this to stop and they’re concerned 
about it. So I’m hoping at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, the 
good people of this province will hold the government to 
account and say, yes you’re moving on this; we support this. 
Let’s make sure the regulations . . . Let’s make sure the 
inspections are being done. Let’s just make sure we can do all 
we can do to make sure they’re as safe as they can be so that 
they’re not going to have an impact that will impact many of us, 
our next generation, or any community. And I know there’s 
been some communities that are still not very happy and are 
very concerned about the oil spill, that are still being impacted. 
We don’t know. So there’s lots of reports. There’s people 
saying different things. At the end of the day, those individuals 
will come forward, and they’ll make their case known, you 
know, if they’re fine with it, if they think it’s been a fair 
process. That’ll all happen. 
 
And I think those in the industry need to be held accountable, 
and we have to hold them accountable. Yes, the regulations. So 
I’m hoping this strengthens. But the inspections will be crucial, 
the regulations and the fines, and at the end of the day, you 
know, making sure that the good people of this province are 
100 per cent protected at best ability that we can do as a 
government. And I would . . . I know it’s a challenge to the 
government, but I would hope the government will consult, will 
come up with the proper regulations with everything else. 
 
And I know in committee, my colleagues will have opportunity 
to ask questions. I know more of my colleagues will want to, 
you know, weigh in on this and take the government to 
challenge but also I guess tell the government. Sometimes it’s 
tough, you know; we’re opposite sides. But sometimes it’s the 
right thing to do. And I’ve seen how this legislature have, times 
before, worked together to make sure things are done right, that 
we have to get this right. This is about our environment. This is 
about our children’s future. We have to make sure this 
legislation is the right legislation, that those protections are 
there for our next generation. We have to do that. I think it’s 
crucial. 
 
So I’m hoping at the end of the day, you know, as we go 
through the process, those recommendations, those that are 
consulted, those individuals that want to have the input and the 
protection will be listened to and those inspectors will do what 
they need to do to inspect and protect our environment and 
protect many of our waterways, our rivers, our lakes. It’s 
crucial. You know, at the end of the day, when I think about 



1700 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2017 

this, we get one shot at this, and I hope we get it right for our 
grandkids, for the next generation. 
 
So having said, you know, the comments I did, I didn’t want to 
get into too much areas of this, but I know my colleagues have 
more. And in committee we will ask more questions. So at this 
time, Mr. Speaker, I’m prepared to adjourn debate on Bill No. 
43. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 43, The Pipelines Amendment Act, 
2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 44 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Moe that Bill No. 44 — The Water 
Security Agency Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am absolutely awash 
with pleasure today to be able to speak to The Water Security 
Agency Amendment Act of 2016. I admittedly am just dipping 
my toes into this subject matter, Mr. Speaker. I haven’t had a 
chance to soak up all of the information, so this might be a bit 
stream of consciousness today but I will do my best to dive 
right into this turbulent topic. I will dive right in. 
 
And as we know, things have not, in terms of drainage in this 
province, been going swimmingly, Mr. Speaker. And this issue 
deserves more than a surface exploration, as there has been, Mr. 
Speaker. There’s been a slew of reports of difficulties from 
around the province. So let’s get into these troubled waters a 
little bit. 
 
What troubles have been arising from the inappropriate 
drainage practices? We’ve been hearing stories, Mr. Speaker, of 
water encroaching on farmhouses as water is coming from one 
farmer’s land to another, or one RM to another; water coming 
up towards the basements and foundations of another 
farmhouse, or coming up on cabin properties, Mr. Speaker, in 
our lakelands here in the province. 
 
We hear, Mr. Speaker, of the loss of thousands of acres of 
pasture and cropland, Mr. Speaker, no longer accessible 
because of water that has been improperly drained onto that 
land. 
 
We hear, Mr. Speaker, of the costs that are associated with that 
damage. Costs from crop insurance, costs of the repairs of grid 
roads, costs from disaster relief. We hear also, Mr. Speaker, 
about less availability of habitat for wildlife, as stands of trees 
or ponds are taken down to make room for more arable land. 
That gives fewer opportunities for wildlife to be able to gather 
safely. 
 

We also hear, Mr. Speaker, about the challenges that come from 
nutrients from runoff, where you have drainage coming from 
fertilized fields with nutrients and phosphates going into bodies 
of water, causing an increase in growth in algae — that green 
water that we know from lakes like at Fort Qu’Appelle or in 
Buffalo Pound. 
 
[15:00] 
 
And this offers a risk, Mr. Speaker, to the local aquatic life. 
There’s also, Mr. Speaker, a risk to contaminating well water 
and, potentially, drinking water as we start to see those 
nutrients, phosphates, other chemicals get into local water 
sources, and the risk that that poses to drinking water or water 
used for livestock. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about really a process that is 
understandable. You understand why any individual landowner 
would want to perhaps drain a slough or find another way to 
remove a stand of trees in order to have access to more arable 
land. It makes perfect sense on that individual farm, but when 
you start to extrapolate that to the effects on downstream 
neighbours, Mr. Speaker, it starts to make less sense as the 
water that is being drained from one farm goes on to another, or 
from one RM into another RM, or, Mr. Speaker, from our 
province here in Saskatchewan affecting our neighbours in 
Manitoba downstream from us. 
 
So we need a better process for this, Mr. Speaker. We need 
more attention. And the reality is that there are problems with 
the current process. The current process, Mr. Speaker, really 
involves neighbours having to first speak to neighbours — a 
conversation that I assure you, Mr. Speaker, is rarely an easy 
conversation to have, to go to your neighbour and say, what 
you’re doing on your farm is causing a problem on mine. I need 
you to stop it; I need you to fill in that trench. That’s not an 
easy conversation to have, Mr. Speaker. Peoples’ livelihoods 
are in question. 
 
And when that doesn’t work, if the neighbours don’t resolve it 
together, we’re then asking people to complain about their 
neighbours to another source, something that can also cause 
significant conflict. And we’re hearing these stories, Mr. 
Speaker, about conflict between neighbours, even threats 
between neighbours, as there are such high feelings that go 
along with these practices. 
 
Another concern, Mr. Speaker, is that these practices, while not 
legal, while not allowed, and while there is a fine associated 
with them, that fine is rarely, if ever, applied. So the likelihood 
of getting change in behaviour, even with an existing deterrent 
like that fine, is very low if there’s no one inspecting it, no one 
doing the work to actually deal with that fine. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this points to some of the existing challenges. And 
one of the major existing challenges that we hear are that the 
people who are actually tasked with enforcing this work find 
themselves really under water. They find themselves 
under-resourced in their ability to rein in the infractions that are 
taking place. 
 
So what does this bill do? I think we should plumb the depths of 
this bill a little bit more and talk exactly about what has been 



March 15, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1701 

proposed. The Water Security Agency Amendment Act has been 
described as streamlining the process for resolving drainage 
disputes between landowners; giving the Water Security 
Agency the authority to order the closure or alteration of any 
drainage works constructed before 1981; replacing the old 
two-step process for complaints of illegal drainage by a 
neighbour with a one-step process that the government says will 
be resolved in 90 days or less; allowing appeal of decisions by 
the Water Security Agency to be heard by the Court of Queen’s 
Bench rather than the Water Appeal Board; expanding the 
Water Security Agency’s authority to enter lands with 
machinery and carry out work required to enforce an order by 
the WSA [Water Security Agency] when a landowner fails to 
comply; expanding the WSA’s ability to recover costs for work 
carried out to enforce an order by the WSA when a landowner 
fails to comply; removing the mediation of disputes between 
landowners from the mandate of the WSA; and increasing the 
maximum fine under the Act from $1,000 per day to an amount 
not exceeding $1 million per day. 
 
So, clearly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is necessary that we shore 
up our response to illegal drainage in the province, but this bill 
really does represent a sea change in the legislature around this 
topic. And while I would love to shower it with praise, being in 
opposition, my role really is to see the glass as half-empty, and 
this is a multi-fauceted issue so we must dig into it a little bit 
more deeply, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So some of the concerns that have been raised around this bill, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, one is the degree to which the consultation 
was adequate. We’ve been hearing in recent days greater 
concern raised by specific stakeholders. We’ve been hearing 
anger from farmers who are very upset about this direction, 
concerned about the impact on their livelihood, on whether they 
will be compensated for lands that continue to be covered with 
water, or whether they will be penalized for past actions. 
 
We’re also hearing from other stakeholders like the 
Saskatchewan Farm Stewardship Association, Ducks Unlimited 
Canada, and of course yesterday, Mr. Speaker, we heard from 
the delegates at the SARM convention that there were serious 
concerns, and they’ve asked that this bill be rescinded, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And these concerns seem to revolve primarily around the 
effects on farmers, and the concerns that this will have on them. 
We definitely need to be looking at what the impacts will be on 
farmers, whether there will be compensation if land is taken out 
of production and what that will mean for individual producers, 
but also whether or not there would be incentives for producers 
to not take these actions, not drain land and leave it as a 
wetland, Mr. Speaker, when it was viable arable land. 
 
The other thing we’re hearing a lot of concern about, Mr. 
Speaker, is the complaints process itself. So as I said, the 
complaints process to date, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has been to 
complain to your neighbours, to have a process in which you 
bring this forward to your neighbour and you say, let’s resolve 
this. As I said before, that’s a very difficult conversation to have 
from one farmer to another, both concerned about livelihood, 
both concerned about access to the most productive land they 
can have. And certainly it pits one farmer against another, and 
even more difficult for smaller farmers that are talking to larger 

producers who may have more financial or other types of 
influence. 
 
So the change in that process is necessary, but one wonders if it 
goes far enough in this current iteration, where we’ve gone 
from a complaint to your neighbours to a complaint about your 
neighbours. It’s still going to cause all kinds of conflict. It’s still 
going to be public, who spoke out about this concern. 
 
And perhaps, primarily, the biggest problem is it leaves all of 
the onus on the actual downstream neighbour, the person who’s 
been affected, to make a complaint, rather than making it about 
making the producer who’s making the change have the 
primary responsibility. Really the onus should be on those who 
are changing the landscape to ensure that they’re doing so in a 
proper way, that they get the proper permits, that they get the 
permission in advance of causing potentially irreversible 
damage to the land of those around them. 
 
We also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, need to have some greater clarity 
around the fines involved. We’ve heard of the change from 
$1,000 a day to up to $1 million a day. What exactly does that 
mean, Mr. Speaker? Is that going to be the same for small 
farmers? Is that going to be the same for large farmers? Will 
this even be used? 
 
And that’s, I suppose, the other question that’s of considerable 
import here, is we’ve heard about the change from 1,000 to $1 
million a day, but if it was never enforced in the first place? If 
it’s never actually applied, well it doesn’t really matter if it’s 1 
cent a day or $1 billion a day. It’s really only an imaginary 
concern. 
 
Is this going to be clearly described to people? Are the warnings 
going to be clear and are the penalties going to be clear? And 
when those infringements continue, will they actually be 
enforced, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
And all of this comes down to perhaps the issue at the crux of 
this bill, and some of the others in front of us including the 
pipeline safety Act, Mr. Speaker. And that comes from the 
concerns around resources available to actually enforce what’s 
going on, to support those who’ve experienced damage or even 
to help those who want to do work and want to do so in a lawful 
and safe way, to be able to actually have that input and 
influence on their decisions so that they do the right thing from 
the beginning. 
 
And as we have these new changes and we have the growing 
numbers of concerns about drainage, the number of complaints 
may be moving, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from a trickle to a flood. 
And we already have a backlog of cases and we’ve been 
hearing from people currently in the system that the flow of 
resolution of these is already bottlenecked. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is in no way my intention to be a 
wet blanket and to criticize this outright. I think there is 
definitely some important work being done within this bill. We 
don’t want to throw the baby out with the bathwater by any 
means, but I would like to float some suggestions that this bill 
requires some deeper investigation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Perhaps we need to go back to the well and improve the degree 



1702 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2017 

to which we have done consultations on this matter. Speak once 
again to those members at SARM, to the folks at SFSA 
[Saskatchewan Farm Stewardship Association], at Ducks 
Unlimited; speak to the scientific experts who really understand 
drainage, who understand what we need for a systemic 
response, an overview of this problem at the provincial level in 
order to really be able to plan ahead. 
 
You know, before this bill is entirely in the tank . . . Well all 
levity aside, Mr. Speaker, I think we need to have a little bit 
deeper of a view of this. It is extremely important that we get 
this right. 
 
We need to use the best evidence available. Speak to the 
experts, and that means the experts on the ground, the experts 
on the farm, the experts in lake country, the experts who are 
experiencing this but also the experts in hydrology who 
understand the way that the decisions made now will affect our 
future ability to protect farm land, to protect homes, to have the 
fairest possible process for farmers, to protect drinking water, to 
protect well water, to preserve wildlife habitat on land and in 
water. 
 
If we don’t do that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we don’t have the 
fairest possible process, if we don’t get this right, then we may 
find ourselves with a further deluge of complaints, and we may 
find ourselves up the creek without a paddle. 
 
With that I’ll adjourn my comments on Bill No. 44, The Water 
Security Agency Amendment Act. That will be the end of my 
comments. I’ll move to adjourn debate. Thank you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 44, The 
Water Security Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 40 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 40 — The 
Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 
sur l’interprétation be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Following my comments, I want to point out that we have had a 
lot of my colleagues that have debated this particular bill, and 
with a lot of thought, a lot of energy, and certainly a lot of 
vision as it relates to the interpretation of sale as it concerns our 
Crown corporations of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, before I begin my comments, I want to 
commend our research staff in the NDP [New Democratic 
Party] caucus office because they have put a lot of effort into 
researching this particular bill. There’s no question that when 

we ask for a bit of information on to the Crowns and the history 
of the Crowns, Mr. Speaker . . . I want to share with the 
Assembly and with the people of Saskatchewan how well 
served we are by our research team within the NDP caucus 
office because, Mr. Speaker, as you may or may not be able to 
see from your vantage point, we’ve got a binder that’s almost a 
foot thick of information as it pertains to the history of our 
Crowns and certainly as to the value of the Crowns and what 
the Crowns do for us. 
 
But more importantly, Mr. Speaker, they also talk about, the 
research team talk about all the legal justifications for the NDP 
defending the ownership of the Crowns by the Saskatchewan 
people. And as you look through the actual book, Mr. Speaker, I 
want to say publicly that I am very, very impressed with our 
research team and staff at the NDP caucus office because it is 
this kind of foresight and work and effort that is required to arm 
MLAs with the right information and certainly to give us the 
opportunity to share with Saskatchewan people all the relevant 
information as it pertains to Bill 40. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the problem we have with Bill 40 is they’re 
basically, the Saskatchewan Party are talking about 
interpretation of the Crown sales aspect of what we think the 
agenda is all about across the way. Now, Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier got up in the Assembly and basically said that SaskTel 
was not for sale. That was what he said in the Assembly not 
more than three or four days ago. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the question we have on this side of the 
Assembly is first of all, if you’re serious about that particular 
statement, Mr. Premier, then you have to withdraw this bill 
because this bill has all kinds of implications and complications 
on the future operations of our Crowns. And the Premier would 
not withdraw that bill. So like anything else, whether it is the 
Regina bypass scandal, Mr. Speaker, or whether it is the 
finances of our province, we certainly do not take the Premier’s 
word nor do we trust the Premier when he makes statements of 
that effect. And all the while these bills of this magnitude, Bill 
40, continue to be in the Assembly. 
 
And that’s why in the opposition we continue raising the issue 
around Bill 40. And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, when the Premier 
makes a statement in this particular Assembly, the opposition 
simply does not buy his position. We don’t agree one iota that 
he has no intentions of selling any Crown, and the reason why, 
Mr. Speaker, the reason why . . . Before I get into the specifics 
of this very thick research binder — and it is very thick — I 
want to just give just a quick little history of the Sask Party 
since they’ve been elected, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this is some of the information our research team dragged 
out of the archives and certainly the history of what the Sask 
Party’s been doing with the Crowns. It’s not a long history but 
certainly there is some history. 
 
We’ll start, Mr. Speaker, in January 2008, shortly after the Sask 
Party became government: 
 

The Saskatchewan Party government creates a provincial 
public-private partnership (P3) Secretariat . . . [And this 



March 15, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1703 

department or the secretariat had] a mandate to review all 
infrastructure projects over $25 million to be considered to 
be built as P3s. After nine months, the government 
disbands the P3 Secretariat determining that there weren’t 
enough large capital projects in the province to qualify as 
P3s. 

 
Well what does P3s have to do with the bill, Mr. Speaker? Well 
what they’re doing with P3, a lot of people may know, is they 
go to private sector companies and they ask the different 
companies to build certain things for the government and the 
companies not only build the project, but they also charge 
interest on the money they give to the government to build that 
project and, Mr. Speaker, they continue controlling the asset. 
 
So when they control the assets, such as schools and hospitals, 
Mr. Speaker, you begin to wonder what the privatization agenda 
is all about. And I think the P3 model is a good indication of 
how the people of Saskatchewan have asked the government, 
what do those P3s cost? And that information, Mr. Speaker, 
certainly has not been forthcoming by the government, and yet 
another example of how we cannot trust the Saskatchewan 
Party government or the Premier when they make statements in 
the Assembly. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, May 2008, this is a short five months after 
they’ve been elected. “SaskTel contracts out some installation 
service of SaskTel Max and high-speed Internet services in 
homes to jump.ca.” That’s what the Sask Party done. So the 
installation services that SaskTel used to do all of a sudden are 
contracted out. 
 
In June 2008, “SaskPower initiates a request for proposals for 
private baseload power generation.” So what’s that about? We 
want to know the details of that particular action. June 2008 — 
these guys have been really busy since the day they were 
elected, Mr. Speaker — June 2008. 
 

July 2008. The Saskatchewan Party government finalizes 
the sale of its share of SaskFerco to Norway-based Yara 
International for $783 million. Investment Saskatchewan 
has received more than $209 million in dividends since its 
original investment. The province invested . . . [$68 
million] in the company between 1989 and . . . [1983]. 

 
So that Saskferco was sold off under the Sask Party 
government. 
 

October 2008. The Saskatchewan Party government 
announces its “Saskatchewan First” policy for Crown 
corporations. The policy will focus the Crowns on 
investing within Saskatchewan and not out-of-province 
[not out-of-province]. Where feasible, existing 
out-of-province investments will be divested although an 
exception to this policy will be permitted if the 
Government determines the investment supports 
in-province operations. 

 
So what they’ve done, Mr. Speaker, is they’ve said, in October 
2008, we’re going to put Saskatchewan first. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, they put the Crown corporations dead last with that 
particular exercise. And we all knew it in the Assembly. The 
people that knew what was going on within the Crown sector 

also knew what the Sask Party was up to, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what they’ve done in October of 2008 is they’ve basically 
said, look, we’re going to hamstring our Crown corporations; 
we’re not going to allow them to expand like other companies 
can because that would simply prove that the Crown 
corporations were highly valuable. So what they did was they 
constricted the Crown corporations to operate within the 
provincial boundaries of Saskatchewan, and they as politicians 
would determine whether investments out of province were 
warranted to strengthen our Crown corporations. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m sorry to say this, but the people across 
the way, I would much rather have the executives, the 
managers, and those that know what’s going on with our Crown 
corporations drive the future of our Crown corporations as 
opposed to a bunch of politicians that are only here on a 
temporary basis, Mr. Speaker. The Crowns deserve better. 
 
Because what the Crowns do, Mr. Speaker, what the Crowns do 
that the Sask Party cannot do, Mr. Speaker, is they provide 
good service in a reasonable price range, creating jobs and 
profit. And that’s the significant difference between a Sask 
Party government and our Crown corporations. The Crowns get 
it, Mr. Speaker. They have done things. They have achieved 
objectives within Saskatchewan that the Sask Party failed 
miserably on, Mr. Speaker, and that is they have created profit, 
they have provided services, they have provided reasonable 
costs for their services, and above all, Mr. Speaker, they have 
created jobs — something that the Saskatchewan Party simply 
can’t figure out. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in October 2008 this is yet another one of 
their ludicrous ideas around how they could figure out how the 
Crowns could be strengthened. They ended up looking at the 
possibility of saying okay, we’ll constrict. We will constrict the 
operations. We will constrict the network. We will constrict the 
outreach of our Crowns so that they can only operate within 
Saskatchewan. Which CEO [chief executive officer], if that’s 
how they view themselves, would constrict their company to 
only operate within a certain parameter, and still expect them to 
perform well? Well, Mr. Speaker, the Crown corporations saw 
this for what it was. It was an obvious attempt, it was an 
obvious attempt to weaken our Crown sector, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In March 2009, “SaskTel outsources its email and conference 
call services to an out-of-province private company,” Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In April 2009, the “Saskatchewan Party government announces 
its plan to sell off 23 Ministry-owned and operated rental cabins 
at Greenwater Lake Provincial Park.” 
 

October 2009. The Saskatchewan Party government 
releases its “Patient First Review” which advocates for 
greater private sector participation in healthcare delivery. 
 
October 2009 [again]. The Saskatchewan Party 
government licenses the province’s first private specialty 
wine stores [Mr. Speaker]. 
 
October 2009. To comply with the government’s 
“Saskatchewan First” policy, SaskTel sells Navigata — 



1704 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2017 

which provides voice, data and Internet services. A 
perennial money-loser, Navigata is sold for a mere $1.5 
million [according to them, Mr. Speaker]. 

 
Again in November 2009: 
 

To comply with the government’s “Saskatchewan First” 
policy, SaskEnergy sells its 50 percent stake in Heritage 
Gas — a Nova Scotia-based natural gas distribution . . . 
[system] — for . . . [$73 million, Mr. Speaker]. 

 
So this is again my argument around how you constrict the 
Crowns from operating beyond certain parameters, and still 
expect them to succeed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In November 2009, “SaskTel divests its remaining 
out-of-province holdings in DirectWest Canada in order to 
comply with the government’s ‘Saskatchewan First’ policy.” 
 
Again, the Saskatchewan Party have no experience whatsoever, 
are telling our proud and robust Crown sector how to run their 
business. 
 
In February 2010: 
 

SaskPower announces that Northland Power Inc., a private 
power producer based in Toronto, has been chosen to 
provide 261 megawatts of power to the provincial 
electrical grid by 2013 [Mr. Speaker]. 

 
Now we’ve heard of this particular contract. It was very rich, 
Mr. Speaker. It provided a base of support and a base of income 
to Northland Power to be maintained for the life of the project. 
That was a guarantee that Northland Power got at the expense 
of SaskPower and all the power bills that we pay, Mr. Speaker. 
 

February 2010. The Saskatchewan Party government 
announces that more than 60 per cent of its internal 
information technology work has been contracted out to 
private, for-profit companies [again, Mr. Speaker]. 

 
March 2010. The Saskatchewan Party government 
announced its intention to sell SCN, the Saskatchewan 
Communications Network — a Treasury Board Crown 
Corporation that specializes in educational television . . . 
[programs especially when it comes to provincial budgets]. 

 
May 2010. The Ministry of Health announces a pilot 
funding project for a 100-bed long-term care facility to be 
privately built, owned and operated by Amicus Health 
Care in Saskatoon. The funding arrangement closely 
resembles the P3 model [that we spoke about]. 

 
June 2010 [and I am quoting a document, Mr. Speaker]. 
Health Minister Don McMorris announces that the Regina 
Qu’Appelle Health Region has put out a request for 
proposals seeking a “third party supplier” that could offer 
CT services in a publicly funded private facility starting in 
2011. 
 
June 2010. Saskatchewan Party . . . completes sale of SCN 
to Bluepoint Investment Corporation, a privately owned 
Ontario-based business. Bluepoint will pay $350,000 for 

the physical assets and the film and video assets of the 
educational broadcaster [$350,000, Mr. Speaker]. 
 
2010. SGI sells its shares in the Charlie Cooke Insurance 
Agency for . . . [$1.1 million, Mr. Speaker.] The sale was 
to remain in compliance with the out-of-province 
investment restrictions within the “Saskatchewan First” 
policy [orchestrated by those folks across the way.] 

 
July 2010. The Ministry of Health releases its “Third Party 
Delivery Framework” for the contracting-out of day 
surgeries and diagnostic imaging to private health [care] 
providers. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in July 2010 again the Saskatchewan 
Party outsources responsibility for inspecting boilers, 
pressurized storage tanks, elevators, escalators, and 
amusement park rides. Government inspections were 
transferred to the newly-created Technical Safety Authority 
of Saskatchewan, a not-for-profit company with a strong 
industry presence on its board. 

 
August 2010. Omni Surgery Centre — a private clinic — 
begins taking bookings for patients who are to undergo 
dental and arthroscopic knee surgery through the 
provincial government’s Saskatchewan Surgical Initiative. 
 
October 2010. The Saskatchewan Party government 
announces a contract with Saskatoon Surgicentre — a 
private surgical clinic — to provide publically funded day 
surgeries. 
 
October 2010. The Saskatchewan Party . . . merges the 
Milk Control Board, the government body which had 
overseen milk testing, with the Dairy Farmers of 
Saskatchewan to form the industry-run marketing board 
SaskMilk. Through SaskMilk responsibility for testing 
milk now rests with the milk industry. 
 
November 2010. DirectWest — a subsidiary of SaskTel — 
sells off AgDealer, a speciality agricultural equipment 
publication, for $1.55 million as part of the “Saskatchewan 
First” policy. 
 
December 2010. SaskTel sells [off the] Saskatoon Square 
building for . . . [$27 million] as part of its divestiture of 
“non-core assets” as . . . [defined] by the “Saskatchewan 
First” policy review. 
 
January 2011. SaskTel sells [off] Hospitality Network 
Canada Inc. (HN) assets to PFM Capital Inc. of Regina for 
. . . [36 million]. The sale of HN complies with the 
provincial government’s “Saskatchewan First” policy, 
which requires Crown corporations to divest themselves of 
assets that are not core to their business. 
 

[15:30] 
 
[Mr. Speaker] May 2011. Regina Qu’Appelle Health 
Region (RQHR) begins contracting out 42,500 CT 
scans . . .  
 
June 2011. SaskEnergy sells its 30 percent ownership of 



March 15, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1705 

Gas Sur, a Chilean natural gas company, for $6 million. 
The sale is to comply with the “Saskatchewan First” 
policy. 
 
June 2011. A private company advertises that it is leasing 
private seasonal campsites in Cypress Hills Interprovincial 
Park. The cost is $30,000 for a ten-year term. Services like 
cutting firewood, maintaining hiking trails and cleaning 
visitors’ centres that were once provided by park staff are 
[now] being handed to private contractors. 
 
September 2011. SaskEnergy announces the sale of 
SaskEnergy International’s 40 percent interest in 
Igasamex, a Mexican natural gas distribution company for 
$17 million US [again] as part of . . . [their] government’s 
“Saskatchewan First” policy . . . 
 
February 2012. Saskatoon’s privately operated surgical 
centre — Prairieview Surgical — begins taking 
patients . . . 
 
April 2012. The Saskatchewan Party government . . . 
acknowledges that Ministry of Highways engineering 
services work is increasingly being contracted out to 
private consultants and that it plans to shut down the 
province’s public engineering services labs. 
 

In October 2012, the Sask Party government creates a new 
treasury board Crown corporation, SaskBuilds, which advocates 
private-public partners again to do large-scale investments in 
the province of Saskatchewan.  
 
In November 2012, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party 
government privatizes Information Services Corporation and 
this of course is the land titles department and they’re 
responsible for personal property and corporations registry and 
certain vital statistics. The government sells 60 percent of ISC 
[Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan] for up to 
120 million. And, Mr. Speaker, the dividends that the Crown 
corporation had returned in 2010 and 2011 were 14 million for 
2010 and 15.5 million in 2011.  
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when we invested in the Information 
Services Corporation as a government, Mr. Speaker, the intent 
behind Information Services Corporation was to strengthen our 
land titles registration. And of course there’s some very 
important private information as it pertains to vital statistics. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that that particular Crown 
corporation generated profit for the government after initial 
investments, and those profits served the people well. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, November 2012, the list goes on: 
 

The Saskatchewan Party government begins private sale of 
Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration pasture land 
that was transferred back to the provincial governments. 

 
The Saskatchewan Party announces all future liquor stores in 
the province will be privately owned and operated. Again 
quoting from the document, “Premier Brad Wall promises 
existing public stores will remain publicly owned” which never 
happened. 
 

May 2013. The Saskatchewan Party government authorizes 
two new private liquor stores in Regina and two more in 
Saskatoon. 
 
June 2013. The Saskatchewan Party . . . outsources 
enforcement and compliance services at Saskatchewan 
Landing Provincial Park to Ghost security. 
 
July 2013. The Saskatchewan Party government announces 
the construction of a new long-term . . . facility in Swift 
Current will be built using . . . a (P3) model. 

 
July 2013. The Saskatchewan Party government contracts 
with a private company to undertake highway photo . . . 
[lab] enforcement in construction zones. 
 

October 23, the Saskatchewan Party government announces its 
intention to use PPP [public-private partnership] model for the 
construction of schools in our province.  
 
The Saskatchewan Party government sells 25 per cent of its 
interest in the Meadow Lake OSB [oriented strand board] plant 
for $30 million.  

 
December 2013. 3S Health signs a 10-year contract with a 
private Alberta company [called] (K-Bro) to launder the bulk of 
the province’s hospital and health care linens. Publicly run 
central laundries in Regina, Prince Albert, Weyburn, Yorkton 
and Moose Jaw will be replaced by this newly privately 
operated laundry facility here in Regina. The deal cost 
Saskatchewan people 350 jobs.  
 
The Saskatchewan Party government transfers control of 
livestock brand inspections from the Ministry of Agriculture to 
an industry-led, non-profit corporation called Livestock 
Services of Saskatchewan. 
 
Again the Premier suggests in February 2014 that he wants the 
government to sell both casinos Regina and Moose Jaw to the 
Saskatchewan gaming authority, but only if the provincial NDP 
Cam Broten — according to his note — supports a change of 
the province’s law protecting Crown corporations. And, Mr. 
Speaker, Mr. Speaker, all we know that was . . . And this really 
offended a lot of the First Nations. It was just a political game 
played at the expense of both the First Nations and the people 
that really wanted to make a difference when it came to 
positioning First Nations to be an integral part of our economy. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in April 2014, the Saskatchewan Party 
announced that four public liquor stores would be privatized in 
the communities of Langenburg, Ituna, Ponteix, and Kerrobert, 
resulting in a termination of 12 union jobs. 
 
In April of 2014 again, the Saskatchewan Party announced that 
a new integrated mental health rehab hospital and provincial 
corrections centre in North Battleford will be built using a PPP 
model. 
 
In May 2014, the Sask Party announced the construction of the 
bypass which is now $2 billion to a private company, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, again we talked about the wholesale 



1706 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2017 

privatization of the province’s public liquor stores, raising the 
possibility that the liquor privatization was an agenda that the 
Saskatchewan Party had all along. In November 2014, the 
Saskatchewan government released its green paper, Future 
Options for Liquor Retailing in Saskatchewan, and it asks the 
citizens to consider retailing options. And, Mr. Speaker, this 
was something that the people of Saskatchewan went through 
only to find out later that the Sask Party simply had their own 
agenda and that they were going to do what they wanted with 
this particular exercise. 
 
Now in April 2015, the Saskatchewan Party government 
announced this social impact bonds which allows private 
investors to invest and profit from selected social programs. 
 

The Saskatchewan Party . . . proposes new legislation to 
allow individuals to pay out of pocket for private MRIs. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party privatizes correctional food 
services to Compass Group Canada for $8 million per 
year . . .  

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is just four pages of some of the history 
of the Saskatchewan Party government. And we can go on. And 
we can go on as to what they have done, not only in the last 
eight years that they’ve been in government, but what their 
intentions are around SaskTel, SaskPower, and SGI. And the 
list goes on as to the Crowns that people wanted to sell. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to tell the people of 
Saskatchewan this, is that the reason why the opposition do not 
trust the current Premier and do not take any word that he says 
in this Assembly with a grain of salt at all, Mr. Speaker, is 
primarily because of the activities of the past number of years. 
They have a history. The Premier has a history of saying one 
thing in this Assembly and doing something totally opposite 
outside of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. And I think the people of 
Saskatchewan are quickly finding out — the people that have 
lost their jobs in Prince Albert for the laundry services, and they 
were doing an excellent job, Mr. Speaker; the people that 
worked in our liquor stores and generating profit, Mr. Speaker. 
They were doing an excellent job. Their prices were certainly 
competitive, Mr. Speaker, and also the Information Services 
Corporation, our land titles branch. 
 
And now you look, Mr. Speaker. Now you look at him saying, 
oh we have no intentions of privatizing anything. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I have page after page after page of things they’ve 
privatized or put under a P3 model that will encumber 
Saskatchewan’s financial situation for years to come. Why? 
Because they believe in privatization, Mr. Speaker. They have 
always believed in that, and that’s why we don’t take any word 
in this Assembly. And that’s why as long as this bill, as long as 
this bill is in the Assembly, the NDP opposition will not rest. 
And we will call the Saskatchewan Party out on their 
privatization agenda because this bill talks about the definition 
of privatization. It doesn’t eliminate the argument that they 
have been exercising for years when it comes to the whole 
notion of privatizing everything that they can. 
 
So I want to summarize the history of the Saskatchewan Party 
when it comes to them talking about privatization. Mr. Speaker, 
they have had a wall-to-wall sale on every asset that hasn’t been 

nailed down in the history of Saskatchewan. They have plans to 
sell even more. And that’s one of the reasons why the NDP, the 
opposition, are telling the people of Saskatchewan that it’s not 
too late, that it is not too late, that we can indeed fight back. 
And it’s on bills such as Bill 40 where the people ought to know 
exactly what the plans are for the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
So if you don’t want to continue this whole notion of selling off 
our Crowns, why are you bringing bills forward like this, Mr. 
Speaker? And that’s the fundamental question that those who 
may not believe that the Saskatchewan Party want to sell off 
SaskTel . . . Ask them that question. 
 
If you want evidence, pull Bill 40. There’s no reason for us to 
talk about the interpretation of sale of our Crown corporations 
Act, or this particular bill, Mr. Speaker, if we have no intention 
of selling these assets. And that’s what’s really important. 
 
So I’m going to tell the people of Saskatchewan this, Mr. 
Speaker. I want to share with them very clearly the message I 
have around the Crowns. 
 
The history of the Saskatchewan Party, including the Premier, 
when it comes to the Crown corporations is a dismal history 
when it comes to protecting the vital importance of our Crowns. 
I have read you but a few examples of what the Sask Party have 
done the eight years or nine years that they have been in power. 
They have decimated the Crown sector as much as they 
possibly can without being called out. And so far, the four big 
ones, or particularly the larger Crown corporations like 
SaskTel, like SaskPower, like SGI, Mr. Speaker, we have to 
make sure that people of Saskatchewan know that this is a real 
threat, that this is a real possibility, that those folks across the 
way have it in their system. They have it in their logic. They 
have it in their ideology that they got to sell as many of our 
Crowns as we can and as much of Saskatchewan’s interests as 
possible. 
 
So we sit here and we look at some of the comments made. And 
I am, Mr. Speaker, I am quoting from a document, Mr. Speaker. 
And this document talks about some of the comments made as 
it respects to the Crown corporations and certainly what the 
Premier said. And I want to quote on the whole notion around 
SaskTel. And I quote: 
 

“Maybe that’s a discussion Saskatchewan people want to 
have” . . . [Wall] said. “We wouldn’t be able to be in a 
position of welcoming private investment into SaskTel 
even [though it] . . . was thought to be the right thing, 
because we didn’t campaign on it. 
 
“If it was something [that the] Saskatchewan people, we 
thought, really wanted to at least talk about, there is the 
idea of a provincial referendum,” said Wall. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to tell the Saskatchewan Party 
today that there’s no question in my mind that the clear message 
that the people of Saskatchewan are going to give you is, let’s 
run an election campaign on this. Never mind a referendum. 
Let’s not do this thing half-heartedly. Let’s have an election on 
the idea of selling our Crowns. Let’s see how much conviction 
and let’s see how much gumption the Premier has when he 
comes to the issue of selling off the Crowns. Let’s see if he 



March 15, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1707 

wants to go there. Let’s call an election on this issue, Mr. 
Speaker, because we are more than prepared to stand up for the 
people of Saskatchewan and certainly tell them, this has been 
their practice. This is their intention. It’s not too late. 
 
And I say from the official opposition’s perspective is to heck 
with, Mr. Speaker, with a referendum. Let’s have an election on 
this issue. And I can tell you right now that the Saskatchewan 
Party won’t want to do that. And it leads me, and it leads to 
really credit my argument, is that they do have an objective 
deep within the bowels of their organization and in their psyche, 
Mr. Speaker, that they do want to sell off the Crown 
corporations of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, why is this such an important issue? And I 
go back to my earlier statement today when I talked about the 
value of the Crowns. The Crowns know how to provide 
services. The Crowns know how to create jobs. The Crowns 
know how to provide those services in a very cost-competitive 
manner, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, they create profits for 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
So the Crowns have done things, as I’ve said time and time 
again, have done many positive things for the people of 
Saskatchewan, much more than the Saskatchewan Party 
government could ever figure out. So I would say to them, leave 
our Crowns alone. They don’t belong to you. They belong to 
future generations and not to the whims of a two- or three-term 
government, Mr. Speaker. We know that the Crowns will 
provide many services and good services over the many, many 
years. 
 
So you look at the practice of the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. You look at the practice of the Saskatchewan 
Party up till this year. They have been privatizing everything 
that they could possibly privatize without getting caught, Mr. 
Speaker, without getting caught. 
 
[15:45] 
 
And now they come along and say, well no, the bill we’re 
putting forward is about interpretation around the sale of 
Crowns. Well we don’t buy it. We don’t buy it at all in the 
opposition, and that’s why we’re closely watching what they do 
around Bill 40. And that’s why we’re on our feet today, and 
we’re going to be speaking about how people could fight back 
and where we need to go. 
 
So I think it’s really important, Mr. Speaker, that we sit down 
and we have this candid discussion, as people of Saskatchewan, 
as to whether the Saskatchewan Party government have the 
mandate to sell the Crowns. And I suggest today that they do 
not have the mandate to sell off our Crowns. The people of 
Saskatchewan simply do not want that to happen. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to be able to reiterate a couple of 
things that I think are important. People ask me about the 
Crowns and what’s the value of the Crowns. In Saskatchewan’s 
history, I know I’ve spoken about this before, but as you look at 
the history of Saskatchewan and the role that the Crown 
corporations play, from our perspective, and I’ve been around 
the cabinet table and I’ve been around politics a bit, Mr. 
Speaker, but when you hear some of the comments made by 

some very astute people, much more astute than I, but when 
they talk about the integration of four or five factors in our 
economy, you have to listen and hear what they have to say. 
 
And many of the people that are giving the lessons there of 
course were the former ministers of the NDP government. And 
you have giants like Allan Blakeney and visionaries like Roy 
Romanow, Mr. Speaker, and really practical, strong leaders like 
Lorne Calvert, Mr. Speaker. You hear people like that over the 
term of your time in office and you begin to soak up some of 
the information that they give you and some of the information 
they share as leaders. And of course, the cabinet folks that I sat 
with, Mr. Speaker, brilliant people and very, very astute 
politicians. 
 
Now what they tell us and what they’ve told me — and I share 
with the people of Saskatchewan this very simple point — is 
why and how are the Crowns so important? Well in order for us 
as a province of 1 million-plus people to survive, we’ve got to 
have the mainstay economies and industries such as agriculture. 
We know agriculture is really, really important, Mr. Speaker, 
and that’s something that we have to always remember. 
 
Now the resource industry, whether it’s uranium and of course 
potash and some of the resource sector and some of the 
commodity prices that we see over the years that we’ve enjoyed 
in the past number of years, those of course always add to the 
economy. 
 
So we’re missing a few of the key points when I make my 
presentation around the Crown corporations, but the point is I 
don’t do that intentionally, that there are many, many sectors 
that afford a lot of credibility to the building of an economy in 
what we call a landlocked province of Saskatchewan. So we’ve 
got to be very smart about how we do this. 
 
And to me, I’ve always maintained that there’s always, and 
always has to be, an attraction to have more people move to 
Saskatchewan. We’ve got to have a growing population. We 
have to continue having the welcoming mat to as many people 
as we can because Saskatchewan needs a lot more people, Mr. 
Speaker. We can host a lot more families, and we can certainly 
build a lot better futures here in Saskatchewan. That part is 
important because the more people we have, the more shoulders 
that we can lean on to strengthen our economy and build our 
future for years to come, Mr. Speaker. So people are pretty 
important. 
 
We also have to have competitiveness in not only the taxation 
rate we have as private taxpayers, Mr. Speaker, but to attract 
industry, large and small. So there’s no question in my mind 
that having large corporations and having businesses and the 
private sector come into Saskatchewan and invest, Mr. Speaker, 
that it goes without saying that’s really, really crucial that that 
continue to work, and that that work continues, and that we 
continue to press that importance as politicians. 
 
The other thing I think is also important, Mr. Speaker, is to 
supply the economic engine with its labour force, Mr. Speaker. 
That is another crucial component. I think that Saskatchewan, to 
their labour movement and to the strong union movement, Mr. 
Speaker, have provided that quality work and the good source 
of numbers in terms of workers, Mr. Speaker, so they are a 



1708 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2017 

critical part of the economy as well. So as you look at allowing 
investment to come in, remaining competitive to attract large 
corporations or medium-sized businesses, Mr. Speaker, those 
are all thoughts that of course we share on this side of the 
Assembly. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the labour development, the provision of 
labour services, whether they’re electricians, engineers, 
contractors, Mr. Speaker, those are also an important part of our 
economy. And they can’t be overlooked. 
 
The other aspect that’s quite important, Mr. Speaker, is around 
the whole notion of the Crown sector. As I said at the outset, 
SaskTel and SGI and SaskPower, they provide services. They 
provide a lot of services to a lot of these businesses, Mr. 
Speaker. So having a Saskatchewan-based Crown corporation 
sector that complements the investment of the private sector, 
whether it’s large multinational companies or medium-sized 
businesses, along with the complement of good labour force 
numbers, Mr. Speaker, and can you work in a competitive 
environment, it doesn’t take a rocket scientist to figure out that, 
to the Saskatchewan Party, that the Crown corporation sector is 
a valuable asset to our economy and that they are needed to 
continue to be flexible and certainly be nimble in today’s 
challenging world to attract industry here to Saskatchewan. And 
that’s what the Crown corporation and Crown sectors provide to 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
So if you look at the overall economic scheme, Mr. Speaker, of 
the province, there’s no question in my mind that there are 
mainstays in our economy, and agriculture being probably the 
biggest one. Mr. Speaker, there’s mainstays in other sectors of 
the economy. We talk about resource development like potash 
and uranium and forestry and so on and so forth, Mr. Speaker. 
Those are all certainly very, very good agents of economic 
building. 
 
The other thing that’s also important, as I mentioned, is the 
people that will work in our mines, provide services to industry, 
and certainly help agriculture stay strong. So the workers 
themselves, Mr. Speaker, they’re also a vital component, and as 
I mentioned having our own Crown corporations is also a key 
component of economic building here in Saskatchewan. 
 
So as you look at some of the examples, Mr. Speaker, that I’ve 
spoken about as it pertains to our economic blueprint, so to 
speak, we have such great opportunity, such great opportunity. 
 
Now I’m going to ask the people of Saskatchewan this 
particular lesson. What happens if you ignore two or three vital 
parts of that economic building process that I’m speaking about 
today, Mr. Speaker? And what if you decide to get rid of the 
Crowns and somebody else decides to own them from who 
knows where? They get to determine our employment numbers. 
They get to determine our prices for services, and they get to 
determine . . . And actually they will take the profits of those 
services back to their shareholders, Mr. Speaker. So it’s really, 
really important that people understand that the Crown sector is 
vitally crucial to our economy, not just today but for years and 
years to come. 
 
Now I have confidence, Mr. Speaker. I have confidence that the 
executive within our SaskTel, within our SaskPower, that 

they’re able to position our Crowns to compete in this 
worldwide, challenging market. I have no doubt in my mind 
that if you give them the proper supports and direction that they 
can indeed rise to the occasion. By direction, Mr. Speaker, I 
don’t mean in any way, shape, or form taking orders from a 
Sask Party government that doesn’t know what they’re doing 
when it comes to the Crown sector themselves. And we 
obviously see that on this side of the Assembly. And I share this 
with the people of Saskatchewan — that they do not know what 
they are doing when it comes to the Crown sector at all in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and that’s why it’s important to get 
rid of the Sask Party government. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would also indicate to the people that . . . 
look at their Crown sector themselves. Now I know when we sit 
down and we talk about the competitiveness of our tax system, 
you know, when I advocated for greater numbers of people so 
we can build our province on many shoulders as opposed to a 
few, that obviously is very common sense and very logical.  
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the Crown corporations, 
when I talk about keeping our tax regime competitive, it was 
really important to the New Democrats years ago and it 
continues being important to us today. Because we obviously, 
through time, Mr. Speaker, when we had a big mess to clean up 
after we left the 1980s in the charge of the conservatives across 
the way there, Mr. Speaker, we had some tough decisions to 
make. And there was not the money that we had to pay the bills. 
And in fact the leader of the NDP at the time, the premier, 
Romanow, actually had to go to New York and to Toronto and 
to Ottawa to help Saskatchewan from becoming a bankrupt 
province where we couldn’t even meet payroll, because that’s 
how bad the conservatives left this province in when we ousted 
them in the 1990s, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we’re back at this now. But at the time when decisions were 
made, Mr. Speaker, under Romanow . . . And history is really 
important on this one. And I was not around in those early ’90s, 
Mr. Speaker, but he certainly researched the history. And there 
was obviously a need for us to take charge of some of the 
spending costs and some of the deficits that were occurring 
under the then premier, Grant Devine. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I can remember the numbers quite well. It 
was $15.4 billion that the province was in debt. I can remember 
the Education budget being around 3 or $400 million. The 
interest alone on the debt, Mr. Speaker, was two if not three 
times higher than the entire educational budget, if you can 
imagine days of that sort, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why when 
they spout off different numbers from across the way, we don’t 
listen to anything that they say, Mr. Speaker, because they did 
not know the tough struggle that occurred in those years. And 
that’s one of the reasons why, Mr. Speaker, they only get 
specific information, selected information from their leadership 
on the Saskatchewan Party, and the rest of the backbenchers 
blindly follow whatever they’re being told to blindly follow. 
 
So the history, Mr. Speaker, in how the government of the day 
were able to recover from that financial mess, one of the assets 
that proved highly valuable was the whole notion of the Crown 
sector, Mr. Speaker. We had to go to the Crown sector. We had 
to set some specific targets for them, telling them that we 
needed the financial support from our Crown sector because the 



March 15, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1709 

province was in such dire straits, and in such dire straits that we 
had to count on the Crowns. So the Crown sector itself, Mr. 
Speaker, they came along and they gave us a lot of support at 
the time. 
 
Now we knew as the government that you couldn’t, you cannot 
simply take every cent from the Crown corporations that you 
can because what that would do, it would be contrary to their 
health. So the old story about the goose that lays the golden 
eggs, you’ve got to make sure that these eggs are continuing to 
come. And so the Crown sector did what they could, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So as we look at how we could recover from the financial ruin 
and mess left by the Grant Devine conservatives, many of them 
who are still hiding over there behind the Saskatchewan Party 
banner, Mr. Speaker, we went to the Crown on three or four 
different entities to help us with the financial mess we were in. 
Obviously taxation was one of them, and yet they spout off 
about taxation. Well guess whose mess we were cleaning up? 
Their mess. And, Mr. Speaker, we had to look at the corporate 
tax rate as well. We had no choice. And yes, it was a tough 
thing to do, but the corporations started paying more, and they 
willingly were, certainly we were on . . . They willingly 
recognized their role as well. 
 
And of course the Crown sector area, Mr. Speaker, they’ve 
come along and they provided a lot of revenues for the people 
of Saskatchewan. And that really displaced a lot of pressure that 
we would’ve had to put on different sectors of resources that we 
could get from. And that includes things like taxation and, of 
course, royalties that we often had to sit down with companies 
on. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what happens if the Crowns are gone? As we 
are witnessing today, this is the rerun of the Grant Devine years 
in which we’ve had the deficits. And who knows where the 
deficit is at now. 
 
And I talk to a lot of conservatives, because I want to see what 
their thinking is on a few things. And some of them don’t like 
the mismanagement. Some of them don’t like what these guys 
are doing, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the Crowns. Some of 
the conservatives think that we should keep the Crowns because 
their argument is, well the Crowns generate revenues, right? 
And I say, yes they do. And those revenues are used for 
hospitals and schools and roads? Yes they are. And if they 
didn’t have those revenues, what would they have to do? How 
would they make up those revenues? And I said, well they’d 
turn around; they’ll tax people like you more. And some of the 
conservative people don’t like that idea of paying more taxes, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
[16:00] 
 
So if you don’t want to pay more taxes, don’t sell the Crowns, 
you know. Talk about the goose with the golden eggs. And 
that’s exactly what Sask Party is doing, Mr. Speaker. They’re 
selling off Crowns left, right, and centre. I’ve given a history of 
that. Those are all factual points that I made, Mr. Speaker. And 
they look at the arguments around the Crowns today, and I tell 
the people that are of the conservative background, that’s what 
happens when you have people who aren’t using common 

sense, that use their ideology to run a province as opposed to 
being practical and pragmatic. And that’s exactly the problem 
with the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
So I sit down and I tell the folks in the conservative circles that. 
I sit and listen to what they have to say, because I want to know 
how they think. And I tell them, if you do not have the revenues 
from the Crown corporations . . . And SLGA [Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority] is one of them. The liquor stores 
that were generating profit, Mr. Speaker. You look at the 
Information Services Corporation, our old land titles branch. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, those entities generated profits. They 
generated revenues. For who? For the people of Saskatchewan. 
So as we got revenues from them, Mr. Speaker, we didn’t have 
to turn around and tax people even more because we’re in 
deficit. But we’re in deficit today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Despite the whole argument around this particular bill, we look 
at what happened in the past, and that’s why it was important 
that I speak of the history of the Saskatchewan Party. When 
they look at the sale of some of the assets we had, Mr. Speaker, 
I’m going to ask those conservative people that I converse with: 
where’s that money gone? Where did that money go from the 
sale of the liquor stores? Where did that money go for the sale 
of Saskferco? Where did the money go for the sale of our Nova 
Scotia operations, our Eastern Canada operations around gas? 
Where do the dollars go for some of the companies that we’re 
investing on as part of our Crown corporations? 
 
The money is gone, Mr. Speaker. All that money is gone. And 
what do we have today? We’ve got a 1.2 or 1.4 or $1.6 billion 
deficit. 
 
So the conservatives say to me, well what’ll happen if we sell 
our Crowns? I say, exactly . . . first of all, you’re going to have 
to pay more taxes because the Crowns are not going to generate 
revenues for you. They’re going to generate revenues for their 
shareholders, who may not be based in Saskatchewan. They’re 
going to be, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re going to be paying 
dividends to shareholders, and those shareholders aren’t going 
to be the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
But if they do plan on selling SaskTel, there’s two things I’ll 
say to them. Number one is you’ll never get it back again. You 
will never get it back again. Once it’s sold, it is gone forever. 
And that’s a chilling message, but the people of Saskatchewan 
have got to hear it. 
 
And secondly, Mr. Speaker, if you look at the revenues 
generated from that Crown corporation, those subsidize our tax 
rate now for the people of Saskatchewan. And it’s a good 
subsidy, because the government doesn’t have to count on the 
taxpayers personally as much because the revenue is in the 
Crowns. But, Mr. Speaker, if you sell the Crowns, where’s that 
money going to go? Where’s the money going to go? It’s going 
to be gone, Mr. Speaker. To what? Cover the debt that we’re 
facing now? And that’s what the Premier alludes to — that if 
we sold our Crowns, we wouldn’t have to deal with debts, you 
guys. That’s his argument around selling the Crowns. 
 
But why should the people of Saskatchewan sell an incredible, 
valuable asset to cover the mismanagement of the Sask Party? 
That’s what gets a lot of people in the conservative circles 



1710 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2017 

angry. Because quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, I think people out 
there ought to know that these Crowns provide an incredible 
service to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And any bill, any bill that talks about anything to do with 
interpretation or privatization or protection of Saskatchewan’s 
interests as being proposed by the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s one of the reason why our basis of non-support, 
non-confidence, and not believing what the Sask Party have to 
say on the privatization front is simply something that we are 
going to stick to. And we’re going to continue fighting, fighting 
the whole matter out. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of documents that I want 
to make reference to, but in particular I want to read one 
particular article that was written by one of the leaders that I 
spoke about, and that leader of course is our former premier, 
Allan Blakeney. And Mr. Blakeney . . . Again, I’m going to go 
back to the excellent research ability of our staff. I want to talk 
a bit about the history of SaskPower, STC [Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company], and so on and so forth. 
 
So I want to quote from this document, The History of 
Saskatchewan Crown Corporations as written by Allan 
Blakeney. And I want to go into a bit of his story, and first of all 
I’ll go to one particular page: 
 

I have worked in this city as a public servant and as a 
lawyer engaged in the private practice of law. The first 
house I ever owned was one that I built, along with others, 
on the 31 Block Montague Street. When I woke up in the 
morning, I noted that the house was nice and warm. I liked 
the natural gas provided by the . . . Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation. I got out of bed and struggled to the bathroom 
and used the plumbing facilities provided by the City of 
Regina and the water facilities . . . hot water provided by 
SaskPower’s natural gas. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, there’s no question that if you look at some of 
the services that people enjoy, waking up to a nice warm home, 
a home that has power, a home that’s heated and a home that is 
providing shelter from the elements for many families in the 
province, well, Mr. Speaker, our Crowns play a central role to 
that. 
 
Now look at SaskTel. Again, this is according to Allan 
Blakeney’s history here. He said, and I quote again: 
 

SaskTel is eighty-eight years old as a Crown entity. [And 
this was written a few years ago.] It has been here since 
1908. It has seen enormous changes. It has lived through 
them. It has adjusted and it has prospered. Certainly it has 
borrowed technology from other companies, as other 
companies have done from SaskTel. It is not a 
technological cripple. Nor is it a business cripple. 
 
In the 1970s, SaskTel adopted fibre-optic technology. It 
made a deal with Northern Telecom to build a plant in 
Saskatoon to manufacture fibre-optic cable. SaskTel then 
proceeded to construct the then world’s most extensive 
fibre-optic network — not only the wired city, but the 
wired countryside. The first fibre-optic cable laid from 
New York to Washington was made in Saskatoon. SaskTel 

performed major contracts to install communication 
systems in the construction of the Chunnel, the tunnel 
under the English Channel. 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, you look at that particular history of SaskTel 
and SaskPower. 
 

SaskPower came into being on 11 February 1929. It was 
then called the Saskatchewan Power Commission. Little 
progress was made during the 1930s [because of] World 
War II and early post-war years. The Commission was 
reorganized as the Saskatchewan Power Corporation late in 
the 1940s and the Corporation set out to do two major 
things. First, to build a generating capacity suitable for the 
rapidly developing Saskatchewan, and to tie it together 
with transmission lines to establish a system or grid. 
 

And of course the second alternative was to electrify rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Now there’s no question, Mr. 
Speaker, there was other private companies operating at the 
time. There was “. . . Moose Jaw (National Light and Power), 
Yorkton (Dominion Electric) and elsewhere.” And, Mr. 
Speaker, “. . . in 1952, SaskPower took natural gas to the cities, 
towns, and villages of this province. It did it early, it did it 
efficiently. This natural gas utility became SaskEnergy.” 
 
And now SGI has been operating for over 50 years. 
 

With respect to basic auto insurance, the Auto Fund, I 
would have thought it all but self-evident that if a 
government makes auto insurance compulsory, then the 
government has a duty to provide it to a motorist at the 
cheapest possible cost. All governments of Canada have 
made auto insurance effectively compulsory. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, it goes on to talk about STC, the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company. It’s been around for 50 
years. 
 

It has provided a valuable service. The continued loss of 
population in rural Saskatchewan, and the far greater use of 
private motor vehicles, has eroded [some of] its customer 
base. [But] STC . . . are what service should be provided 
and at whose expense. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, these are a few of the comments made by 
Allan Blakeney about the history of our Crown corporations 
and what he foresaw at the time. There’s no question that there 
is a lot of history. And I wanted to share a bit of that history 
with the people that might be watching this to indicate that at 
one time there wasn’t the ability to strengthen our communities 
and to connect our communities because the Crown sector was 
not around. And in those early years, people that built our 
province had the foresight to realize that Saskatchewan really 
needed to have its own Crown sector that could provide 
affordable light, affordable heat, and that could provide a lot 
more information as it pertains to communication services, 
whether that be in cellphone coverage or whether that be in 
technology, and the list goes on. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to share with you a bit of the 
history of our Crowns. There’s a lot more information as to the 
history, and I’m not going to do justice to it because quite 



March 15, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1711 

frankly I think if you look at the overall value of the Crowns, 
they have proven us a great value year after year after year. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I go up to a couple of points when looking 
at the interpretation, and I understand that my colleague the 
Minister of Justice certainly has a learned mind when it comes 
to the issue around law. And I want to share with him a few 
points around the shareholder rights without obligations. And I 
just want to read off a few points on this particular bill, Mr. 
Speaker, because it does legally pertain to what your 
shareholders’ rights should be and what this is all about. 
 
Now again, this is titled Shareholder’s Rights without 
Obligations, and I quote: 
 

It is beyond dispute that shareholders have rights. Indeed, 
those rights, particularly when held by minority 
shareholders, are among the most jealously guarded by the 
courts. Despite their array of rights and powers, however, 
shareholders owe no obligation to the corporation. In the 
commercial context, the possession of rights, absent any 
corresponding obligations, is quite unique. 
 
Shareholders do not have a fiduciary obligation to the 
corporation or to other stakeholders. They need not be 
concerned with the interests of others when they exercise 
their rights as shareholders. They can and do act in their 
own self interest, which is not always in the best interests 
of the corporation. 

 
That’s quite blatant in page number 1. Now under the “Specific 
Rights,” Mr. Speaker, they have a section called “The 
‘Blocking’ Right.” And I want to read this out for the record: 
 

Certain corporate activity, even if determined by the 
directors to be in the best interests of the corporation, can 
only be effected if approved by a special resolution of the 
shareholders. Minority shareholders, acting solely in their 
best interests and without regard for the best interests of 
the corporation, can defeat such resolutions and block the 
corporation from pursuing such action. 
 
A special resolution is a resolution which, in order to be 
effected, requires two-thirds of the votes cast by 
shareholders who voted in respect of the resolution. 

 
So what does that mean, Mr. Speaker? That minority 
shareholders can actually legally protect and block corporations 
from making certain decisions if it pertains to them protecting 
their own interests, as shareholders protecting their own 
interests, even minority shareholders. 
 
And under section 2: 
 

“special resolution” means a resolution passed by a 
majority of not less than two-thirds of the votes cast by the 
shareholders who voted in respect of that resolution or 
signed by all the shareholders entitled to vote on that 
[particular] resolution. 

 
[16:15] 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to try and use the limited 

experience I have in law to try and explain in layman’s terms 
what exactly is meant by the blocking right when it comes to 
minority shareholders. And this bill speaks of minority 
shareholders, and it has a direct implication not only on the 
taxation, Mr. Speaker, but who is in charge and who is in 
control of some of these corporations that we may roll into the 
argument that even minority shareholders in a minority position 
that have no influence on the corporation. Not so, Mr. Speaker, 
not so at all: 
 

For example, a blocked resolution can thwart the 
restructuring plans of a growing corporation. In the 
interests of avoiding the impasses which may result from 
failure to pass a special resolution, a majority shareholder 
would be well advised in the early stages of a corporation’s 
life to negotiate an option to acquire the interest of 
minority shareholders. Such option would be triggered 
should the minority shareholder block action which is 
strategically important to the corporation. 

 
And there we go again, Mr. Speaker. How is this particular 
statement on the blocking rights of minority shareholders going 
to affect the operation of SaskTel, even if we were to say to the 
Sask Party today — which we are not — that if you guys sell 
off 49 per cent, you’re selling off a lot more than 49 per cent, 
especially around the blocking rights and privileges of the 
minority shareholders? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what is the role of a shareholder? Obviously 
the role of a shareholder is to try and gain as much profit as 
they possibly can from their investments. It just goes without 
saying that if any shareholder in this Assembly wanted to invest 
in any particular company, their primary objective is to make 
sure that company makes money because that’s how you invest 
money. 
 
So if you’re a minority shareholder in SaskTel, guess what, you 
do have a lot of say and a lot of sway on certain things that the 
corporation may think they want to do but it impacts your 
bottom line. So, as a minority shareholder, you do have rights in 
which you could exercise to block some of the opportunities 
that the corporation themselves deem fit for their expanse, or 
for their increased operations. So a lot of times there could be 
that particular challenge on some of these fronts. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s another section around here under 
the legal terms where it says “The Dissent Right.” Now what’s 
all that about? 
 

Minority shareholders who do not have sufficient votes to 
block strategic action which requires a special resolution 
may, in certain circumstances, exercise the dissent right. 
 
The minority shareholder has the right to dissent and put its 
shares to the corporation if: 
 

(a) the special resolution which is passed . . . [fails] 
within one of the above categories. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, which talks about the constraint of the 
issues, it talks about amalgamations, it talks about dissolution. 

 
(b) the shareholder dissents to the resolution; 



1712 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2017 

(c) the directors do not . . . [appeal] the resolution; and 
(d) the shareholder complies with the technical 
procedures in section 184. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, there’s more. There’s more, Mr. Speaker. 
And we’re just trying to . . . Like I go back to the excellent 
advice we’re getting from our research team. And there’s even 
more as to how we look at the minority shareholders’ rights. As 
it comes to SaskTel, if we wanted to sell a minority share in 
SaskTel, as being defined in this particular bill, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve got to know what we’re getting into. We’ve got to know 
what we’re getting into, Mr. Speaker. And I want to go a few 
other points here. I mean it’s always important to share with the 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, “In a carefully . . . [crafted] USA a minority 
shareholder can have his cake and eat it too.” Now a USA, Mr. 
Speaker, just for the information is not the U.S. [United States]. 
It’s a unanimous shareholder agreement. And the member from 
— I’m not sure where he is from, maybe North Battleford — 
thought I was talking about the States. Well it’s a unanimous 
shareholder agreement. And in a carefully drafted unanimous 
shareholder agreement “. . . a minority shareholder can have his 
cake and eat it too. That is, he [or she] can exercise greater 
rights without incurring liabilities or giving up . . . rights against 
the directors.” 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that’s from the minority shareholders’ 
perspective. 
 
And I’ll go on, Mr. Speaker. And this is for the record. So we 
have some legal folks out there — you might want to read this 
as well. Mr. Speaker: 
 

. . . at least 75% of the members of its board. Such a 
provision leaves the fiduciary obligation with the directors. 
This method is of value if the minority shareholder, either 
through a pooling agreement or articles . . . [provided with 
the] cumulative voting for directors, can ensure adequate 
representation on the board of directors. 

 
So there we go again. Minority shareholders do have a lot of 
specific rights. Often an agreement allows the minority 
shareholder to elect directors to the board who are in a minority 
position. One’s firm impression may be that such a right is not 
of much value. To the contrary, a right to representation on the 
board, even if it is not enough in number to control the outcome 
of the board resolution, is still a useful tool to protect minority 
shareholder rights. 
 
Discussion and debates at the director levels is foreign to a 
shareholder, which means that a minority shareholder can 
certainly organize from their minority perspective to challenge 
every decision that the corporation makes. And they may not be 
privy to some of the corporate strategies and some of the board 
of directors’ thinking, but they have a right to block some of 
these efforts that are being planned for any minority shareholder 
that may not like what the future of SaskTel would look like if 
they were indeed allowed to become a minority shareholder in 
this company. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, you have to be very careful here. Because 
you look at everything that a minority shareholder could 

actually do to a corporation, and they could throw any 
accusation at all or they can challenge any particular direction 
or they could thwart any expansion plans, Mr. Speaker. They 
have rights. They have rights within the corporation to do what 
they think is necessary to protect their investment income. 
 
Now they can come along and they can talk about another 
section, conflict of interest: 
 

Conflict of interest and inadequate disclosure is also 
conduct which gives rise to the oppression remedy under 
section 234. Many successful minority shareholder 
oppression claims involve some form of allegation of 
conflict of interest or inadequate disclosure of self-dealing 
by the controlling shareholder. 

 
So again we go back to some of this point, Mr. Speaker. A 
minority shareholder is not going to go there blindly and say, 
you . . . SaskTel can do what they want at any time that they 
want. They have an obligation, the corporation does, to be 
responsible and respond to every issue that even a minority 
shareholder may have. Because those minority shareholders do 
have rights, and the courts have recognized those rights. And 
they have different tools that they could use at their disposal 
and they can challenge a company’s or a corporation’s 
objectives in many, many ways. And that’s what’s really 
important, Mr. Speaker, as to why I want to read some of these 
sections into the record. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, again I go under the oppression remedy, and 
I’m assuming the oppression remedy is when you’ve got two or 
three shareholders, minority shareholders that aren’t happy with 
what’s going on and some of their arguments are not being 
heard thoroughly, and they could bring some of the tools that 
they want to to thwart any kind of an expansion plan, a future 
SaskTel under a minority shareholder agreement, what they 
might have planned to strengthen SaskTel. And that’s why 
you’ve got to make sure all these are understood. And under the 
oppression remedy, an overview is quite clear. It says here: 
“The oppression remedy found in section 234 of the Act is 
without doubt the most powerful right a shareholder has to 
protect minority interests.” 
 
Most jurisdictions in Canada, including the federal legislation, 
provide an oppression remedy like section 234 of the Act. So 
what does oppression remedy mean? Meaning that minority 
shareholders do have a lot of tools at their disposal to argue 
against any expansion plan that a SaskTel may have. Never 
mind the taxation implications. There’s a lot of rights and 
obligations under the Canadian law that would prevent a 
SaskTel from doing what they think is necessary for their 
corporate health, and they’re going to be held back by minority 
shareholders in many forms. 
 
And that’s one of the problems that we have when we sit down 
and we talk about the fact that the Sask Party has not 
thoroughly thought this out. And there is going to be some . . . 
There’s going to be some major implications for SaskTel, some 
major implications. 
 
So I go back to my point earlier that if you do not have any 
intentions of selling SaskTel, (a) pull the bill. That’s the first 
thing that you should do. Bill 40 should be stricken from the 



March 15, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1713 

record and never to be spoken of again, Mr. Speaker. And 
secondly, that if the history of the Sask Party has given any 
indication as to their intentions around privatizing everything 
they can touch their hands on, Mr. Speaker, and I tell the people 
of Saskatchewan, well they’re pretty blatant in that effort, so 
you’ve got to be very careful. 
 
Now I want to go back to some of the rights and responsibilities 
and obligations that the corporation as a whole may have to 
minority shareholders, and that’s what we’re talking about in 
Bill 40, the minority shareholders. It is really, really important, 
Mr. Speaker, as I said at the outset, that some of these minority 
shareholders do have a lot of rights and tools at their disposal. 
And let me assure you that there are many lawyers that are more 
than willing to offer supports for minority shareholders that 
may feel that their issues and concerns are being oppressed and 
that their voices are not being heard. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out some of the conduct 
giving rise to oppression, and these are really fancy titles, but I 
just want to . . . You have to be very direct in some of the 
language as being . . . Because obviously there’s a number of 
court cases that speak of some of the activities happening 
around minority shareholders’ participation in some of the 
companies. And as I said at the outset that a minority 
shareholder can use any tool that they have, given the federal 
legislation or provincial legislation, to protect their investment 
opportunity. 
 
First and foremost, as I said at the outset, that it doesn’t matter 
if you’re a minority shareholder or a majority shareholder, you 
have the right to protect your investment interest. And there’s a 
number of tools and a number of court cases that have staunchly 
supported that position. And there’s no challenge to that 
particular fact. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to throw out something here in terms 
of some of the examples. And we talk about the “lack of valid 
corporate purpose for the transaction.” Let’s look at what the 
Sask Party’s doing around the GTH, the Global Transportation 
Hub. Now what if the GTH, Global Transportation Hub, was 
owned 49 per cent by minority shareholders, as in the case 
that’s being proposed in Bill 40 here? Now what if the GTH 
was 49 per cent owned by the minority shareholders? 
 
Well I can tell you right now, Mr. Speaker, we would be in 
court. We would be in court under conflict of interest. We 
would be in court, Mr. Speaker, in a number of fronts when it 
comes to the GTH if we adopted the same principles being 
outlined in this bill under 49 per cent ownership as we would be 
under GTH. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, why would we be in court if the GTH had 49 
per cent ownership, as being proposed under SaskTel? It would 
be a number of fronts. It would be a: 
 

failure on the part of the corporation and its controlling 
shareholders to take reasonable steps to simulate an arm’s 
length transaction; 
 
[second] lack of good faith on the part of the director of the 
corporation; 
 

[third] . . . lack of adequate and appropriate disclosure of 
material information to the minority shareholders in a plan 
or design to eliminate the majority shareholder. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, those are serious repercussions, serious 
repercussions for SaskTel. 
 
Now we alluded earlier about the tax implications, Mr. Speaker, 
about the tax implications around the sale of SaskTel. Now we 
hear them every day talk about the carbon tax. I want to share 
with the people of Saskatchewan, we have that carbon tax 
already, compliments of the Sask Party. And what that is, Mr. 
Speaker, is the $1.5 billion carbon capture boondoggle that the 
Sask Party put in place. I would tell the people of Saskatchewan 
this: look at your SaskPower bills. And that’s why every time 
they do a petition on the carbon tax, Mr. Speaker, every time 
they do a petition on the carbon tax, Mr. Speaker, we smile 
because the Sask Party were the ones that are having the power 
bills in our province rise every two or three months. Because 
the people of Saskatchewan got to pay and pay and pay for their 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So you want to talk about the carbon tax, Mr. Speaker. Well 
guess what? The Sask Party ham-handed our power corporation 
and this carbon capture project, which cost $1.5 billion. I don’t 
know how many millions we sent to a corporation in Alberta. I 
just don’t know what the amounts were, but I know we sent 
millions of dollars to Cenovus, I believe, Mr. Speaker. And 
those millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker, were paid by the 
Saskatchewan people who could be viewed as shareholders in 
this corporation. And I think those shareholders have a right to 
certain processes under that particular Act, Mr. Speaker, that’ll 
protect their interests and ensure that the profit lines and the 
supports of SaskPower does indeed go back to the majority 
shareholder, which are the people of Saskatchewan. So there is 
a lot of information, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I want to go on to the scenario. If the GTH was going to 
be put in the same proposal as what’s being proposed here for 
SaskTel, and I said, would we be in court from a minority 
shareholder? Absolutely we’d be in court, Mr. Speaker. And I 
identified some of those reasons — lack of good faith, lack of 
adequate and appropriate disclosure, Mr. Speaker. And here’s a 
few other ones, Mr. Speaker. The biggest one I think around the 
GTH is failure to keep any or proper financial records, Mr. 
Speaker. If a minority shareholder could find evidence of that 
under the GTH, then guess what? A minority shareholder would 
have this government in court basically because since they 
couldn’t do this, really it amounted to oppression, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[16:30] 
 
Now I’m going to go on a bit more about how the minority 
shareholders can position themselves quite well. Again I’m not 
a lawyer by any stretch of the imagination, but under the 
minority shareholders’ agreement, Mr. Speaker, you’re allowed, 
you are allowed, you’re allowed to have adequate information 
on what the corporation does. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, a lot of court cases support what we’re 
saying here today when you want to protect the minority 
interests’ obligations and rights. They have the tools. They have 
the court cases. And they want to get their investment back. 



1714 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2017 

And guess what? No matter what good intention the Sask Party 
may say they’re going to have as majority owners of SaskTel, 
well you’re compromising the majority owners of SaskTel by 
inviting 49 per cent, even inviting 10 per cent. You cannot let 
the private sector into the Crown corporation sector because the 
moment they buy shares into SaskTel, guess what? The ball 
game changes. The ball game changes, you guys. 
 
And I think one of the things, under and around the . . . Even 
confidentiality at cabinet is compromised, Mr. Speaker. I go 
back to the point, “The failure to provide adequate and timely 
disclosure to minority shareholders of contracts in which the 
majority shareholder has an interest is evidence of oppression.” 

 
Which means if cabinet makes a decision and doesn’t let the 
minority shareholder know about SaskTel’s future, well guess 
what, folks? There’s a recourse there as well. 
 
So I’m going to go out and, Mr. Speaker, and these are some of 
the things that I think we have to really, really, really figure out, 
Mr. Speaker. And it goes back to my comment around the 
revenues, revenues for SaskTel. We take revenues from 
SaskTel. The Sask Party comes along, and they say oh we could 
take some money from SaskTel as the majority shareholder to 
not have to lean on taxing our people too much. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, you’ve got to be very, very careful on that front too 
because minority shareholders do have powers on that front as 
well. 
 
And I’ll point out, Mr. Speaker, is that you have to really 
understand that certain corporations will not allow you to 
siphon off profits, if there’s some interests that minority 
shareholders may have as to that decision around siphoning off 
profits. And I want to make a reference to section 10, Mr. 
Speaker, again on this particular bill, when they talk about 
injunctive relief, Mr. Speaker: “Injunctive relief is very 
intrusive into the affairs of the corporation. However, an order 
to restrain oppressive conduct is suitable when made in the 
early stages before the damage is done.” 

 
And I’ll make reference to a court case: 
 

In Re Little Billy’s Restaurant (1977) Ltd., Faltakas v. 
Paskalidis et al., [Mr. Speaker,] the company was enjoined 
from entering into a franchise agreement which had been 
proposed, and if consummated, would have siphoned off 
profits to a company in which the minority shareholders 
had no interest. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, is SaskTel and is SaskPower going to run into 
these problems? And that’s why, if the Sask Party don’t know 
what they’re doing on this front and on this bill, then they 
shouldn’t do it, Mr. Speaker. They shouldn’t do it primarily 
because you’re putting so much at risk for the people of 
Saskatchewan. You’re putting a lot of jobs . . . You’re looking 
at the whole notion around the history of the Crowns, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We spoke about the rights of the minority shareholders. We 
know they have rights, Mr. Speaker, we know they have rights. 
We know they can block certain things that the corporation may 
plan for the future of its growth. And is this another example in 
the legal context of how the Sask Party want to hamstring the 

future of our Crown corporations? 
 
That’s why definitions, Mr. Speaker, should not be allowed in 
this Assembly. That’s why Bill 40 needs to be withdrawn 
because it shouldn’t even enter the notion of having 49 per cent 
of the SaskPower or SaskTel corporation sold off. Because 
you’re going down a very slippery slope. 
 
Now I spoke about the history of the Crown corporations. I 
spoke about the value of the Crown corporations, of what 
they’ve done for our province, Mr. Speaker. I have spoken 
about the revenues that they bring to our province each and 
every year, Mr. Speaker. I’ve spoken about how the Sask Party 
has constrained the future of our Crown corporations, 
everything from SaskPower to SaskEnergy to SGI. 
 
They have come along and they have used the guise of 
Saskatchewan First, and the average person saying, well 
Saskatchewan should be first. Well we were first, Mr. Speaker. 
We were first in the Crowns in terms of making sure we had 
affordable services for the people of Saskatchewan. We were 
some of the Crowns that expanded across Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
We wanted to expand into services, Mr. Speaker, but what 
happened, Mr. Speaker, is the Sask Party put the Saskatchewan 
Crowns in a neat little box and saying, nothing beyond the 
borders of our province it shall be involved with, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So that was the death knell, the first shot against our Crowns. 
And as we sit here and we listen to what the Premier or the 
minister may say as to the future of the Crowns, not one 
Saskatchewan New Democrat is buying that argument, Mr. 
Speaker. We have steadfastly said, we are not in the process of 
selling our Crowns. That is not on. And if you have the courage 
to test us on this, let’s call an election on this. Let’s call an 
election on this particular issue, Mr. Speaker, and I can tell you 
there’ll be a lot less over there. Because the people of 
Saskatchewan will not stand for a party that has betrayed them, 
not only on the finances but on the bypass boondoggle, Mr. 
Speaker, the higher power bills. And now they want to sell our 
Crowns. For what? To cover the debt that they created, and 
we’ll never see a net gain. 
 
And after the Crowns are gone, they’re gone forever. So I 
would encourage the people of Saskatchewan to pay very close 
attention. We need to get rid of the Sask Party government 
because they plan on getting rid of our Crowns. No question 
about it. And whether it is by 49 per cent or, in the past, their 
100 per cent of sale of our Crowns, they are costing even 
conservatives money, Mr. Speaker. Now how do you do that? 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they’re replacing revenues from our 
Crowns, and the only option any future government has to go to 
is to the taxation of people and companies across the province. 
 
And I think from our perspective as Saskatchewan New 
Democrats, we think we want to see the population continue 
growing. We want to see our taxes remaining competitive, and 
the only way you can do that, Mr. Speaker, is start realizing that 
the values of the Crowns are highly regarded by the people of 
Saskatchewan. They have done something that the Sask Party 
cannot do, Mr. Speaker; they have provided profit. They have 
provided good service. They have provided employment, and 
they have provided all of this in a very reasonable price. And 
along comes the Sask Party using our great province’s name, 



March 15, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1715 

Saskatchewan First, to usher in a new era of trying to kill off 
the Crown corporations. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan — I don’t know how many more 
ways I’ve got to tell the Government of Saskatchewan — the 
people of Saskatchewan do not want their Crowns sold. I don’t 
know why they just can’t get it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You can’t bring in an interpretation Act and say, oh, we’re just 
going to look at this. You can’t have the statements made by the 
Premier saying, well what if we get an offer? Well you know, 
the Premier, the Premier . . . If the Premier had the courage to 
call an election on this issue, bring it on, because us New 
Democrats are going to be standing firmly and fairly with the 
people of Saskatchewan when it comes to the Crowns. 
 
And I dare say, the same manner in which they hid the debt, the 
same manner in which they hid the debt, and everybody in their 
. . . Everybody across the way knows they hid the debt. They 
called an election before the budget because each and every one 
of the Sask Party MLAs knew how bad the finances were of 
Saskatchewan. They all knew. They all knew, and they hid it 
from the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And that’s why there’s a lot of anger today. When you see 
working men and women clawing back their salaries to cover 
up the mismanagement of the Sask Party, I say shame on them, 
Mr. Speaker. Shame on them for putting the people of 
Saskatchewan through that. And they never had the courage to 
tell the people of Saskatchewan the true state of our financial 
situation. They never had the courage, Mr. Speaker. They never 
had the courage, and that’s what’s so unfortunate in this day 
and age. I think the people of Saskatchewan feel betrayed. 
 
I got a letter today . . . I’m not going to mention the gentleman’s 
name. I’m not going to mention the gentleman’s name. And he 
talked about SaskTel being sold off. He talked about that. And 
he said, I voted for the Saskatchewan Party the last two 
elections, he said, and then I get this call back. I need some 
more money from my salary. There are going to be forced days 
off, and you’re also going to be taking an extra cut in some of 
your extra pay, what this gentleman said. And he said, I voted 
for them the last two terms, and I can tell you today I will never 
vote for them again, is what he said. 
 
And I texted him back and I said, you were betrayed. Line up 
with the rest of the people of Saskatchewan because that 
betrayal doesn’t just end on hiding the budget before the 
election. We all knew what was going on in the NDP circles. 
We all knew. We all knew. 
 
They hid the scandal behind the bypass. They hid the budget, 
Mr. Speaker. They hid their agenda around privatizing our 
Crown corporations. And their history shows, their history 
shows exactly what I spoke about. If they have done this in the 
last six years, I would say to the people of Saskatchewan, how 
could you trust them? How could you believe that SaskTel is 
not for sale? 
 
And if you can’t believe us from the political perspective 
because you don’t believe the NDP’s on the right front on this, 
then check out the corporate world and see where the rights of 
the minority shareholders are. The rights of the minority 

shareholders are pretty powerful, Mr. Speaker. They do have a 
lot of rights. They do have a lot of tools. And some sharp 
lawyer will come along the way and say oh, oh, Sask Party, 
guess what? You forgot about this particular aspect of a 
minority shareholder agreement. The USA, Mr. Speaker. So the 
end result is this USA and the minority shareholders’ tools and 
the implications and the slippery slope. 
 
That’s why from our perspective, Mr. Speaker, I say we do not 
entertain anything coming from the Sask Party as it pertains to 
protecting our Crowns because we have seen this act before, 
Mr. Speaker. We don’t like it. The people of Saskatchewan 
don’t like it, and I dare say, I dare say to any one of them 
backbenchers sitting there, it’s time to wake up. It’s time to 
wake up to the real problems in Saskatchewan. 
 
You have working men and women, working men and women 
that are now paying three and a half per cent of their salaries 
being clawed back, plus their forced days off, plus their loss of 
employment for some of their other brothers and sisters in the 
union movement, Mr. Speaker. And then you contrast that with 
the boondoggle called the bypass. You contrast that with the 
$1.5 billion overrun on the carbon tax project, compliments of 
the Sask Party. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the biggest thing that I’d point out under the 
Crown corporation — and this is what people ought to know — 
is that if you want to have, if you want to have a debate on this 
issue, let’s not go halfway and have a little referendum. Let’s 
have an election on this, man. That’s my point today when I 
stand up, talk about the shareholders agreement. Let’s have an 
election on this. 
 
And not a peep from the government, Mr. Speaker. They all 
know, they all know that the Saskatchewan Party is on a 
slippery slope, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the Crowns. 
People are not believing them anymore. And, Mr. Speaker, yes, 
it’s three years away to the next election. But I can tell the 
people of Saskatchewan this, is that we have to act now. We 
have to organize. You’ve got to demonstrate. You’ve got to 
write your letters. You’ve got to contact your MLA. You’ve got 
to contact your cabinet ministers. You’ve got to contact the 
Premier. You’ve got to contact every Sask Party person that you 
know in your riding saying, let’s make a stand. Let’s tell this 
government, we say no to the sales of the Crowns because those 
Crowns have served us for years and years. It has helped 
Liberals. It has helped conservatives. It has helped the NDP, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And yet why don’t the Sask Party get it, Mr. Speaker? Because 
their ideology is making them do that, their ideology. Some 
person in the back room saying, well we’re supposed to be 
private sector people, so let’s sell everything we’ve got. Well 
you’ve sold as much as you possibly can and you’re still in 
debt. So how does that work? How does that work, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
That’s why we don’t believe. We don’t believe in the whole 
argument, oh it’s all about interpretation. Well if it’s all about 
interpretation then you better wake up because there are 
minority shareholders’ rights that could kibosh any future plans 
that SaskTel has because they do have the tools that are clearly 
outlined in our courts, clearly outlined in legislation, clearly 



1716 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2017 

outlined in our laws that say you cannot disregard minority 
shareholders’ interests when it comes to the operation of any 
corporation. Because their primary role as minority shareholder 
is profit driven, and they have a right to protect that profit. Why 
don’t those guys across the way get it? There’s thousands of 
court cases that have proven this time and time again. They just 
simply don’t seem to get it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[16:45] 
 
So as you go along, as you go along this whole process, as you 
go along this whole scenario, Mr. Speaker, I will tell them this, 
that the Crowns themselves, the Crowns . . . I’ve said this three 
or four times, but I want the Crowns to know this. Within the 
NDP ranks in this Assembly, we know that they have done 
something. The Crowns have done something the Sask Party 
has not done. They have created jobs. They have created good 
services at good prices, and they have created profits for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
So we applaud the Crown corporations on this side of the 
Assembly. We think they’re doing a great job, Mr. Speaker. 
They are doing a great job. And despite their political masters’ 
blundering of this particular file and on this front, Mr. Speaker, 
they continue, they continue building the future of their Crowns 
because it’s something that they believe in. 
 
So as you have your discussion around the water bottle and the 
restaurants, think about how we can fight back. We’re going to 
ask people from Swift Current, people from Alsask, and people 
from Yorkton, and people from La Loche, and people from 
Wollaston Lake, and from Uranium City, all throughout the 
land, that the Sask Party do have a practice and a history of 
selling our Crowns. Do not believe them when they say bills of 
this sort are just merely interpretation bills, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Do not take the word of a premier that has hid the true state of 
our finances before the last election because the Premier didn’t 
have the courage, he didn’t have the courage to tell the people 
the true state of the finances. And as I said earlier, when I saw 
the picture of the Premier on election night, he didn’t look like a 
premier that won the third minority with 50 seats. He looked 
rather depressed because he knew what was coming up. He 
knew what was coming up, and that was a forced smile, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And the only thing that we . . . Within the NDP, we do want. 
We do want to form government, Mr. Speaker. Our aspiration is 
to form government so we could protect the Crown corporations 
from any effort of privatization. We don’t plan on setting up 50 
other Crowns. We want to protect the bases of the Crown 
corporations that are here now. We want to protect the main 
corporations. 
 
Our plan as a party, Mr. Speaker, is very simple. It’s very 
simple. We want to strengthen the economy. We see the roles of 
the Crown corporations that they play. We also see the role of 
the private sector, the large multinational corporations. They all 
add to the health of our economy overall. We value that. We 
recognize that. And we’ve appreciated that over the many terms 
that we have formed government in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 

Now what I see, Mr. Speaker, is not much of a game plan from 
across the way. All I see is 49 members collectively crossing 
their fingers and their toes, hoping that the commodity prices 
rebound so they can say three years from now they balanced the 
budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if they don’t sell the Crowns, they can say that 
they done it easier and faster. But that easy way, Mr. Speaker, is 
not the Saskatchewan way. It is not the Saskatchewan way. So I 
think, beyond crossing their fingers and toes collectively, we’ve 
got to have a better game plan than that. 
 
And I can tell you on this side of the Assembly, we have great 
discussions around the Crowns. They create profits for the 
people of Saskatchewan so we don’t have to go back to those 
taxpayers and say, guess what, folks? The Sask Party had the 
opportunity. They sold a minority shareholder in SaskTel. We 
no longer get the profits we once had. We don’t have control of 
the corporation, so we can’t get dividends from the corporation. 
So now you’ve got to pay more tax there, mister conservative 
supporter. So that’s the danger. 
 
So conservatives recognize that. I think conservatives recognize 
that the Sask Party is on the wrong path with this one. And I 
would tell the conservatives, tell them, tell your government 
that they should wake up to this fact that people of 
Saskatchewan do not want to sell their Crown corporations. 
 
And that’s why every bill of this sort that comes forward, the 
NDP are going to rise up and they’re going to debate. They’re 
going to argue. They’re going to connect. They’re going to 
network. They’re going to tell the people of Saskatchewan the 
truth behind the dealings when it comes to things like even a 
minority shareholder agreement, that there are incredible risks, 
incredible risks. 
 
And that’s why I say today that the people of Saskatchewan, I 
think they’d much rather have an election on this as opposed to 
a silly referendum that they’ll probably word in a certain way 
that’s non-offensive, Mr. Speaker. Instead of us arguing about 
the wording of a referendum, let’s just have an election. Let’s 
get it on. 
 
Let’s have an election on this issue, and we’ll see how loud and 
proud some of the backbenchers are on the campaign trail when 
they’re asked about that on the doorstep. Let’s see how loud 
and proud they are when they talk about the boondoggle around 
the Regina west project. Let’s see how loud and proud they are 
when we show the people of Saskatchewan evidence that their 
carbon capture tax that they’re paying on their power bills . . . 
Let’s see how loud and proud they are then. And worst, Mr. 
Speaker, let’s see how loud and proud they are after the fact that 
now the people of Saskatchewan are going to see their budget 
next week and just see how badly they managed a booming 
economy, a robust financial position that the government . . . 
[inaudible] . . . had, and very strong Crowns. 
 
We just can’t figure out, Mr. Speaker, we just can’t figure out 
how is it, Mr. Speaker, how is it, how is it you have inherited, 
as they have inherited . . . Everybody in the province knows 
this. They’ve inherited a booming economy, a growing 
population, money in the bank. They’ve had money in an 
emergency fund, all left to them by the people of Saskatchewan 



March 15, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1717 

under the guidance of Calvert and Romanow, Mr. Speaker. 
They inherited all this good stuff, and they had record revenue, 
Mr. Speaker, record revenue. 
 
And that’s why when they throw out figures . . . Oh, we have 30 
per cent more money for education, they often say. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, talk about the 200 per cent increase in revenue that 
you had. They refuse to do that because no government in the 
history of Saskatchewan has ever enjoyed, has ever enjoyed the 
amount of revenues that the Sask Party have enjoyed the last 
eight years. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, what do they do? They say, they say to 
us, oh well, we’re in a hole now. We’re in debt now. So can we 
sell the Crowns? That’s what the Premier alluded to in one of 
his interviews. And we’re saying, what are you doing? You 
don’t sell your house to pay off a food bill. You simply don’t do 
that, And that’s exactly what the Sask Party is proposing. How 
do you get from having record revenue, a booming economy, 
growing population, money in the bank, a fiscal stabilization 
with real cash in there, and then eight years later you’re broke? 
You’re broke, and you’re telling your wife and your children 
you’ve got to sell the house because you’ve got to pay off your 
bill. What kind of sense does that make? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party took us there. They took us there. 
They took us all the way from all that promise. And that’s why 
we on this side of the Assembly, each and every day I tell them, 
you squandered our future. You’ve squandered our future, and 
you will continue squandering because conservatives have 
never known how . . . have never been known to manage a 
province or a country well. They go in there and they destroy 
things. And that’s why we continue having people in our 
movement, people within the NDP, will come and they’ll give 
us that experience. They’ll give us the history of the 
conservative movement in Saskatchewan. 
 
So why would you continue supporting that particular action by 
that government, Mr. Speaker? It’s because people, quite 
frankly, were betrayed. They were betrayed. And the voters are 
always right, Mr. Speaker. The voters are always right, but a lot 
of voters today feel betrayed. And I can tell you right now the 
public sector unions have felt betrayed. The people that wanted 
to work at the bypass that were capable of doing this kind of 
work, they feel betrayed, Mr. Speaker. The people that go pay 
their power bills for their carbon tax put on by the Sask Party, 
they feel betrayed. And those that thought they weren’t going to 
sell our Crowns, well guess what? They also feel betrayed. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, Bill 40, no matter how many times the 
minister or the Premier or that government gets up and says, oh 
this is not a bill that’s going to sell SaskTel, we just don’t buy it 
on this side of the Assembly. We don’t buy that one bit. And 
that’s why, Mr. Speaker, every opportunity we’ve got as an 
opposition to speak out against this bill, we will do so. We will 
do so because over the years, I can tell you, over the years, 
SaskPower, SaskTel, SGI, SaskEnergy, all these Crowns have 
generated millions if not billions of dollars to the people of 
Saskatchewan for what? For health care, for housing, for 
highways, and for education. 
 
And if we didn’t have those revenues from the Crowns then, 
Mr. Speaker, guess what? There’s only one taxpayer left. And 

we’d have to go back to that taxpayer and say, look, we need 
more money from you. Why? Because the Saskatchewan Party 
sold off an entity called a Crown corporation called SaskTel 
which was generating revenues which subsidized your taxes. 
Guess what? That asset is gone now. And what did they use the 
money for? Oh, they didn’t build a two-lane highway anywhere. 
They used the money to cover up their mismanagement, 
scandal, and waste. 
 
And matter of fact, the Saskatchewan people have nothing in 
the future that would protect them from the vagaries of the 
markets when it comes to prices for insurance, prices for heat, 
prices for light, prices for telephone. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we control that now. We control that. And 
yes, we have to be cognizant of the fact that we live in a global 
market. We understand that, but we have confidence in SaskTel 
that they can indeed expand their horizons, build partnerships, 
build networks, as we talked about earlier where Blakeney 
spoke about the background, Mr. Speaker. They have the ability 
and capacity to do so, but they’re being hamstrung and they’re 
being told you will not move beyond your borders. And that, 
Mr. Speaker, in my opinion, is an effort to curtail the 
excitement attached to our Crowns being able to expand beyond 
our borders and being able to become a vibrant part and a 
bigger part of our economic building partnerships with the 
private sector in the large corporations. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot more information that we 
could speak on this bill. I wish I had another three or four hours, 
Mr. Speaker, because I’ve only gone through about a third of 
what I wanted to speak about. I see a lot of my colleagues have 
spoken on this bill. They have eloquently pointed out the fact 
that this is a bad step, a very bad step for the Saskatchewan 
Party to undertake. 
 
And I’ll close on several points this evening. The first point is 
the Crowns make money. Leave them alone. Second thing is the 
people of Saskatchewan do not want their Crowns sold. Figure 
it out. We can send you a memo with very large print, and we 
can translate that print for you if you can’t figure it out on your 
own. 
 
Secondly, when you look at even the whole motion around 
interpretation of law, minority shareholders have a lot of rights, 
a lot of rights. And what if you did sell SaskTel? Guess what? 
Taxation would be going to the Libs. You’re going to be 
subsidizing . . . The taxation dollars collected from SaskTel will 
be going to the federal government. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they complain about the carbon tax, but I can 
tell you one thing: when the federal Liberal government writes 
a cheque for carbon tax credits, rest assured the Premier, 
Finance minister, and the entire Sask Party caucus will be 
spending that money. They’ll take it. So why are they on one 
hand whining about a carbon tax when they’re implementing 
one on their own? And when it comes back to refunding the 
carbon tax, guess who gets the money and guess who’ll take it? 
It’s those folks across the way. 
 
And that’s why you do not believe anything they say around the 
Crowns. Their history would suggest it, their practice . . . 
People would see their practice and the dangers of not 



1718 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2017 

researching, as some of my staff have done, on the implications 
of privatizing even 49 per cent, Mr. Speaker. The dangers are 
there. They’re very vast. They’re very strong. And the courts 
will not care whether this corporation is publicly owned or not. 
They will, on many occasions, side with the minority 
shareholder. 
 
And that’s the folly of the Saskatchewan Party’s ways. They 
don’t think thoroughly of some of these implications as it 
pertains to our Crowns around the issue of taxation, around 
minority shareholders’ agreements and, Mr. Speaker, the 
negative effect it has to our province and to her future. 
 
And that’s why the people of Saskatchewan ought to stand up. 
And I tell them today, I tell the people of Saskatchewan it is not 
too late. It is not too late. You can speak up. And one of the best 
ways to speak up is to tell your Sask Party MLA, if you live in 
their ridings, let’s have an election on this matter. Let’s have an 
election on the future of our Crowns. And we will see whether 
the Sask Party accepts that challenge or not. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if their history proves right as I’ve indicated, 
they hid the budget from us. They hid a scandal. They hid their 
privatization agenda to have an election first. And the people of 
Saskatchewan feel betrayed. 
 
So yes, they won. But now the betrayal is starting to sink in to 
the people of Saskatchewan, and I can tell you that a lot of them 
are very angry. We’re getting a lot of people that are waking up 
on the sale of the Crowns, and they’re telling us as opposition, 
we voted for these guys. We’ll never vote for them again if they 
go ahead and try and sell our Crowns. So that’s the message 
they have for the Sask Party. 
 
And I can tell you right now, Mr. Speaker, we are eagerly 
awaiting the day when they say, okay let’s have an election on 
this. And, Mr. Speaker, I suggest we’ll have a kinder, gentler, 
fairer, more visionary government with the NDP than you’ll 
ever have under the cobbled-together Saskatchewan Party 
government. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It now being 5 o’clock, this House 
stands adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1685 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1685 
  Meili ............................................................................................................................................................................... 1685, 1686 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1686 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 1686 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1686 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1687 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1687 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1687 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1687 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1688 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1688 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1688 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1688 
  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1688 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1689 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1689 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1689 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1689 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1690 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1690 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1690 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Supporting Victims of Domestic Violence 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1691 
 Women’s Suffrage in Saskatchewan 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1691 
 Co-operatives Pioneer Appointed to the Order of Canada 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1691 
 Melfort Rink Wins Special Olympics Team of the Year 
  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1692 
 Champions of Mental Health Dinner and Auction 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1692 
 Estevan Educator Named one of Canada’s Outstanding Principals 
  Carr .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1692 
 Business Women of Moose Jaw Annual Awards Gala 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1692 
STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Unparliamentary Language 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1693 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Auditor’s Report and Details of Land Transactions 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1693 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1693 
 Regina Bypass Project 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1693 
  Wyant ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1693, 1695 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1695 
 Local Agreements and Funding for Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1694 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1694 
 Provision of Teacher Education Programming in the North 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1694 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1695 
 Provision of Crop Insurance 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1695 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1695 
 Donations to Political Parties 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1696 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1696 



 

 Legislative Supports for Victims of Domestic Violence 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1696 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1697 
 The Water Security Agency Amendment Act 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1697 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1697 
POINT OF ORDER 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1697 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1697 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1698 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 603 — An Act to Provide Critical Supports for Victims of Domestic Violence 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1698 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1698 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 43 — The Pipelines Amendment Act, 2016  
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1698 
 Bill No. 44 — The Water Security Agency Amendment Act, 2016  
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1700 
 Bill No. 40 — The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’interprétation  
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1702 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


	STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER
	Unparliamentary Language
	STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER
	Unparliamentary Language

