






















































Hansard: March 28, 2017


FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

of the 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan
____________

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 

____________

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 65A  TUESDAY, MARCH 28, 2017, 13:30 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 

 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 

Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 

 

 

 
 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 

Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 

Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 

Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 

Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 

Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 

Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 

Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 

Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 

Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 

Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 

Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 

Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 

D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 

Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 

Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 

Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 

Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 

Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 

Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 

Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 

Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 

Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 

Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 

Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 

Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 

Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 

Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 

Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 

Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 

Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 

McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 

Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 

Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 

Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 

Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 

Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 

Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 

Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 

Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 

Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 

Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 

Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 

Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 

Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 

Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 

Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 

Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 

Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 

Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 

Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 

Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 

Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 

Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 

Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 

Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 

Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 

Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 

 

 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 11 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1939 
 March 28, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave for 
an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to my 
fellow members, I would like to introduce some guests in our 
Legislative Assembly here today. Joining us are representatives 
from the Ministry of Central Services who just last night were 
awarded the city of Regina’s 2017 Municipal Heritage Award 
for Restoration of the Legislative Building dome. 
 
The award recognizes those who have demonstrated 
commitment to conserve Regina’s built heritage and history. 
The legislative dome project was chosen for restoring this 
iconic landmark to its original 1912 state while protecting its 
heritage value. You’ve heard about the 22,000 pounds of new 
stone meticulously carved and installed, and you’ve seen the 
shining reflection from the new copper cladding. 
 
Today I’d like to introduce to you some of the people 
responsible for pulling together this project. From Central 
Services, we have Harlan Kennedy, executive director, project 
management. Harlan, just give us a wave. Not up there? Okay. 
Oh, there you are. Here I am looking over here. Thanks, Harlan. 
Yasir Elawad, director of project management; Jackie Hall, 
project coordinator; and Jeff Tochor, building operator. 
Although he couldn’t be here today, I would like acknowledge 
Steve Bata, building manager for the Legislative Building for 
all his work on this project. Also joining us today is Michael 
Toews, project manager. 
 
I’d also like to recognize PCL Construction Management, who 
led the restoration and were responsible for nominating the 
dome project for the award. With us today we have Sean 
Hamelin, PCL district manager; Darryl Abstreiter — you guys 
are all over the place — superintendent and site supervisor; 
Chris Brooks, PCL project manager. Mr. Speaker, it is an 
honour to receive this heritage award. Countless tradespeople, 
artisans, project managers, planners, and more can take great 
pride in this achievement. I invite all members to join me in 
welcoming our guests to their Legislative Assembly. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d just 
like to join quickly with the minister in welcoming these very 

important individuals from Central Services and through the 
broader construction community, from PCL and beyond, Mr. 
Speaker, to their Legislative Assembly. And certainly this is the 
kind of piece of work that you can, you know, you can point to 
for the rest of your life, Mr. Speaker, and show off to your 
children, your grandchildren, your great-grandchildren, and say 
that I was part of that job, and to look on that work with pride. 
 
That that great work was joined with a Municipal Heritage 
Award certainly makes sense because this is such a gift from 
the people of Saskatchewan, this building, and the work that 
was done certainly added to that gift, Mr. Speaker. To all these 
individuals, and certainly to Jeff Tochor as the interface for us 
and somebody we see day to day, we want to say again 
congratulations and great work. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I note 
in our galleries today, in both yours and the west gallery, we 
have municipal leaders that have joined us today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s an honour to introduce to you and through you 
to members of the Assembly, someone who’s no stranger to the 
Assembly itself, the newly elected president of SUMA 
[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association], Gordon 
Barnhart. He’s joined by the executive director for SUMA, 
Laurent Mougeot. We want to wish them a warm welcome to 
their Assembly. 
 
I also note in your gallery Carmen Sterling, who I think is a 
vice-president at the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities. Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join 
me in welcoming these local municipal leaders to their 
Legislative Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to join with the Premier and welcome these municipal 
leaders, both rural and urban, to our Assembly here today. 
Certainly Dr. Gordon Barnhart is someone that’s served our 
province with distinction for his entire life, Mr. Speaker, and his 
new role as president of SUMA is an important one, where he’ll 
continue to serve our province. Of course we know him through 
his service as Lieutenant Governor. We know him through his 
service as president of the University of Saskatchewan, and 
many would know him through his service on the floor of this 
Assembly, and also in Ottawa, serving as Clerk to the Senate as 
well. 
 
It’s also my pleasure to welcome and thank for his service, 
Laurent Mougeot, the executive director of SUMA here today, 
representing and serving our cities and towns across 
Saskatchewan. And certainly this is someone who understands 
how cities and towns operate as well, serving as a city manager 
in Prince Albert with distinction for some period of time. So I 
join with the Premier, and ask all members to provide a great 
big thanks to these municipal leaders that have joined us here 
today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 



1940 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2017 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to make an 
extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to you and through you, I would like to take this opportunity to 
introduce a large group of very dedicated volunteers, 
Saskatchewan agriculture’s crop reporters. From seeding to 
harvest, the network of crop reporters provides valuable 
information that many people and institutions rely on, both 
locally and internationally. Having accurate and timely crop 
reports available each week allows international traders to better 
predict market trends. Local producers are able to plan and 
evaluate each crop season to make the best business decisions, 
and these business decisions are crucial to strengthening our 
economy. 
 
This information is collected each week by a small army of 
dedicated volunteers. Each year we celebrate those volunteers 
who have offered their time for 25, 30, and 35 years. By my 
calculations, the group we are honouring today has collectively 
contributed to a remarkable 13,050 crop reports. 
 
I want to recognize and thank each of the volunteer crop 
reporters here today. As I announce their names, I ask that each 
crop reporter and spouse give us a wave to be recognized by the 
legislature. 
 
First, the 25-year service people include Warren and Claudia 
Volke of the RM [rural municipality] of Happy Valley; Grant 
and Marilyn Hale, RM of Brock; Paul and Virginia Tysdale, 
RM of Baildon; Wes Black, RM of Porcupine. Two 25-year 
reporters that could not be with us today are Tim Clifford, RM 
of Victory; and Lloyd Tyler, RM of Fertile Valley. 
 
The 30 years of service, we have Bette and Dennis Reiss of the 
RM of Francis; Brian and Jeanette Becker, RM of Calder; Dale 
and Donna Meier, RM of Progress; Harry and Eileen 
McCorriston, RM of Connaught; Val and Gaylord Muller of the 
RM of Frenchman Butte; Walter and Linda Sullivan, RM of 
Milton, who I don’t think were able to attend today. 
 
Thirty-five year service, Mr. Speaker: Ed Datchko, RM of Ituna 
Bon Accord; Jim Hornford, RM of Elfros; and Allan and 
Marion Hardy, RM of Wolseley. 
 
Thank you, everyone. I ask all members to join me in thanking 
these volunteer crop reporters for their service and dedication to 
agriculture and to Saskatchewan, and welcome them to their 
legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
honour to rise and join with the minister in welcoming this 
year’s crop of crop reporters, the long service awards. I couldn’t 
resist the pun. And really the idea that you do this as a volunteer 

for 35 years, 25 years, 20 years, 15 years, that’s an incredible 
commitment to your province and to your industry and to 
agriculture in Saskatchewan. So I think it’s very fitting that we 
get to greet you when you come in to the legislature every year, 
having reached these milestones. 
 
But you folks that hit the 35, you just don’t look old enough to 
be doing it for 35 years, so good on you for that as well. Mr. 
Speaker, I think on behalf of the official opposition, we want to 
join with the minister and the government to thank these people 
for their service, for their volunteerism, and to welcome them to 
their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. While 
I was on my feet previously, I didn’t recognize a former 
constituent who’s joined us in the west gallery, together with 
his wife. He now lives in Regina. His name is Andy Schmidt, 
and he’s with his wife, Emma, today. Mr. Speaker, Andy’s from 
Swift Current. His parents were our good friends. They were 
both entrepreneurs in the community. And, Mr. Speaker, 
they’re good friends as well, so I want to acknowledge Andy 
and his wife, Emma, in the gallery today. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, we should also introduce a former 
member of this place. Mr. Speaker, the former member for 
Cypress Hills and the first elected member for the 
Saskatchewan Party, Wayne Elhard has joined us. I can see 
him, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I note that, I think it was just today the Government of 
Manitoba has made an announcement in respect of Mr. Elhard. 
They have asked him to help them with their surgical wait times 
reduction initiative. And, Mr. Speaker, we think he might be 
well qualified, having been a part of a wait reduction, wait time 
reduction initiative on this side of the House that has proven to 
be reasonably successful. So we wish him well on that work, 
Mr. Speaker, and I ask all members to join me in welcoming 
Andy and Emma and Wayne to their Legislative Assembly 
today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
just briefly join with the Premier in welcoming Mr. Wayne 
Elhard to his Legislative Assembly. It’s interesting, I don’t 
know if the windmill he’s got up there is going to run on water 
or not, Mr. Speaker, but we’ll see how that works out through 
the question period. But certainly we’d like to, on behalf of the 
official opposition, say a word of welcome to Mr. Elhard to 
your Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Legislative Assembly, seated in your gallery, Monique Goffinet 
Miller. Mr. Speaker, Monique is a board member of the 
Canadian Women Voters Congress, and I had the opportunity to 
meet with Monique as my role as incoming Chair of 
Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians, Canadian region. 



March 28, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1941 

Monique is organizing a campaign school for this year in 
Regina, in October 6th, 7th, and 8th, and she’s undertaking this 
as her role as the Canadian Women Voters Congress. Now their 
vision is a better society through increased participation and 
influence of women in political and community leadership. So, 
Mr. Speaker, please welcome Monique to her Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with the 
member opposite in welcoming Monique to her Legislative 
Assembly. Monique is, as I have mentioned previously, is 
rather new to Regina and to the constituency of Regina 
Lakeview — but I think I’ve had opportunity to introduce her at 
least a couple of times before — and is someone who is keenly 
interested in the work of this place, and particularly the role of 
women in politics. And we do feel very supported by the work 
that you are doing and are excited by the campaign school that 
you have organized. 
 
She really hit the floor running in this province, Mr. Speaker, 
and very pleased to welcome her both to the constituency and to 
her Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I would also like to introduce two guests that 
are with us today. In my gallery at the top row, we have Zach 
Broughton, my brother-in-law. Give a wave. Zach is down in 
Regina to witness today’s session, and I just want to thank him 
for all the help that he does back in Saskatoon, helping with 
Jacob and James while I’m down here. I think Zach’s been on 
the ice more with Jacob than I’ve been on the ice with Jacob. So 
thank you, Zach, for your help. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Also with Zach today is Scott Hoffman, is a colleague of 
Zach’s. They both work at Mosaic. I had a chance to have lunch 
with them earlier today and learned some interesting things, 
such as he actually lives . . . his representative is the member 
from Eastview — which I didn’t know — and he’s down here 
to make sure he’s doing a good job, I hope; and that he’s a 
self-proclaimed political geek, which I confirmed to him that 
most members here are political geeks; and today was a little bit 
. . . as he put it, paradise, coming down to the building. So I 
welcome both of them to their Assembly, and please welcome 
them to the proceedings today. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. The people who have signed this petition are opposed 
to the Sask Party’s plan to scrap and sell off Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company. They would like us all to know that 
STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company] provides a vital 
service to many seniors, workers, and families throughout the 
province; and that by scrapping STC out of the blue without 
asking permission of the owners, the Saskatchewan people, the 
Sask Party is sending a clear sign about how little they care 
about protecting our Crowns like SaskTel; and that STC helps 

drive the economy with its parcel service that serves farms and 
other businesses. Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately stop 
the plan to scrap and sell off Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company, and to resume transportation services to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 

 
It is supported and signed by many good people of this 
province. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Saskatoon, 
Creelman, Borden, and Fillmore. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
proud to stand in my place to present a petition that will help 
the cities of our province, as opposed to hurting them, and this 
particular petition is around a second bridge for Prince Albert; 
and that the need for a second bridge for Prince Albert has 
never been clearer than it is today. Prince Albert and 
communities north of Prince Albert and the businesses that send 
people and products through Prince Albert require a solution. 
So in answering a call from the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote for someone to help her in these petitions and to 
lobby for a second bridge for Prince Albert, I’m proud to stand 
in my place and to present the petition that reads as follows: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan ask that the Sask Party government stop 
stalling, hiding behind rhetoric and refusing to listen to the 
people calling for action, and begin immediately to plan 
and then quickly commence the construction of a second 
bridge for Prince Albert using federal and provincial 
dollars. 

 
And as we say day after day, Mr. Speaker, in this Assembly as 
we present page after page, I’m very proud to stand in my place 
to present yet another page that have been signed by people 
primarily from Prince Albert, and I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition opposed to Bill 40 and a potential 49 per cent 



1942 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2017 

Crown corporation sell-off. The people who signed the petition 
want to bring to our attention the following: that the Sask 
Party’s Bill 40 creates a new definition for privatization that 
allows the government to wind down, dissolve, or sell up to 49 
per cent of the shares of a Crown corporation without holding a 
referendum; that in 2015-16 alone the Saskatchewan Crown 
corporations returned $297.2 million in dividends to pay for 
schools, roads, and hospitals. And as we know, over the last 
decade, Mr. Speaker, that is actually over $3 billion. These 
dividends should go to the people of Saskatchewan, not 
investors. 
 
Our Crown corporations employ thousands of Saskatchewan 
people across the province. And under section 149 of the 
Income Tax Act of Canada, Crown corporations are exempt 
from corporate income tax provided not less than 90 per cent of 
the shares are held by a government or province. The Sask 
Party’s proposal would allow up to 49 per cent of a Crown to be 
sold without being considered privatized. So this short-sighted 
legislation risks sending millions of dollars in Crown dividends 
to Ottawa rather than the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately stop 
the passage of Bill 40, The Interpretation Amendment Act, 
and start protecting jobs and our Crown corporations 
instead of selling them off to pay for Sask Party 
mismanagement. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition today are 
from the city of Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to 
present a petition regarding pay equity here in Saskatchewan. 
And the undersigned residents of Saskatchewan want to bring to 
our attention the following: that the citizens of this province 
believe in an economy powered by transparency, accountability, 
security, and equity; and that all women should be paid 
equitably; and that women are powerful drivers of economic 
growth and their economic empowerment benefits us all. 
 
And we know that the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives 
found that in Saskatoon in 2016, women earned on average 63 
cents for every dollar that a man makes, and in Regina, women 
earned on average 73 cents for every dollar that a man makes. 
According to the most recent StatsCan data, the national gender 
wage gap for full-time workers is 72 cents for every dollar a 
man makes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan eliminate 
the wage gap between women and men across all sectors 
where the Government of Saskatchewan has jurisdiction, 
provide a framework under which this can be done within 
this term of this Assembly, and that Saskatchewan 
government call upon workplaces within Saskatchewan 

within the private sector to eliminate the wage gap between 
women and men. 

 
Mr. Speaker, people signing this petition come from the city of 
Regina and Moose Jaw. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present to you a petition to increase the funding to Prince Albert 
mobile crisis. Prince Albert mobile crisis unit has had to close 
its doors during daytime hours, resulting in a loss of resource to 
people in distress. Mr. Speaker, the daytime closure of Prince 
Albert mobile has put stress on Prince Albert Police Service. 
And we know with the increase of crime in Prince Albert, we 
need our police services on the streets protecting citizens in our 
community. And they try their best to deal with people who are 
dealing with serious mental health issues, but they’re not 
trained to provide that work and it does take them off the streets 
for hours while they’re trying to find services for these 
individuals. And we know that the intervention workers from 
Prince Albert mobile crisis are the best workers to provide those 
services for these individuals. So I’ll read the prayer, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to increase funding to 
Prince Albert mobile crisis unit so they may once again 
offer 24-hour emergency crisis service. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this issue is really important to many people 
across this province and this particular petition is signed by 
individuals from Regina and Debden. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition regarding library funding in the province. Those who 
have signed the petition wish to draw our attention to the 
following: whereas the Saskatchewan government has cut 
funding for regional libraries in half or by 3.5 million and 
eliminated funding for libraries in Regina and Saskatchewan, 
and this drastic funding cut will have a devastating impact on 
libraries, especially regional libraries and the many people who 
depend on them; whereas libraries are a vital part of 
communities across Saskatchewan and the services that they 
provide enrich the lives of many, the drastic cuts imposed on 
libraries will lead to branch closures, program cuts, and 
reduction in hours, and will hurt the many people who use 
library services and the hard-working and dedicated public 
servants who work in the libraries. 
 
Whereas libraries are more than just about borrowing books: 
meeting rooms are used by community groups; library staff host 
educational programming and clubs, and publicly accessible 
computer terminals that are essential to many. There are 
services for seniors, children, employment support, language 
and reading groups, citizen test preparation, and help for 
newcomers to build their resumés. And whereas these cuts will 
have disproportionate impact on rural communities where 



March 28, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1943 

libraries are vital community spaces, potential closures or 
reductions in services will severely impact our communities. I’ll 
read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Therefore in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
renew its commitment to the invaluable programing, 
educational opportunities, and public spaces our libraries 
provide across this province and restore the 4.8 million for 
funding for public libraries that was cut in the 2017-2018 
budget. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those signing this petition today reside in Regina. 
I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition to ensure job security for victims of domestic 
violence. Saskatchewan has the dubious distinction of having 
the highest rates of domestic violence by intimate partners 
amongst all Canadian provinces. One in three Canadian workers 
have experienced domestic violence, and for many of them the 
violence follows them to work. 
 
Victims of domestic abuse should not be further victimized at 
work, Mr. Speaker, and employers lose $77.9 million annually 
due to the direct and indirect impacts of domestic violence. 
Manitoba has already enacted such legislation, and Ontario is 
on its way to enacting legislation that ensures job security for 
victims of domestic violence. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan enact 
legislation that requires all employers to provide a 
minimum of five paid workdays and a minimum of 17 
weeks unpaid work leave with the assurance of job security 
upon return for all victims of domestic abuse in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Individuals signing this petition today come from Assiniboia, 
Moose Jaw, Shaunavon, and Central Butte. I do so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

Gender Diversity Awareness Week 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Yesterday I was honoured to bring greetings, 
along with the member from Regina Douglas Park and the 
member from Moose Jaw Wakamow, to the celebration of 
Gender Diversity Awareness Week, and take part in the flag 
raising yesterday morning and afternoon. 
 
TransSask Support Services are so important to our growing 
and diverse society, and the courage and continued efforts are 
being felt all over Saskatchewan. 
 
Raising awareness to this week will only lead to more 
understanding, acceptance, and support for those who identify 

as binary and transgender. Mr. Speaker, this week serves as a 
reminder that we must continue our efforts to promote equality 
for all, as there is no place for discrimination in our province. 
 
There were flag raisings all around Saskatchewan to 
commemorate past and present supporters who are fighting 
every day to have the same equality, respect, and opportunity as 
everyone else in our society. 
 
I would like to thank the TransSask Support Services and 
Moose Jaw Pride for giving me and my colleagues the 
opportunity to take part in Gender Diversity Awareness Week. 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members, please join me in continuing to 
stand up for the rights of all transgender and binary people in 
our Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Prince Albert Students Compete at Model 
United Nations Assembly 

 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Thursday, 
March 24th, students from Prince Albert and area competed in 
the Prince Albert Rotary Club’s model UN [United Nations] 
assembly. Mr. Speaker, teams were each assigned a country to 
represent and were judged on their representation, their 
decorum during the assembly, the quality of their research in 
support of their views, and their speaking and debate abilities. 
 
Two motions were debated. One motion sought to establish a 
new world economic order where developed countries would do 
more to assist developing nations. The second motion dealt with 
the improvement of treatment of Indigenous people. 
 
St. Mary High School, representing Russia, was selected as the 
top delegation and will now compete at the Model United 
Nations Assembly in Winnipeg this May. The delegation from 
St. Mary was made up of Matthew Buglass and Lucas Mitchell. 
 
The model UN Assembly was sponsored by the Prince Albert 
Rotary Club, which was also a sponsor of the winning team’s 
trip to Winnipeg. The national model UN Assembly in 
Winnipeg is sponsored by the Rotary Club of Winnipeg. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in thanking 
the model UN staff advisor, Dennis Ogrodnick; Rotary Club 
representative at the competition, Morley Harrison; and all the 
teams who competed on Thursday for their hard work; and in 
congratulating Matthew Buglass and Lucas Mitchell on their 
win and offering our best wishes to them in the next level of 
competition. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 
[14:00] 
 

Humanity First Launches Nationwide Campaign 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 
stand in this House today to bring awareness to a nationwide 
campaign launched by Humanity First Canada which is 
intended to create awareness and alleviate hunger in Canada. 



1944 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2017 

Humanity First Canada has been providing food hampers to 
needy families and students on a monthly basis, making sure 
that food is delivered to families in a discreet and respectful 
manner throughout Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we value the important work done by Humanity 
First Canada and thank its chairman, Dr. Aslam Daud. We also 
value the good work done by food banks across Canada and 
right here in Saskatchewan.  
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking the 
volunteers and donors at Humanity First that are helping this 
worthwhile campaign. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Empowering Immigrant Women Workshop 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Friday I 
attended a workshop at Queen’s House Retreat in Saskatoon 
entitled Empowering Immigrant Women - A Journey of 
Inspiration and Success. The Saskatoon Open Door Society 
sponsored the event with funding provided by Immigration, 
Refugees and Citizenship Canada, along with Senator Lillian 
Dyck and city councillors Mairin Loewen and Hilary Gough. I 
was honoured to bring greetings to participants. 
 
Early in the day, four participants from around the globe shared 
stories of their arrival in Canada. Mr. Speaker, this group of 
women understands that when women do well by finding safe 
homes to raise their families, receiving quality education, and 
finding jobs, our communities are strengthened and improved. 
When women do well, we all benefit. 
 
The event was also a celebration of multiculturalism in 
Saskatchewan. Participants were invited to attend the workshop 
wearing their traditional dress, and after lunch several 
participants entertained the group with an array of cultural 
dance, song, visual storytelling, and a multicultural fashion 
show. It truly highlighted the unique and diverse nature of 
women in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask members to join me in congratulating the 
Saskatoon Open Door Society for organizing this remarkable 
event that showcased the value brought to us by newcomer 
women from around the world, women who come to build 
safer, better lives while enriching the economic and cultural 
fabric of our province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

New Grain-Handling Facilities in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There’s been an 
ongoing series of good news stories about significant 
investments in Saskatchewan’s economy. Mr. Speaker, this 
morning G3 Canada announced that it will construct two 
primary new grain-handling facilities in Saskatchewan. One 
elevator will be located just outside of Melville in my 
constituency and will have 34 000 tonnes of storage. The other 
facility will be located just west of Saskatoon and will have 

storage for over 42 000 tonnes. 
 
Karl Gerrand, G3’s CEO [chief executive officer] had this to 
say about the announcement: “These two new locations are 
being constructed with the same state-of-the-art truck delivery 
and rail-shipping features as our other new facilities, which are 
key components of G3’s excellent customer service offering.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, this will provide more options for our producers to 
access global markets. This investment will also create 
construction jobs and provide opportunities for people in these 
communities for years to come. With investments such as this, 
Grain Millers’ investment in Yorkton, and Brandt investing in 
Saskatoon, as well as many key economic indicators we have 
seen, they show that we are trending in the right direction, and 
we can be confident that our economy is on the right track. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask members to join me in welcoming G3 
to these two Saskatchewan communities, and we look forward 
to seeing these elevators’ operation for the 2018 harvest. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 

Local Businessman Receives 
Business for Peace Award 

 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is 
my honour and pleasure to talk about Murad Al-Katib, the 
president and CEO of AGT Foods, a company and a leader that 
we have talked about in this Assembly many times. In 2001 
Murad founded Saskcan Pulse Trading out of his basement in 
Regina, and it now has become one of the largest pulse 
processing companies in the world. 
 
Recently Murad was honoured with the Business for Peace 
Award, Mr. Speaker, an award given to business people who 
are contributing to economic growth while leaving their mark 
on society in a way that goes beyond profits. Each year, winners 
are selected by a committee of Nobel Peace Prize winners and 
is given to individuals who are positively changing the face of 
business. 
 
Murad, a son of Turkish immigrants himself, helped feed 
millions of Syrians in the midst of the refugee crisis and has 
made a significant contribution to the development of 
sustainable agriculture. Under Murad’s leadership, AGT has 
been a major partner with the United Nations World Food 
Programme and the international committee of the Red Cross. 
AGT estimates that their supplies to UN [United Nations] WFP 
[World Food Programme] and ICRC [international committee 
of the Red Cross] feed more than 4 million people. 
 
In an interview with the StarPhoenix this morning, Murad was 
asked, “What was your reaction when you learned that you’d 
been given this award?” And he said, and I quote: 
 

You never set out in your life to do these things to be 
recognized for them. You do them because you’re actually 
passionate about the causes. It’s an opportunity to stand up 
in front of a large group of business leaders and use the 
work you’re doing as a call to action, to say, “You know 
what? Entrepreneurs and business people have an 



March 28, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1945 

opportunity to contribute to the problems that are in society 
today.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, I think that says it all. I would ask all members to 
join me in congratulating Murad on this prestigious award, a 
first in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 

New Schools in Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to highlight our government’s commitment to education 
with the soon-to-be-complete two new schools in my 
constituency, on time and on budget, Mr. Speaker: St. Kateri 
Tekakwitha, Saskatoon Catholic; and Chief Whitecap, 
Saskatoon Public. And with John Lake School nearby, this 
brings the historical chapter and partnership full circle. Both 
schools will be beautiful facilities and home to over 1,250 
students and offer 90 child care centre spaces when they open in 
September. 
 
Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota has seen amazing growth over 
the past several years, with Stonebridge alone growing from 
4,000 people in 2011 to over 10,000 in 2016. This new 
neighbourhood is full of young families and young children 
who will benefit from increased access to child care and K to 8 
[kindergarten to grade 8] schooling. The schools surrounding 
Stonebridge will also see great benefits such as smaller 
classroom sizes and less pressure on resources. 
 
This new joint-use school will also benefit the community as a 
whole, with increased access to a fitness centre and a 
community resource centre. These facilities will be available to 
the public after regular school hours, providing a real pillar for 
this growing community. 
 
I am proud of our government’s record when it comes to 
education, and even in these tough economic times our record is 
one of opening 40 new schools, including 21 this year, along 
with 25 major renovations, Mr. Speaker. There’s still work to 
be done but we will continue to meet the challenge to keep 
Saskatchewan strong. Thank you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Regina Bypass Project and Financial Support for 
Municipalities 

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, day after day I ask the 
Premier to come clean about their GTH [Global Transportation 
Hub] scandal. We want to know why taxpayers and landowners, 
including nuns, got ripped off while two Sask Party supporters 
earned, or received, $11 million. But day after day the Premier 
sits in his chair, spins around, has the appointed minister stand 
up and spout nonsense — or, if he takes to his feet, he 
apologizes for not providing an answer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s the same with the bypass: $2 billion gone on a 
project that was supposed to cost $400 million. Now they’re 

trying to hide, of course, behind a contract with this private 
foreign corporation. That foreign corporation from France and 
beyond has rights, they say, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, how can 
the Premier be so defensive of those contracts, saying they need 
to be good to their word, while out of the blue they ripped up 
agreements with, and tore back millions from, our 
municipalities, not being true to their word with our cities and 
towns? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, once again, it’s important that we correct the record 
after that member takes to his feet. Whenever the interim leader 
of the NDP [New Democratic Party] speaks in this place we 
have to clarify, Mr. Speaker. Once again he characterized the 
bypass as a $400 million project whose costs have increased. 
He knows that’s not true. He knows that estimate — the $400 
million estimate — was when the scale of the project was 
much, much smaller. Well, he shakes his head. He knows that’s 
the truth. 
 
And in consultation with the communities surrounding Regina, 
and the City of Regina, Mr. Speaker, that project took on the 
significance of a perimeter road. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, it truly is 
a bypass, and it’s on time and it’s on budget. And I want to 
point out again for members opposite that there are, of the 
130-plus companies that are involved in the project, 90 of them 
are from the province of Saskatchewan. Ninety of them have 
their headquarters here; 8,000-plus jobs being created for 
Saskatchewan people on the bypass that, each and every day, he 
opposes, he criticizes in this House. 
 
And by the way, his question at the end, I think, was on revenue 
sharing, and it’s certainly a valid discussion and debate to have. 
It’s important to note for the citizens of Regina that that bypass 
represents the largest single infrastructure investment in the 
province’s history, right here in the capital city of Regina, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re proud of the work we’ve done with our 
municipal partners, Mr. Speaker. We’ll get into more details in 
a moment, but I can share with members opposite that 
municipal revenue sharing in Saskatchewan since the days of 
the members opposite being in office, municipal revenue 
sharing has doubled, Mr. Speaker. And in the case of our largest 
centres, it’s up two and a half times what it was, Mr. Speaker. 
And I look forward to subsequent questions. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — You know, Mr. Speaker, watching the 
cabinet and the caucus applaud that non-answer is disappointing 
once again, but it’s what we’re growing accustomed to day after 
day. You know, they’re the ones that are protecting the $11 
million, that agreement that they handed to the two Sask Party 
supporters. And they’re the ones that are refusing to open up the 
$2 billion bypass contract with this foreign corporation with 
incredible mismanagement by the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker. The 
Premier speaks about some creep in scope. It certainly never 
doubled, Mr. Speaker. Even if it hadn’t . . . Even if it had, $2 
billion is outrageous. 
 
You know, meanwhile, that Premier and along with him all the 
members opposite have broken faith with Saskatchewan people 



1946 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2017 

and thrown out agreements with our cities and towns. Mr. 
Speaker, they’re changing the law so they can rip tens of 
millions of dollars that are needed away from our cities and 
towns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, former Conservative candidate and current 
Saskatoon city councillor Randy Donauer said, “This is a 
transfer of a tax burden from one level of government . . .” It’s 
certainly that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
To the Premier: why is the Sask Party defending their wealthy 
supporters, foreign corporations, while punishing Saskatchewan 
people by ripping millions of dollars away from our cities and 
towns? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, since our government was 
elected in 2007 and our first budget 2007-2008, the cumulative 
inflation since then has been 18 per cent. The increase in 
operating for K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] has been 31 per 
cent; the increase in operating for universities and Sask Poly, 45 
per cent; the increase in operating dollars for our health 
authorities, 59 per cent. 
 
But the clearest winner in terms of this government’s 
investments has been the municipal sector because their funding 
is up 103 per cent, Mr. Speaker. And there are no strings 
attached to that money. They can use it for operating. They can 
use it for capital. And in this budget, a very difficult budget, 
that revenue-sharing agreement was preserved, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There have been some decisions with respect to grants-in-lieu. I 
know that representatives of our cities will be meeting with the 
ministers responsible, I think tomorrow, to further discuss the 
matter. But, Mr. Speaker, when the member quotes the 
councillor from Saskatoon, he should know that in 2007, when 
those folks had the chance to do more than talk, they were 
receiving . . . Saskatoon received from the NDP $17.8 million 
in revenue sharing, and they were sitting on a mountain of 
money, about a half billion dollars. That’s what they gave to the 
people of Saskatoon. This year . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they don’t want to hear the answer. They 
received 17 million from the NDP. And, Mr. Speaker, in this 
budget year from our government, Saskatoon will receive $46 
million. That’s an increase of 161 per cent. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, we’re asking them to accept part of the 
challenge we all face, a $10 million reduction in grant-in-lieu. 
That leaves Saskatoon, net to the good, $36 million. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Sorry, Mr. Speaker, I missed that in the 
SUMA speech that the Premier gave just a couple months ago 
here. You know, and he doesn’t have to take my word for it; he 
could ask the president of SUMA, Dr. Gordon Barnhart, who’s 
here today. Or we could read the quote of Yorkton Mayor Bob 
Maloney who said, “Just to pass along what’s been dumped on 
our plate would need a 10 per cent increase in taxes.” Ten per 
cent increase. Mr. Speaker, let’s be clear: those tax hikes are 
Sask Party tax hikes. Cities and towns aren’t happy. North 
Battleford Mayor Ryan Bater said “. . . outrage is putting it 

lightly. We were absolutely blindsided by this budget.” 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Moose Jaw city manager Matt Noble said, “total 
blindside.” Regina’s mayor, Michael Fougere, said that this 
came “out of nowhere.” Mr. Speaker, even former Sask Party 
candidate and current city councillor Bob Hawkins said this 
budget comes like . . . Well, you know, I’m not sure I can finish 
this quote without getting tossed from here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
To the Premier again: why is the Sask Party attacking our 
communities and attacking Saskatchewan families, breaking his 
promises, and hiking taxes while he has giveaways for the 
wealthy and well connected? Why didn’t he at least have the 
decency, the decency to come clean with our cities and towns? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure if the Leader of 
the Opposition was at the SUMA meeting where I spoke . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Well he says he was. If he was there, 
he would know . . . If he was there, he would know I expressly 
mentioned as a part of the list of things on the table, 
grants-in-lieu. 
 
Well he’s smiling. Mr. Speaker, we see this time and time again 
where the member opposite will stand up and characterize 
something, including commitments I made on taxes — that was 
his tack last week — and he’s proven to be wrong, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In the case of SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities], the speech to SARM, we also indicated at 
SARM specifically that grants-in-lieu would be on the table. 
Well it was in the speech, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Moreover I think we were pretty clear at both SUMA and 
SARM that we had a $1.2 billion revenue challenge. And so, 
Mr. Speaker, notwithstanding the fact that this side of the 
House has doubled municipal revenue sharing, Mr. Speaker — 
for our two largest centres, it has gone up by two and a half 
times, Mr. Speaker, since we formed government — 
notwithstanding that, we’ve asked them to share in the 
challenge of the budget in terms of grants-in-lieu. They’ll all be 
still net to the positive. They’ll all be significant, more support 
from our government than there ever was from the NDP, and 
that doesn’t count the infrastructure dollars in Saskatoon, 125 
million alone, and when you count the stadium in Regina, 127 
million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ll continue to work towards a meaningful 
partnership with the municipal sector that’s more than just 
speeches and words, that’s actually informed by a record of 
more dollars on a revenue-sharing basis and more dollars on a 
capital basis. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Government’s Fiscal Management 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, they keep acting like they just 
landed in government yesterday: oh golly, somebody really 



March 28, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1947 

messed up these books. Mr. Speaker, they’ve been here for a 
decade. Mr. Speaker, oil prices, oil prices have always been and 
always are volatile, especially when they were at well over 
$100 a barrel. But they are the ones who blew it, and it’s 
families who they are forcing to pay the price. 
 
On November 8th, 2011 when they expanded the PST 
[provincial sales tax] exemption for children’s clothes, the Sask 
Party press release headline read, “First promise kept.” The 
Premier himself said they made the announcement to “. . . make 
life a little more affordable for Saskatchewan families . . .” 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they are breaking that promise now and 
making life less affordable for Saskatchewan families. 
 
I’m hoping for a straight answer that doesn’t blame a magical 
being or the volatility of oil prices as if that’s something new, 
Mr. Speaker. Will this minister cancel their plans to hike taxes 
for necessities like children’s clothes, shoes, and diapers? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do 
acknowledge that it’s difficult with respect to any time you’re 
making changes to your tax base in the province. It’s difficult 
any time you’re making changes to your tax base in the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. When you’re moving 
from taxing income and productivity to a consumption-based 
tax, there’s going to be some difficulties, which is why, which 
is why we increased the Saskatchewan low-income tax credit by 
41 per cent in this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I listened to the opposition critic’s question yesterday, and 
I wanted to make sure I went back and checked with officials 
because she indicated yesterday in her question that we were 
taxing diapers, Mr. Speaker. We are not taxing diapers in this 
province with respect to the provincial sales tax. It is equivalent 
to the incontinence products in the province of Saskatchewan, 
and feminine hygiene products. I went back with officials today 
to make sure that we’re not taxing diapers in this budget, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now with respect to children’s clothing, with respect to 
children’s clothing, Mr. Speaker, here we have a classic case. 
The Leader of the Opposition yesterday was railing on the 
government with respect to spending decreases in the province. 
The Finance critic gets up and talks about revenue changes in 
the province. Last week the Leader of the Opposition said he 
doesn’t like debt or deficits, Mr. Speaker. That’s the NDP math. 
A $1.2 billion hole, they don’t want to see any reductions in 
spending. Matter of fact, they want to see increases. They don’t 
want to see any changes in revenue, Mr. Speaker, no changes 
from taxing productivity and income to consumption taxes. And 
they don’t like any debt, Mr. Speaker. It simply doesn’t add up 
from the NDP side. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Ownership of Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, they’re railroading taxpayers 
with a billion dollar PST tax grab, and they’re derailing 
shortlines with their desperate sell-off of the Grain Car 

Corporation. For years producers have been able to count on the 
cars of the Grain Car Corporation to get their grain to market, 
and they’ve been able to rely on the grants from the profits of 
the Grain Car Corporation to help shortlines stay on track and 
move grain to the mainlines. 
 
But just like the STC, ISC [Information Services Corporation of 
Saskatchewan], and 49 per cent of all the other Crowns, this 
government is chugging along at full steam to privatize 
everything, and they’re spiking these grants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this program ensures rail safety; it saves our 
highways, and is not only self-funding but actually makes 
money. So, Mr. Speaker, what possible justification is there to 
scrap this program? And what is the minister’s plan going 
forward to support shortlines and maintain grain movement 
capacity? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
member opposite for the question. This is something that we 
looked at. We had a great discussion with the shortline 
association back in November on the discussion about this. We 
have proposed that the shortlines will have first opportunity to 
buy the rail cars. 
 
The main thing here, Mr. Speaker, is the rail cars will be used 
by Saskatchewan farmers in the province of Saskatchewan. 
They’ll move Saskatchewan grain to port and to market. This is 
a good news story for rural Saskatchewan and the shortline 
association in this province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 

Saskatchewan Transportation Company 
Assets and Services 

 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, like the rest of our Crowns, 
STC belongs to Saskatchewan people, but the Sask Party seems 
to have forgotten. They’ve pretending like they aren’t selling it 
off, that they’re not privatizing it. But, Mr. Speaker, we’ve 
heard them promise before not to privatize. We know they’ll do 
anything to sell off much of our Crowns as they can. 
 
So what exactly is their plan for STC? What is their plan for the 
equipment and the buses and the new depot in Regina? Mr. 
Speaker, what are they doing and what is their plan to do with 
the assets? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank 
the member opposite for the question. Mr. Speaker, the good 
staff at STC have tried many different options to reduce costs 
and to increase revenues at STC, Mr. Speaker, but to no avail, 
Mr. Speaker. Route discontinuations have been implemented, as 
did the NDP do that. Route frequencies has decreased, as did 
the NDP. We’ve tried different advertising, different marketing, 
and that didn’t work, Mr. Speaker. Ridership continued to 
decline, Mr. Speaker. So ridership has declined by 35 per cent 



1948 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2017 

since 2012, and 18,000 people in just the last year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now the wind-down of STC will transpire over the 
next several months, Mr. Speaker, and those assets . . . We’ve 
engaged KPMG, Mr. Speaker, to deal with those assets. And 
once the wind-down is complete and we’re finalized with it, 
KPMG will dispose of the assets of STC. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, 1,200 people rely on STC to 
travel regularly to medical appointments. But, Mr. Speaker, 
when asked about that, the member from Prince Albert Carlton 
said that there are all kinds of communities that “. . . have 
people with cancer that have to make it into the city for 
treatments and they found other options without much 
problem.” Mr. Speaker, yes, he actually said that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I’d rather listen to someone who knows 
what’s going on. Philip Racette says, “I’m lucky. I’m in the 
middle of almost daily cancer treatments. As of right now, STC 
and the Cancer Agency are a huge support in terms of my 
survival, but what will happen to other people across 
Saskatchewan as the Sask Party moves to sell off STC?” 
 
Can the Minister of Health please tell us in what consultations 
was he involved, and what concrete plan does he have to ensure 
that the patients who rely on STC to get to care are not 
abandoned by the Sask Party sell-off? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this wasn’t an issue that we took lightly. You heard that on the 
preceding answer from the minister in charge of CIC [Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan]. We take this very 
seriously in health care, Mr. Speaker. There are programs in 
place for low-income people, for people in the North and 
remote areas to be able to travel for medical appointments, Mr. 
Speaker. Other areas of health care also rely on STC at the 
moment. Canadian Blood Services does, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to read a statement from Canadian Blood Services. It 
says: 
 

Canadian Blood Services is aware of the province of 
Saskatchewan’s recent announcement regarding the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company and is developing 
plans to make changes to the organization’s operations. 
Canadian Blood Services will continue to ensure that 
hospitals and patients have access to the blood and blood 
products they need. 

 
Mr. Speaker, again we take this matter very seriously. We’re 
going to make sure that people get to appointments and that 
appropriate medical supplies are there as needed. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, for my constituents in the 
North and those in the South — rural and urban, it doesn’t 

matter — that answer just isn’t good enough. Mr. Speaker, they 
are scrapping a service that thousands of people rely on and 
they are refusing to answer even the simplest questions. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s starting to seem like they really don’t have a plan 
— no plan to deal with the patients, no plan to serve the riders, 
and no plan to deliver the blood samples or the tractor parts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, do they know it’s not too late? They can admit 
that they didn’t think of the consequences, Mr. Speaker. Will 
they do the right thing and save STC? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank the 
member opposite for that question. Mr. Speaker, yes, plans have 
been put in place to handle blood services, to transport people 
through this next interim period before the wind-down is 
complete, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also know, Mr. Speaker, that in other areas 
where service has been discontinued that other enterprises, 
non-profit organizations, service clubs, people, friends, and 
neighbours . . . Just like people do in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, they help out their friends and neighbours, Mr. 
Speaker. And we expect that to continue to happen in the routes 
that are still being serviced by STC, just like the routes that 
have not been serviced, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, that is 
what’s happening and the wind-down will continue with STC. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Libraries 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We know that the 
Education minister thinks that the government should get out of 
the “library business.” We know he thinks that our towns and 
cities don’t need libraries anymore because people have 
computers and they can just google it. And he’s implied that 
people should go hang out at Starbucks or somewhere where, 
“other than where we’re not paying.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister doesn’t get it. Libraries mean so 
much more to our communities than books alone. Our libraries 
are community hubs. They provide programming and build 
literacy skills in children and in fact in adults. They provide 
English as an additional language programming and have 
resources that help connect newcomers to jobs. Mr. Speaker, 
after years of underfunding, they’ve already been struggling to 
provide these services. But, Mr. Speaker, our libraries were 
completely blindsided by these cuts that threaten their very 
future. How can the minister claim to believe in literacy, 
education, and community while he’s making these massive 
cuts to our public libraries? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, difficult decisions had to 
be made in order to meet the fiscal challenges that we’re facing. 
Mr. Speaker, I have a quote that I want to read: “It’s inevitable 
that they’re going to have shortfalls when commodity prices are 
what they are.” That’s a quote from the Finance critic on 



March 28, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1949 

November 16th, 2016 in the Leader-Post. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we value and respect the people that use our 
libraries, the people that work in our libraries. We want to work 
with the libraries to adjust how they deliver their services 
within the available funding levels and reflecting where our 
society is going and with the availability of technology. Our 
focus is on supporting things like electronic resources, 
interlibrary loans, CommunityNet. It’s our hope that local 
libraries will work with their municipalities and school 
divisions to find new ways of delivering services. 
 
We know, Mr. Speaker, that in rural areas there’s often a library 
in a municipal building, a library in a school, and a library 
down the road. We want to look at the best utilization of those 
services and look to see whether there can be savings that are 
found. 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Provincial Sales Tax Exemptions 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A few 
minutes ago the Minister of Finance indicated that he believes 
that diapers are not part of the exemption . . . or are still part of 
the exemption for the PST, provincial sales tax. Now I have an 
information notice bulletin here from the Government of 
Saskatchewan Ministry of Finance dated March 22nd, 2017, 
and it says, “PST now applies to all sizes of clothing and 
footwear and includes items such as . . .” And it lists a whole 
bunch of things but it says, “Diapers, cloth and disposable.” So 
I want to raise this with the minister right now because 
obviously his ministry is saying something different than him. 
My question to him is, who can we believe? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — As I said to the hon. member, I listened 
to her question yesterday very carefully, and when she 
mentioned diapers, Mr. Speaker, I went back to my deputy 
minister to clarify. I was under the impression that diapers were 
considered equivalent to the incontinence products that we 
already have tax exempt in this province, Mr. Speaker, as well 
as feminine hygiene products. Now I understand that there was 
diapers included on a bulletin that went out. I’ve discussed it 
with my deputy minister. We are not taxing diapers in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 

Funding for Post-Secondary Students 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, we can all agree that the economy 
is struggling, and that’s on the Sask Party and their failure to 
plan. 
 
It’s not the fault of Saskatchewan students, that’s for sure. Not 
the fault of Saskatchewan students trying to prepare for the 
future. They’ve saved up. They want to be in school. But the 

Sask Party’s long since blown through their savings. Now they 
want to get into everyone else’s savings, and they want to leave 
everyone with a legacy of debt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, universities are an economic engine in this 
province. The University of Saskatchewan alone returns over 
$1,500 per person per year to the provincial economy. Mr. 
Speaker, the Sask Party may be out of gas, but why do they 
want to cut the engine on our recovery? Why, why do you want 
to put the brakes on improving our economy? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To be sure, there 
were some difficult choices in this budget. But it is important to 
remember the broader context, Mr. Speaker, that overall 
funding for post-secondary education and student supports is 
still 52 per cent higher than it was 10 years ago, Mr. Speaker — 
8.3 billion we’ve invested, over 4 billion to our two universities. 
In fact, operating funding to those two universities has gone up 
over the last decade by 45 per cent, nearly twice the increase in 
the cost of living. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we can’t forget the student supports that are 
in place now, unchanged by this budget, that were not in place 
10 years ago: $137 million this year in loan scholarships, 
bursaries, and grants. That includes the universal Saskatchewan 
Advantage Scholarship and the graduate retention program, the 
GRP, Mr. Speaker, a program that has been called free tuition. 
In fact, support programs in Saskatchewan are so generous, one 
expert wrote “. . . literally everyone ends up receiving more in 
subsidy than they pay in tuition.” That’s important context, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 53 — The Provincial Health Authority Act 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 53, The 
Provincial Health Authority Act be now introduced and read a 
first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 53, The Provincial Health Authority Act be now 
introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 



1950 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2017 

Bill No. 54 — The Provincial Health Authority Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2017/Loi de 2017 portant modifications 

corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Provincial Health 
Authority Act 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 54, The 
Provincial Health Authority Consequential Amendment Act, 
2017 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 54, The Provincial Health Authority Consequential 
Amendment Act be now introduced and read the first time. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 55 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Economy — Audit 

Assessments) Amendment Act, 2017 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 55, 
The Miscellaneous Statutes (Economy — Audit Assessments) 
Amendment Act, 2017 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Energy 
and Resources that Bill No. 55 be now introduced and read the 
first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 56 — The Oil and Gas Conservation 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 56, 
The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Energy 
and Resources that Bill No. 56, The Oil and Gas Conservation 
Amendment Act, 2017 be now introduced and read the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that the Assembly approves in 
general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Ms. 
Sproule.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Canora-Pelly. 
 
[Applause] 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s not hard to get a 
clap out of you guys. Thank you very much. It’s an honour and 
a privilege here to rise in the Assembly to support the Minister 
of Finance and the 2017-18 budget. 
 
First of all, I’d like to thank a few of my family and constituents 
before I get going, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to tell a little bit about 
my family. I’m married to my wife, Lorri, for 32 years. She’s a 
nurse practitioner and she works in Canora area. I’m sure we’ve 
been married happily . . . I’m sure she’s been happily married 
with me for a few years. 
 
Also I have three lovely kids: my daughter, Jasmine, 29, she 
works for Walker Projects in Regina; and my son-in-law, 
Shane, who works for SGI [Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance] in Regina. And then I have my one and only 
grandson, Lewis. He’s 18 months old. He loves playing ball, 
and he loves wrestling with his big grandpa. 
 



March 28, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1951 

Then I have my daughter, Jade. She’s 26. She’s got a social 
work degree, and she works at the corrections centre in Regina. 
She’s been working there for the last two years. And she loves 
playing hockey and everything, and she’s involved and plays in 
the senior men’s rec hockey league. 
 
And then I have my son — he’s 24 — Carson. He’s living in 
Melville for the last four years, and he’s working at the golf 
course. After getting his turf management degree in Olds, 
Alberta, he decided to move back to Saskatchewan. So I’d like 
to really thank my wife and my kids for the past year, and just 
my support throughout life. They’ve been taking good care of 
me and making sure that I behave. 
 
I’d also like to thank my CA [constituency assistant], Carol 
Sleeva, and all my constituents in Canora who helped and 
supported me, not only through this year being elected but 
through the year of campaigning and everything. And I really 
appreciate them, and I try and get out to the constituents as 
much as I can. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to thank my colleagues around here 
and our staff for all their help during the past year. It’s been 
great to get their support the first year because it’s been a great 
learning curve, and it’s nice to have all my friends here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 2017-18 budget is well thought out and a plan 
to get back to the balance within three years. And for that I 
applaud the Finance minister and his team, along with the 
Premier and our government, for all their hard work. Mr. 
Premier, this budget was one of the toughest under the current 
government. Over the last three years of soft commodities, our 
government has almost half of the . . . resource revenues of 2.5 
billion have shrunken. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the last 10 years this government has 
continued to grow. This has been part of the growth plan, while 
the government has lowered taxes, paid down the debt. Now 
however, as you see, we must make adjustments due to the low 
commodities in order to keep the province growing and strong. 
We must take action to rebalance our spending and revenues to 
reflect the new reality. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to stand up today 
not only to support this budget, to talk about, a little bit about 
the records of events that have happened over the last 10 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, health care is undoubtedly one of our most 
important areas and largest investments in our province. 
Saskatchewan will invest $5.2 billion this year, an increase of 
$38.6 million from the 2016-17 budget, and more than 51 per 
cent since 2007. This budget includes $3.4 billion to the 
regional health authorities, an increase of 1.2 per cent from last 
year and 57.9 per cent since 2007. It includes $12 million to 
address the capacity pressures and emergency wait times in 
Regina and Saskatoon. It’ll also fund $24.4 million to address 
service pressures and operating costs. Mr. Speaker, we will also 
provide $750,000 to the HPV [human papilloma virus] 
vaccination program for boys, expanding this program. 
 
It will make capital investments of 83.7 million to continue its 
commitment to the new children’s hospital in Saskatchewan. 
There will be $6.7 million dedicated to the Leader integrated 
facility, and $3.5 million to fund the electrical projects in the 
Regina General and Pasqua hospitals. The Saskatchewan 

Cancer Agency will receive more than $170 million, an increase 
of funding by 3.3 million, to provide treatment for patients. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s some tough decisions on some of the 
programs that were deferred to ’18-19, like the funding for 
autism. The province will phase out or reduce some of the 
programs, although it will in most cases cover low-income 
individuals. Special home care fees will increase for some 
residents. Approximately 50 per cent of the residents will 
continue to pay the monthly minimum fees. The province will 
continue to subsidize 83 per cent of overall long-term care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the last 10 years, the Sask Party record is 750 
more doctors, the shortest wait times in Canada. We’ve doubled 
the investments in hospital projects, in the new children’s 
hospital in Saskatoon and new major hospitals in Moose Jaw 
and North Battleford. We’ve opened up 15 long-term care 
facilities for seniors and tripled the seniors’ income from $90 to 
270. 
 
And under the NDP record, what did they do? They lost 450 
nurses and 173 doctors from 2001 to 2006. Saskatchewan had 
the longest wait times in Canada during that time. They closed 
52 hospitals and 1,200 long-term care beds. They had zero 
increase to the seniors’ income plan for 16 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all know that education, including advanced 
education, is our second-largest budget expense at 3.6 billion. 
Our K to 12 overall budget for ’17-18 is just over $2 billion, a 
decrease of 6.7 per cent. Most of this decrease, $262 million, is 
required to construct 18 new schools in Regina, Saskatoon, 
Warman, and Martensville, which will be completed this fall, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
There is $119 million for capital projects; 43.2 to preserve 
maintenance, an increase of 13.7 per cent; 21.8 million to 
complete four capital projects, three in Regina: the Sacred 
Heart, École Connaught, and Scott Collegiate; and a major 
expansion and renovation to St. Brieux School; 2 million in 
design funding for two new projects in Rosthern and Weyburn; 
and $2.8 million to purchase seven new relocatable units; 40.3 
million to complete 18 joint-use schools; $1 million for the 
school facility audits; and $55.8 million for 889 care spaces in 
the new schools in Regina, Saskatoon, Warman, and 
Martensville. This brings the total of new spaces of more than 
6,000 over the last 10 years. There is $3.5 million funding for 
the northern regional libraries. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government listened to the people and will 
continue keeping elected school boards. There will be no major 
school division boundary changes. We will continue to keep our 
focus on the education sector strategic plan, which will help 
develop our kids. We will work with improving engagement 
with the First Nations and Métis residents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will continue to invest in post-secondary 
students. High school grads of Saskatchewan will receive $500 
per year in relief throughout the Saskatchewan advantage 
program. Post-secondary students will continue to get their 
tuition costs back through the graduate retention program, up to 
$20,000 if they live and work in Saskatchewan. 



1952 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2017 

Mr. Speaker, the College of Medicine will receive $69 million 
to support accreditation and sustainability; $26 million for 
Student Aid Fund to provide student grants; $12 million for 
scholarships; and $8 million for the Saskatchewan advantage 
grant for education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to tell you a little about our education 
record over the last 10 years. We built 40 new schools and 25 
major new renovations, 750 more teachers and 164 more 
student support teachers. We did an increase in funding to K to 
12 by 32 per cent since 2007, and enrolment is up 10 per cent. 
We increased the operating and capital funding for 
post-secondary over 40 per cent in 10 years. Under the NDP, 
they closed 176 schools, and from 2000 to 2007 they dropped 
400 teachers and underfunded K to 12, leading to property tax 
and increased tax revolts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, agriculture is one of our leading industries in our 
economy today. Our budget of 388.6 million will continue to 
keep the industry strong. 71.2 million will again be provided for 
strategic initiatives under the federal-provincial Growing 
Forward 2 agreement. 26.8 million will be invested in research, 
and 172.2 million will be earmarked for crop insurance 
premiums and programs delivered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to say that Sask ag exports are up 186 
per cent over the last decade. In 2016 ag exports were over $14 
billion to 147 countries. In 2006 Sask ag exports under the NDP 
were 4.9 billion. Saskatchewan exported $1.5 billion of canola 
in 2016, up 524 per cent since 2007. Last year there were 13 
countries that received more than $200 million in Sask ag food 
exports. Saskatchewan has $4.5 billion in agriculture 
value-added industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a diverse group of companies and 
investors investing in our resources. The total exploration and 
expenditures in the mining industry over the last 10 years is 
over $30 billion. The uranium industry has invested $4.8 
billion, which includes 2.6 to Cigar Lake, the second largest in 
the world. K+S has committed 4.1 billion to the Legacy 
solution potash near Bethune. BHP Billiton has committed 3.8 
billion to develop Jansen Lake project and others. The oil and 
gas industry invested $4.4 billion in Saskatchewan in 2015, an 
83 per cent increase over the last decade. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s business and trade has really 
exploded over the last 10 years. Our retail trade has grown by 
61 per cent, the highest by anyone in Canada. Saskatchewan 
manufacturing sales have grown by 44 per cent, while the rest 
of Canada has averaged 1.5 per cent. Saskatchewan food 
manufacturing subsector is up 84 per cent, and the whole . . . 
Sask wholesale trade has grown by 90 per cent while the rest of 
Canada has only grown by 37 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the provincial government will continue to 
improve the Sask advantage and improve in investment and 
create jobs. In 2017, capital investment is forecasted as 14.5 
billion. Mr. Speaker, CIT, our corporate income tax, will be 
reduced by half a per cent in 2017 and 2019, which will 
continue to keep the lowest tax rate on manufacturing processes 
in Canada. This will give us a chance to attract new businesses, 
investments, and create new jobs in our province. 
 

We will also continue to offer programs and tax credits to 
attract businesses and jobs to our province. Some of them are 
the innovative patent box, the Sask research and development 
tax credit, and the oil investment incentives, and there are many 
others. Mr. Speaker, growth in agriculture and economy will 
continue to help our province flourish. 
 
Population has grown by more than 130,000 since 2006. 
Saskatchewan is the second-fastest growing province in Canada 
with a population of 1,155,393. And from 1996 to 2006 under 
the NDP, the population dropped by 22,000 people. Shame. We 
have created the second-best job creation in Canada from 2007 
to 2016. And from 2000 to 2007 under the NDP, they had the 
worst job creation in Canada. Shame again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in order to keep our province growing and our 
economy strong, Saskatchewan has the lowest PST in the 
country. A family of four have no tax on their first $50,000 of 
income, the highest threshold in Canada. Under the NDP, what 
did they do? They raised the tax 21 times in 16 years, including 
PST four times and raising the gas tax twice. Shame again. 
 
We will continue to build and spend the money on highways 
and infrastructure which will help our province keep it strong. 
The $1.1 billion that will be spent on the highways and 
infrastructure budget will continue to see major projects and 
990 kilometres of provincial highways across Saskatchewan. 
This year’s budget includes $343 million to start or continue 
construction around the province. As well, 500 million to the 
Regina bypass. 
 
Highlights include continued work on the new overpasses at 
Warman and Martensville, twinning of the Highway 7 between 
Saskatoon and Delisle, twinning of the Highway 39 between 
Estevan and Bienfait and two sets of passing lanes on Highway 
5 between Saskatoon and Humboldt, future twinning and 
passing lanes on Highway 6 and 39 between Estevan and 
Regina and passing lanes on Highway 4 and north of North 
Battleford and Highway 7 of Rosetown to the Alberta border. 
There will also be 150 kilometres of highways and upgrades to 
Highway 4 south of Cadillac, Highway 51 of Kelfield, Highway 
80 north of Esterhazy, and Highway 322 of Silton. We’re 
investing more than $53 million to build, operate, and maintain 
highways and airports in northern Saskatchewan. Thirty major 
bridge rehabilitations and replacements will also be done this 
year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, social services continue to grow, and we will 
continue to service our most vulnerable people. We will 
increase 6.9 per cent, or $73 million We will bring the total 
budget to 1.125 billion, the second largest in Social Services’ 
history. This budget will go to children and family programs 
that will increase by 13.4 million to 256.3 million. Disability 
programs will see an increase of 2.3 million. An overall 
increase of 67.2 million will be for income assistance programs; 
25 million for the transitional employment allowance; an 
increase of 15.9 for the Saskatchewan assured income for 
disability, the SAID program; 10.5 million for the 
Saskatchewan assistance program; and 14 million for the 
Saskatchewan rental housing. Funding will also be increased for 
the Saskatchewan employment supplement and personal care 
home benefit and seniors’ income plan. 
 



March 28, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1953 

Mr. Speaker, this year’s budget has a plan, and this is the 
government that has a plan to get it back to balance within three 
years. This is unlike anyone else in the country. Diversity is the 
key to our province’s success, and we need to switch on relying 
on resources, and balance it to taxation on consumption. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our province has the lowest per capita debt in the 
country. Families have one of the lowest taxes in Canada, and 
Saskatchewan will not have a carbon tax. And gone are the days 
of people leaving, and we are now a have province. Mr. 
Speaker, in closing, I did not make any of this up, and I will be 
supporting the budget and not the amendment. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood. 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
and speak to the budget. Many thanks are in order before I 
begin my remarks. As many members have stated in this House, 
we spend time away from our families in order to undertake our 
duties as MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly], so that 
is where I shall start. 
 
My husband Jim and I have been married for 35 years this 
summer. We have three daughters together. He has been by my 
side through all my endeavours — over 30 years in the media, 
three decades of volunteering in my community, and my time as 
a school board trustee. He was a big part of my election 
campaign and he continues to clear the path so I am able to 
focus on my new role. Words cannot express my gratitude to 
him for his support. 
 
Amy, our oldest daughter, is married to Karl and is the mother 
of Gianna, Isabella, and Lukas, three of our grandchildren. She 
is currently on maternity leave from her auditor position with 
Canada Revenue Agency and is a chartered professional 
accountant. Our middle daughter, Monique, and her husband 
Aaron are first-time parents of baby Sebastian who was born 
last November. Monique is a lawyer and has spent the last 
couple of years as a litigator with the city of Saskatoon. Janelle, 
our youngest, is working in Saskatoon after completing a 
master of public administration. Mr. Speaker, we are so pleased 
to welcome two grandsons, born two months apart, after a 
string of daughters and granddaughters. 
 
I would not be standing here today if it were not for the voters 
of Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood. As I stated in a recent 
constituency newsletter, my goal is to represent and serve my 
constituents to the best of my ability, and it is a great honour to 
bring their voice to the legislature. 
 
I would like to recognize the efforts of my constituency 
assistant, James Hawkes. There is a steep learning curve to the 
position and he is juggling the varied duties well. I would also 
like to thank my constituency association — all new volunteers 
but one. They support my work as an MLA. 
 
Now to the matter at hand, the budget. Mr. Speaker, do you 
remember the movie A League of Their Own? The movie is 
about two sisters who join the first female professional baseball 
league and deal with a growing rivalry. It’s one of my 
favourites. Jimmy the ball coach is played by Tom Hanks, and 

Geena Davis plays the team’s talented backcatcher, Dottie. 
There’s a scene between Jimmy and Dottie when Dottie quits 
the team right before the world series. When Jimmy presses her 
for the reason why, she says, it just got too hard. He responds 
with, if it wasn’t hard, everyone would do it. That’s how I feel 
about our budget, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan is facing a 
challenge right now, but we are not the only province in the 
country in this position. Far from it. 
 
The Fraser Institute wrote an article on budget day comparing 
Saskatchewan to our neighbouring province to the west. The 
institute looked at the two vastly different fiscal paths of our 
two provinces, and I quote: 
 

Both Alberta and Saskatchewan are energy-rich 
jurisdictions that have fallen on hard times in recent years 
when commodity prices fell . . . 
 
And yet in their recent budgets, the two governments took 
very different approaches to dealing with the challenges 
they now face. One particularly important difference is that 
while Premier Notley’s government in Alberta has 
continued down the path of significant spending growth, 
Saskatchewan’s budget signals that their government is 
taking the need for spending restraint much more seriously. 
 
. . . Saskatchewan’s budget lays out a generally realistic 
quick path to balance and future generations in 
Saskatchewan will benefit from the reduced debt 
accumulation that will result. 
 
. . . the budget released this week shows that 
Saskatchewan’s government understands that persistent 
deficits and ever-growing debt are problems that require a 
disciplined response on the spending side of the ledger. 

 
[15:00] 
 
The National Post stated, and I quote: 
 

If anyone doubted that Saskatchewan and neighbouring 
Alberta have become two different countries, Wednesday 
should [have] put an end to it. While Alberta’s New 
Democratic Party has firmly committed itself to heavy 
borrowing and a ballooning debt, Wall and Doherty have 
wedded themselves just as firmly to austerity. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, we see that other governments are continuing 
to run deficits indefinitely. Other governments have decided not 
to make the tough choices, but not us, not here in 
Saskatchewan. We will not postpone the day of reckoning and 
visit this challenge upon the heads of our children. As the 
Finance minister has outlined, we will face our responsibility 
squarely and meet the challenge by taking a number of 
significant measures, some difficult yet necessary measures, to 
get back to balance in three years. If it wasn’t hard, Mr. 
Speaker, everyone would do it. 
 
How do we find ourselves facing such a challenge, you ask? As 
the Premier explained in his pre-budget address, despite our 
more diversified economy, we still have an overreliance on 
non-renewal resource revenues, and those resource revenues 
dropped by over a billion dollars in the 2014-15 budget year 



1954 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2017 

and they have stayed that way. Mr. Speaker, that’s three straight 
years of a dramatic decrease to resource revenue forecast over 
$1.3 billion per year, namely oil and potash prices. No one 
expected that. 
 
The resource sector slowdown led to a corporate tax revenue 
going down by hundreds of millions, depleting reserves and the 
rainy day fund. But as a government, we will face the facts and 
take responsibility for our role in the matter. And as a 
government we will responsibly move forward by rebalancing 
our spending and our revenues to deal with this new reality. 
 
These tough choices mean controlling and reducing government 
spending. These tough choices mean restructuring the tax base 
to reduce our reliance on resource revenues. These tough 
choices mean there’s a shift away from the reliance on the 
volatility of resource revenue and a shift towards consumption 
taxes. I have heard economist after economist talk about this 
being the best model moving forward. That is how we will face 
our responsibility as government, however the NDP disagrees 
with this choice but presents no alternative. 
 
How are we going to do this, Mr. Speaker? Let’s start with 
controlling and reducing government spending. We started with 
ourselves, Mr. Speaker. As of April 1st the Premier, cabinet 
ministers, and all MLAs will be taking a 3.5 per cent pay cut. 
We will take the lead and model what we are asking of others, 
our government employees both in scope and out of scope. The 
fact is the government spends about $7 billion per year on 
public sector compensation, so reducing government spending 
on compensation by 3.5 per cent needs to be part of the plan. 
 
Transformational change, Mr. Speaker, is to provide the best 
possible services to the people of this province at the lowest 
possible cost to taxpayers. Just like a business looks to address 
inefficiencies in its operations, we have addressed inefficiencies 
within government. Transformational change means moving us 
in a more efficient, more effective, and responsible provincial 
economy. If it wasn’t hard, Mr. Speaker, everyone would do it. 
 
One of these transformational changes has been the 
consolidation of 12 regional health authorities into one. With a 
health budget of 5.6 billion, it is anticipated that that there will 
be between 10 and $20 million in savings through reduced 
administration and increased efficiency starting next year. This 
health budget has increased 53 per cent since 2007, and this 
government is committed to improving front-line health care. 
 
Long-term care homes will see fees increase for some residents 
based on income, but approximately 50 per cent of the residents 
will see no change and will continue to pay the minimum 
monthly fee. That is reassuring for the good work that is done at 
Stensrud Lodge, a long-term care facility in my constituency. 
 
Although some services previously provided by the government 
will be phased out, such as the hearing aid plan, one needs to 
remember that coverage for low-income residents will continue 
to be provided by government. Even with these tough decisions 
being made, this province will still remain stronger than it was 
under previous NDP governments. 
 
A difficult decision was made to end the subsidy and wind 
down STC, the only publicly owned provincial bus company in 

the country. Ridership had declined dramatically, costs 
continued to escalate, and the per-passenger subsidy of $94 per 
passenger was no longer sustainable. Only two of the 27 routes 
are profitable, and ridership has declined by approximately 77 
per cent since 1980. Despite concerted efforts of this 
government to reverse the trend, the results continued to look 
bleak. 
 
Another transformational change initiative involves the winding 
down of executive air. Since 2007 when this government took 
office, use of executive air is down by 73 per cent. My, what a 
difference from the days of the NDP. It is expected that the 
decision could save up to 1 million per year. 
 
Now we will look at measures in this budget to modernize and 
expand the tax base. The provincial sales tax is being raised by 
one point from 5 to 6 per cent, and a number of PST 
exemptions are being eliminated to meet the current financial 
challenge we are facing. For example PST will now be applied 
to children’s clothing, restaurant meals, and snack foods. It will 
not be applied to diapers, Mr. Speaker. Even with the PST 
increase, Saskatchewan will have the lowest PST in the country 
among provinces with the PST. 
 
Good news for those in this province who buy used cars: the 
PST exemption for used cars will continue; however the value 
of a trade-in will no longer be deductible in determining the 
PST on the purchase of a new vehicle. 
 
Municipal revenue sharing maintains the formula based on one 
point of the PST. This revenue sharing is more than a 103 per 
cent increase since this government came to power 10 years 
ago. 
 
This budget adjusts the education property tax mill rates in 
order to fund 40 per cent of the cost of K to 12 education. In 
recent years the education property taxes remained unchanged 
while education costs have continued to increase. The share of 
education costs funded by the education property tax has been 
approximately 35 per cent in recent years. This budget restores 
the 60/40 balance that this government committed to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in November of 2016 our Education minister 
appointed Dan Perrins to lead work on a kindergarten to grade 
12 educational governance review. Following the release of the 
Perrins report, Minister Morgan appointed a six-person 
advisory panel to lead consultations with the education sector 
and the public on the governance options presented in the 
Perrins report. This panel met with more than 45 stakeholder 
groups and received more than 3,800 online submissions from 
residents of the province. There was strong public support 
during the consultations for publicly elected local trustees. 
 
As a former trustee with the Greater Saskatoon Catholic Board 
of Education for 13 years, I was pleased with this government’s 
decision to accept the final report from the panel on education 
governance renewal. School boards will remain publicly elected 
in this province and there will be no major school division 
boundary changes. 
 
We look forward to the 18 new joint-use schools opening in the 
fall of this year, including the eight new schools in Saskatoon. 
The major renovations at Holy Cross High School and École St. 



March 28, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1955 

Matthew Elementary School in my constituency are complete. I 
would remind you, Mr. Speaker, this Saskatchewan Party 
government has built 40 new or replacement schools and has 
funded 25 major school renovations. This contrasts with the 
NDP who closed 176 schools. There are over 750 more teachers 
employed in this province, while under the NDP from 2000 to 
2007 the number of teachers dropped by 400. Those are the 
facts. 
 
I applaud this government’s commitment to continue to support 
Saskatchewan’s most vulnerable people, Mr. Speaker. There is 
an increase of 73 million, or 6.9 per cent, to the budget of 
Social Services. The ministry’s budget increases to 1.125 
billion, the largest ever for Social Services in our province’s 
history. The budget for child and family programs will increase 
by 13.4 million and disability programs will see an increase of 
2.3 million. The NDP claim to be the champions of those most 
in need in our province, yet in the 16 years when they had the 
chance, they failed to deliver. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you have heard often the three priority areas of 
health, education, and social services. They make up nearly 
three-quarters of the total expense of government, or a 
combined 10.6 billion in this budget. But it bears repeating: this 
budget continues to invest in the programs and services that are 
valued by the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now to the third area of focus in this budget, keeping the 
economy of Saskatchewan strong. All three personal income tax 
rates will be reduced by a half point in 2017 and another half 
point in 2019, and will save Saskatchewan taxpayers over $82 
million in this budget year alone. Even with the PST increase in 
this budget, every resident of this province at every level of 
income will be paying significantly less in income tax and PST 
combined than they did in 2007 when the NDP were in power. 
Economists recommend this approach as income taxes have a 
greater negative affect on the economy than consumption taxes. 
 
People of this province will pay among the lowest income taxes 
in the country. They will keep more of their hard-earned money 
in their own pockets. Our government in the last 10 years has 
delivered the largest tax reductions in Saskatchewan’s history. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance also introduced reductions 
in the corporate income tax rates, a half point this year and 
another half point in July of 2019. When fully implemented, the 
corporate tax rate will move from 12 per cent to 11 per cent, 
making Saskatchewan’s corporate tax rate and the taxes on 
manufacturing and processing the lowest in Canada. It will help 
us to continue to attract new investment, new jobs, and new 
opportunities to this province. Saskatchewan remains the 
second lowest in the country for cost of living in all categories. 
 
Let us not forget that when this budget is fully implemented, 
Saskatchewan will be the only province in Canada with no 
carbon tax of any kind. As the country’s greatest exporter per 
capita, a carbon tax will drive costs up, competitiveness down, 
and lead to job losses. We stand firmly opposed to the federal 
government’s carbon tax plan. 
 
My constituency of Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood is said to be 
the oldest postal code in Canada in the area around Market Mall 
called the Nutana Suburban Centre. This area has the highest 

concentration of seniors per capita in the country, Mr. Speaker. 
The seniors in my constituency will benefit from funding 
increases to the personal care home benefit and the seniors’ 
income plan. 
 
Under this government, Mr. Speaker, there are 15 new 
long-term care facilities, while the NDP record is that they 
closed 1,200 long-term beds. Under this government, the 
seniors’ income plan benefit has tripled. When the members 
opposite were in power, there was no increase to this benefit for 
16 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not all gloom and doom as the NDP would 
have us believe; there is plenty to celebrate. There are signs of 
confidence in our economy, signs of renewal. There were 8,000 
jobs created in this province from January to February of this 
year, the highest percentage rate increase among the provinces 
and over half of the new jobs in Canada in that time period. 
 
Another noteworthy statistic is that Saskatchewan reached more 
than 1,000 in average weekly earnings in December of 2016, 
the highest average weekly earnings in the province’s history. 
Through the innovation and determination of the people of this 
province and the efforts of our Premier, exports have increased 
by 62 per cent since 2006; our GDP [gross domestic product] 
has increased 25 per cent; our retail trade is up 61 per cent, the 
highest growth in the country; and wholesale trade has seen a 
90 per cent increase, again leading the provinces. 
 
Our agriculture exports have increased a whopping 186 per 
cent. Canola exports alone grew a remarkable 524 per cent 
since 2007. And Saskatchewan’s manufacturing sales have 
increased by 44 per cent since 2006, again the highest growth 
among the provinces. 
 
This exceptional growth doesn’t happen by chance, Mr. 
Speaker. I remember a conversation I had last year with the 
deputy consul general for the People’s Republic of China. He 
spoke about our Premier’s visits to his country. Efforts by our 
Premier to sell our province internationally have paid dividends. 
It is the feather in our provincial cap that Saskatchewan is 
ranked as the most attractive place in the world, out of 104 
jurisdictions, for mining companies to invest. And this province 
came in fourth in the world as the most attractive place for oil 
and gas companies to invest. 
 
It’s nice to talk popularity polls and surveys, Mr. Speaker, but 
even better is when a person or a family makes the pivotal 
decision to move, and moves to Saskatchewan. I recently read 
in the Legislative Library’s newsletter that in 1911, six years 
after entering Confederation, Saskatchewan’s population had 
doubled to just under a half a million people. This was more 
than Alberta, more than Manitoba. There were more 
homesteader applications from 1900 to 1910 than in the entire 
1800s, and 60 per cent of these entries ended up coming to 
Saskatchewan. We were the fastest-growing province in 
Canada. I won’t go on about what happened from those early 
days after we joined Confederation until recent times. We 
would be here for days. But when you are a perennial underdog, 
it doesn’t give people a lot of reasons to move here. 
 
Despite our current revenue challenges, our province has now 
reached a new record and we’re back on track with population 



1956 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2017 

growth numbers like the 1920s. We’re now flying the have 
province flag. As I mentioned in a recent 75-minute debate I 
participated in, every single city in the province saw their 
populations increase in the past five years, and towns and cities 
and villages also welcome new neighbours. 
 
[15:15] 
 
When we welcome these new residents, thankfully they will 
have more doctors to choose from as we have radically changed 
that picture under this government. I met one of those new 
doctors on Friday, as my family doctor of over 30 years has 
recently retired due to health challenges and I needed to find a 
new one. During our initial visit, we talked about 
dermatologists. I was encouraged to hear that there are now five 
dermatologists practising in Saskatoon, as this was a bleak 
picture for quite some time. 
 
How do we explain this unprecedented growth, unprecedented 
investment, unprecedented population numbers? Did all of this 
just happen because our beloved Saskatchewan Roughriders are 
a Canadian favourite? Mr. Speaker, I think there is more to it 
than that, and I point to the policies of this government as the 
explanation. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s rather amusing how one changes 
their perspective depending on which side of the House they are 
sitting on. When the member from Saskatoon Centre was 
minister of the Environment and the NDP cut 500 jobs in the 
2004 provincial budget, a large number of those from that 
particular ministry, he stated, and I quote: 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately as a result of this need to 
reduce expenditures, we also had to reduce staff, and this 
was not an easy decision to make . . . 
 
But in order to govern effectively, we had to have 
responsible finances and not to back down from these 
difficult choices. 

 
Now fast-forward to the day following the budget when that 
same member stated in this House, and I quote: 
 

Mr. Speaker, I think this is hugely ironical, the mess that 
we find ourselves . . . this government has created, that 
they’re expecting the cleaners, our cleaners, to clean it up. 
 
But this is the kind of mean, vindictive people that are 
running our government on that side who refuse to take 
any responsibility for the state of affairs. 

 
This member went on to say, and I quote, “It almost looks like 
out of a Dickens book, doesn’t it?” 
 
Perhaps the member was referring to the Dickens’s A Tale of 
Two Cities and its famous opening line, “It was the best of 
times, it was the worst of times.” The best of times speaks to the 
unprecedented growth of our province under this government. 
The worst of times speaks to the sustained drop in resource 
revenue that no one saw coming. So when the NDP were 
running the show, it was called difficult choices. But when this 
government faces those same decisions, we are mean and 
vindictive people. I take exception to that, Mr. Speaker. 

The day after the budget, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition asked our Premier, and I quote, “Why wasn’t he 
straight with [the] Saskatchewan people?” It brought back 
memories of the last provincial election and the fact that the 
NDP made 18 election promises without accounting for the cost 
to Saskatchewan taxpayers, a $1 billion price tag for over four 
years to the people of this province, huge deficits that would 
have not included the prolonged low commodity prices that 
we’ve encountered. Now who wasn’t being straight? 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were many words of support for the 
approach that was taken by the Minister of Finance in this 
budget, and I will share but a few. John Gormley wrote in the 
StarPhoenix on Friday, and I quote: 
 

This budget, the Saskatchewan Party’s 10th, chooses tough 
choices now rather than deferring. To share restraint across 
a broad spectrum as we all respond to a natural resources 
revenue crunch is not easy but [it’s] necessary. 

 
SARM president Ray Orb stated in a news release, and I quote: 
 

Despite a significant decline in revenue, the Government 
of Saskatchewan has kept its promise to dedicate 1 point of 
the PST to municipal revenue sharing. We applaud the 
government for staying true to its commitment to 
municipalities. 

 
And the Association of Saskatchewan Realtors released a 
statement, and I quote: 
 

. . . ASR grades the new provincial budget [as] a net 
positive, saying it shows courage in taking difficult 
measures to tackle the deficit and imagination in shifting 
toward a tax system that favours growth. 
 
. . . [recognizing] that balancing the books will create gains 
in everyone’s longer-term interest. We also recognize that 
taxes on transactions are more growth-positive than taxes 
on assets or income. 
 

So there you have it, Mr. Speaker. This government is meeting 
the challenges head on and facing the facts, from the reality of 
ongoing shortfalls of resource revenue and the resulting 
corporate tax revenue decline, and the pressures of population 
growth on vital services. This budget faces our new reality of 
lower resource revenues head on by controlling and reducing 
government spending, restructuring the tax base, and charts a 
course of ensuring that Saskatchewan’s budget returns to 
balanced by 2019. This budget prudently includes a 300 million 
contingency to protect us against revenue declines for things we 
can’t predict like floods and forest fires. 
 
We will keep our economy strong. We will improve our 
competitive edge to remain an economic leader in Canada. Mr. 
Speaker, we will commit to protecting our AAA credit rating. 
We will not add more debt and resulting higher interest 
payments that could impact the credit rating this government 
has worked so hard to achieve. There were tough choices to 
make in this budget, Mr. Speaker, make no mistake about it, but 
when the going gets tough, the tough get going. 
 
We will work harder to meet that challenge. That is the 



March 28, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1957 

Saskatchewan way. Mr. Speaker, there is more work to do and 
as the government, we know that. But I can think of no better 
government to shoulder that work than this Saskatchewan Party 
government. As I stated at the beginning of my remarks, Mr. 
Speaker, if it wasn’t hard, everyone would do it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the motion brought forward 
by our Finance minister, and I do not support the amendment by 
the member from Saskatoon Nutana. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a week 
left, it’s next week coming up, it’s going to be April 4th, and it 
is a great honour to be here. It’s going to be one year from 2016 
to 2017, and thank you very much to all colleagues and cabinets 
and their staffs for all co-operation with me. 
 
Also the previous week, Mr. Speaker, I remember that . . . It 
was 2000, last week of March, my wife came from Pakistan to 
this country. It has been about 16, 17 years today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with great confidence, I would like to establish my 
statement about our economy. Our economy is heading in the 
right direction, with a record high number of job growth, record 
number of businesses emerging in the economy, and 
Saskatchewan people have the lowest tax in the nation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the price of commodities is at its lowest in the last 
three years, which slowed down the economic momentum of 
our country and affected provincial economies. Because of the 
low price of our commodities, our resources revenue is down by 
$1 billion per year. Our employment is affected directly and 
indirectly, but we still see more businesses and jobs emerging in 
our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is not only 1 billion less revenue. Also the tax 
revenue is down due to resources sector slowdown, and we 
reduced the corporate tax revenue. Mr. Speaker, keeping up 
with the growth momentum and creating 8,000 jobs in February 
while the population has increased by 77,000 and in the hard 
work challenges we accepted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federal government projects a $28.5 billion 
deficit. Alberta shows $10.3 billion deficit. Manitoba is going 
to be 1 billion deficit. Mr. Speaker, we have gone through the 
10 years period under NDP government where the people of 
Saskatchewan were ignored and were looked by blind eye and 
only the lip service was provided. Mr. Speaker, the objective of 
this government is to serve the Saskatchewan people at the best 
and the highest level they deserve. And the Saskatchewan Party 
is showing practical work for people’s interest by investing in 
our infrastructure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, remember when the NDP interim leader brought 
the petition about trucks using Dewdney Avenue to go to the 
GTH. And when the Leader of the Opposition noticed that there 
is more traffic on Dewdney Avenue, he must have understood 
that this heavy traffic is the result of growth and the better and 
stronger economy in our province. Mr. Speaker, a large 
population and emerging businesses in our economy brought 
more traffic to that road. At that given time, the Saskatchewan 
government identified the need of a bypass in Regina, bridges, 

and doubling of highways, keeping our roads safe and efficient 
while at the same time having traffic and hazardous material 
movement away from the city. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one death on the road is too many, and we cannot 
afford it. Why NDP continue to oppose this? It is troubling, 
taking a local bypass price tag. The budget could have been 
balanced if not building it, Mr. Speaker, as promised. And we 
kept Saskatchewan strong, and again we are now meeting the 
challenge. The money from this project is being invested into 
this province. It’s for the safety of the people of Saskatchewan. 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP call the bypass project mismanagement. 
The answer is, we do not compromise the safety of 
Saskatchewan people with a dollar amount. 
 
The $1.1 billion, 2017-2018 Ministry of Highways and 
Infrastructure budget will see work continue on major projects 
and 990 kilometres of provincial highway across Saskatchewan 
over the coming year. Mr. Speaker, this year’s budget includes 
$343 million to start or continue construction across the 
province, as well, $500 million for the Regina bypass. 
 
Here are a few highlights, Mr. Speaker, major projects to 
improve safety and increase capacity on some of 
Saskatchewan’s busiest highways, while also improving their 
safety and efficiency: continued work on a new overpass at 
Warman and Martensville; continued work on twinning 
Highway 7 between Saskatoon and Delisle; continued work on 
twinning Highway 39 between Estevan and Bienfait; 
construction of two sets of passing lanes on Highway 5 between 
Saskatoon and Humboldt; further planning for future twinning 
and passing lanes on Highways 6 and 39 from Estevan to 
Regina; and begin planning for passing lanes on Highway 4 
north of North Battleford and Highway 7 from Rosetown to the 
Alberta border; 150 kilometres of rural highway upgrades, 
including Highway 4 south of Cadillac, Highway 51 near 
Kelfield, Highway 80 north of Esterhazy, and Highway 322 
north of Silton. 
 
Investing more than $53 million to build, operate, and maintain 
highways and airports in northern Saskatchewan. Thirty major 
bridges, rehabilitation and replacement, as well as numerous 
culvert projects across the province. More than 20 million for 
urban and rural municipal road projects and airports — funding 
that is over and above revenue sharing. For the second time in a 
row, the highway budget tops $1 billion. This is the 
second-largest transportation budget in provincial history. This 
builds on our government’s record and commitment to 
infrastructure, which grows our economy and improves our 
safety. 
 
With this year’s budget, we have now invested over 7.4 billion 
to improve more than 12 000 kilometres of roads and highways 
in Saskatchewan: 990 kilometres of provincial highways; 150 
kilometres of rural highways upgrades; 300 kilometres of 
repaving; 400 kilometres of other treatments; 140 of resealing; 
14 million for the support of economic growth and safety of 
rural municipalities; 6.7 million for construction maintenance 
partnerships with urban municipalities; 700 kilometres for 
community airports improvement, 50/50 cost sharing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all remember the disaster in our health care in 
Saskatchewan during the NDP government, where they chose to 



1958 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2017 

close 52 hospitals while having the longest surgical wait times 
in Canada; 1,200 long-term care beds were mercilessly closed, 
and zero increase to seniors’ income plan benefits for 16 years. 
We remember when Saskatchewan lost 450 nurses and 173 
doctors from 2001 to 2006. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Here on this side, the picture is totally different, Mr. Speaker. 
Saskatchewan is investing $5.2 billion this year in core health 
services and infrastructure to meet the health care needs of 
Saskatchewan people. The 2017-18 health budget has increased 
$38.6 million, which is point seven per cent from 2016 to 2017, 
and it’s more than 51 per cent since 2007. The health budget 
includes 3.4 billion in funding for regional health authorities, 
and this is an increase of 1.2 per cent over last year and 57.9 per 
cent more than the regional health authority allocation in 2007. 
It includes a new $12 million investment to address 
overcapacity pressure and emergency department wait times in 
Regina and in Saskatoon, and $24.4 million in funding to 
address services pressure and operating cost. 
 
This government will meet its commitment to provide 
additional funding to the Canadian National Institute for the 
Blind with a 250,000 funding increase in 2017-2018. Mr. 
Speaker, the province is also providing $750,000 to begin a 
human papilloma virus vaccination program for boys, 
expanding availability of the program that began in 2008. 
 
Mr. Speaker, capital investment in 2017-2018 totals $83.7 
million, a 17.2 per cent increase, affirming our commitment to 
the children’s hospital of Saskatchewan investments, including 
15.5 million for the children’s hospital of Saskatchewan which 
also received $8 million for information technology needs, and 
4.4 million in operating funds. The Leader integrated facility 
will receive $6.7 million and $3.5 million will fund electrical 
renewal project at Regina General and Pasqua hospitals. Mr. 
Speaker, the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency will also receive 
more than $170 million and $3.3 million increase in funding to 
provide cancer treatment to more patients. Mr. Speaker, the 
government will continue to subsidize 83 per cent of all of the 
overall cost of long-term care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our students are very dear to us, so we strive to 
provide them with quality education, not throw debt on their 
shoulders. Mr. Speaker, I do like to remind this House about the 
closure of 176 schools by the NDP government when their 
budget met challenges time. I do like to tell this House that our 
government made a different decision. Instead of closing 
schools, we are building 40 brand new schools or replacing 
schools and 25 major renovations. I do like to ask the member 
across the floor when that many schools were closed, where did 
those 400 teachers go? And how difficult was it for the teachers 
with those crowded classrooms? Mr. Speaker, we have 754 
more teachers and 164 more student support teachers. 
 
It was an . . . [inaudible] . . . disaster in the education system 
when the NDP underfunded kindergarten to grade 12 education, 
leading to significant education property tax increase. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the Saskatchewan government increased kindergarten 
to grade 12 operating funding by 32 per cent since 2007, 
compared to an enrolment growth of 10 per cent. 
 

Mr. Speaker, in 94 days, the new joint school in my 
constituency, Regina Pasqua, will be opening and students, 
parents, teachers are very excited and waiting for the next 
school year to start classes in their new school. For the 
community, École Harbour Landing School and St. Kateri 
Tekakwitha School will be milestones in Harbour Landing. 
 
We are spending $2.02 billion in 2017-2018 budget, a 
construction of 18 new schools in Regina, Saskatoon, Warman, 
and Martensville which will also be opening in 94 days. Mr. 
Speaker, we continue our investment of 119.1 million for 
capital projects to complete 21 new schools and one major 
renovation that will open this fall; $43.2 million for 
preventative maintenance and renewal and emergent funds, an 
increase of 5.2 million or 13.7 per cent; $31.8 million to 
complete four major capital projects including three new 
schools in Regina, that is Sacred Heart, École Connaught, and 
Scott Collegiate. And a major expansion and renovation of St. 
Brieux School; $2 million in design of funding for two new 
projects, consolidation and replacement of schools in Rosthern 
and Weyburn; $2.8 million for the purchase of seven new 
relocated units; $48.3 million to complete the 18 joint-use 
schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, $55.8 million is being provided for the child care 
funding. 889 new spaces will be created, including 810 spaces 
at the 18 new joint schools in Saskatoon, Regina, Warman, and 
Martensville, bringing the total number of new spaces created 
in the past 10 years to more than 6,000. 
 
And 3.5 million in operating funding for northern and regional 
libraries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have increased capital funding for 
post-secondary institutions by 40 per cent over 10 years while 
the NDP increased 20 per cent over 16 years which is only 1 per 
cent per year. Mr. Speaker, the 2017-2018 budget continues to 
invest in post-secondary students while controlling costs to help 
meet the financial challenges facing the province. High school 
graduates from Saskatchewan will continue to receive $500 per 
year in direct tuition relief through the Saskatchewan 
Advantage Scholarship. Post-secondary students will continue 
to get their tuition costs back after graduation through the 
graduation retention program which provides up to $20,000 in 
income tax credit to graduates who live and work in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition, targeted funding is being redirected 
from the University of Saskatchewan’s base operating budget to 
the College of Medicine. The College of Medicine will receive 
a total of $69 million to support accreditation and sustainability. 
Students will also benefit from over 46 million in key financial 
support: 26 million for the Student Aid Fund to provide student 
grants and loans, 12 million for scholarships including the 
Saskatchewan Advantage Scholarship, and 8 million for the 
Saskatchewan advantage grant for education savings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of Agriculture’s budget for 2017-18 
of $388.6 million continues to support Saskatchewan’s strong 
agriculture industry. Business risk management programs will 
be fully funded with an investment of $264.1 million, an 
increase of almost 4 per cent. Funding of 71.2 million is again 
being provided for strategic initiatives under the 



March 28, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1959 

federal-provincial Growing Forward 2 agreement. The budget 
continues the province’s investment in agriculture research with 
$26.8 million. For crop insurance premiums and program 
delivery, 172.2 million is being provided. 

Mr. Speaker, our government’s 2017-2018 budget is very 
supportive to Saskatchewan’s most vulnerable people with an 
increase of 73 million, which is 6.9 per cent. This brings the 
ministry’s budget to 1.125 million, the largest ever in Social 
Services history. 

Mr. Speaker, despite the fact of commodity prices low in all 
different sectors, our exports have increased and agriculture 
export has increased 44 per cent since 2006. Our 
manufacturing, wholesale, and retail trade sales have increased. 

Our average weekly earning has increased 39 per cent. Mr. 
Speaker, it is at 39 per cent since 2006. We remember NDP job 
creation record in Canada from 2000 to 2007, just half the 
national rate of job growth. And from 2007 to 2006, our 
government holds the record of having the second job creation 
in Canada, nearly the double national rate of the job growth. 
Mr. Speaker, it has the lowest PST in our province. A family of 
four in Saskatchewan pays no income tax on their first $50,495 
of income, the highest tax-free threshold in Canada, where the 
NDP raised taxes 21 times in 16 years. 

Mr. Speaker, I cannot understand the math of the NDP. There 
are only 16 budgets in 16 years, so how can they raise taxes 21 
times? Mr. Speaker, the budget will continue to expand 
Saskatchewan’s economy and opportunities over the last 
decade. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to end this by expressing my full 
support for this budget. I believe the minister and all who 
worked so hard on this did a great job and fully understand 
what is the best for our province, even though tough decisions 
needed to be made. I do not support the amendment as the 
budget has my full support, and we are meeting the challenge. 
Thanks, Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 

Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am proud today 
to stand up and respond to the budget. I know there’s a lot of 
people who would like to have my position here where they 
could respond to the budget as well, and I hope I can speak for a 
lot of people and some of the concerns that they’ve brought to 
my attention. 

But first of all, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank a few people in my 
life about how they’ve supported me. Like the member across 
just said a little while ago, that it’s almost a year now that the 
election from last year, and so in the year it’s been quite a 
transition and a learning experience. 

There’s been a lot of people in my life that have helped through 
that, my partner being a big influence in my life, Darren. And 
he oftentimes listens to me and we’ll have a lot of conversations 
of things that are going on. And it’s kind of a good thing 
because previous to this position, I wasn’t able to talk to him a 
lot about the kind of work I did. But now he gets to watch me 

right here, and he knows if I’ve come to work or not, and he 
understands what’s going on in this House here. So it’s nice to 
have someone who’s very supportive. 

And I also have . . . I’m really grateful for the kids also in our 
lives, and I want to thank my stepson Jordon and my 
stepdaughter Taylor for taking care of my two babies, my dogs 
Roxy and Diesel, when I’m away, and making sure that they’re 
okay, because oftentimes, Mr. Speaker, Darren and I are on 
opposite sides of the province, like this week I believe he’s in 
Deschambault. So he works up north and I come all the way 
down south so we rely on the kids to be watching the dogs. But 
soon enough, they might be out of the house so we might have 
to look at other options. 

And Jordon’s graduating this year. He was accepted at both the 
U of S [University of Saskatchewan] and the U of R [University 
of Regina], and just last week he told us that he chose the U of 
S. I kind of was hoping he would choose the U or R too, but 
like teenagers are, they go with their friends, and most of his 
friends were going to the U of S and he’s going to study 
engineering. So that will be very good for him. 

And my daughter is also in university through the U of S and 
she’ll be doing her two years of Arts and Science and then she’s 
heading into the school of Social Work. So she’ll be finishing 
her final two years from the U of R. So we’re very proud of her 
as well. My daughter is a very big support in my life as well, 
and I think she misses me quite a bit while I’m away and so we 
Snapchat and do all those social media aspects of keeping in 
touch. But we try to spend as much time as we can on the 
weekends when I’m home. 

This weekend will be definitely a family weekend, and I look 
forward to it because some other weekends have been very busy 
with activities. But this weekend hopefully a few people will 
get some good meals because I oftentimes hear that that’s not 
the case when I’m not around. And so we’ll be having some 
family get-togethers this weekend, and also with my two little 
grandsons, and they’re just so beautiful. 

[15:45] 

My grandson Rhyker turned two in February, and my grandson 
Soyer, he’s about 20 months because he’ll be turning two in 
August, and they’re just developing such personalities and 
they’re so much fun to have. And we went to Bubble Guppies a 
couple of weeks ago and they just had a blast. And so I look 
forward to spring and summertime when we can get out and 
play a little bit, but this weekend we’re probably going to have 
some sleepovers so I’ll probably be quite tired on Monday 
when I come back. 

My family’s big, and my constituency assistant, Rose, she’s a 
major support in my life as well. And like I said when my 
daughter’s missing me, I think sometimes she heads over to the 
office and visits with Rose. So she’s been a surrogate mother to 
her while I’ve been away and she’s been a great support as well. 

So I want to thank everybody, and my friends who sometimes I 
neglect because I’m so busy, but they still hang around with me 
when I’ve got the opportunity and we have some events 
planned to spend some time together. So I’ve got such a great 



1960 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2017 

support system and I really appreciate everybody. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, today I want to talk a little bit about this 
budget. This budget was titled Meeting the Challenge, but I feel 
that it’s more appropriate to call it creating a challenge. I feel 
that this budget is about investing in some of the Sask Party 
priorities of making the most vulnerable pay and allowing to 
have tax breaks for corporations and the most wealthy. And I 
believe that the priorities of this budget were not the priorities 
of the average resident in Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m going to start with talking about the elimination of the 
grants-in-lieu for municipalities. Mr. Speaker, this is going to 
cost millions of dollars, and I compare this to cutting your 
children’s allowance because you overspent on your credit card. 
It’s a very unfair burden to place on our municipalities to pay 
for the mismanagement of this government. 
 
Municipalities were happy to see that the municipal revenue 
sharing remained, but as SUMA indicated in a press release, the 
quote is, “Municipal revenue sharing is being effectively gutted 
for urban municipalities by provincial government downloading 
and revenue clawbacks.” Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party 
government gives with one hand and takes with the other, and 
SUMA indicated that “Our members are outraged and so are 
we.” 
 
And I have some quotes from some municipal leaders. This one 
quote from the former Sask Party candidate in Regina, ward 2 
councillor Bob Hawkins says, “This is a budget that comes like 
a thief in the night.” And then I have a quote here from former 
Conservative candidate and Saskatoon ward 5 councillor Randy 
Donauer: “This is a transfer of a tax burden from one level of 
government to another because they can.” 
 
And from Regina Mayor Michael Fougere: “It came out of 
nowhere. Many municipalities have already set their budgets 
and that’s why there’s some angst and concern and anger from 
this council.” 
 
And Moose Jaw city manager Matt Noble says, “This is out of 
the blue. It’s a total blindside.” And Yorkton Mayor Bob 
Maloney says, “Just to pass along what’s been dumped on our 
plate would need a 10 per cent increase in taxes.” And North 
Battleford Mayor Ryan Bater says, “Well, outrage is putting it 
lightly. We are absolutely blindsided by this budget.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, this has hit municipalities, and they’re really 
concerned of how they’re going to work their budgets because, 
unlike the provincial government, municipalities need to have a 
balanced budget. And so this is going to result in cuts to 
services for residents or it’s going to mean more tax increases, 
and average families can’t afford that. 
 
And so we have some communities who are losing almost half 
of the amount of the revenue sharing that they receive, for 
example, Yorkton. And we know that this elimination of 
grants-in-lieu are really going to hit communities like Estevan 
really hard because they’ve been impacted by the resource drop, 
the decline. And how are these families going to adjust if they 
have a high increase of property taxes? It’s just more burden to 
place on them as well. 
 

And we know that this is not the only thing that’s going to be 
impacting municipalities. We know education tax is going up 
10 per cent. So we have more taxes on education, but we’re 
getting less put into education because education got an extreme 
hit in this budget. 
 
We have the cuts to library services, and we know that library 
services are important. We have a lot of people who have been 
contacting us, and I’m sure even members across, about how 
important these library services are to them. And so if this 
government continues on their plan, municipalities are going to 
be pressured to take this over, and they’ve already been hit with 
a resource drop. 
 
So we have cuts to heritage and culture funding, and I haven’t 
heard exactly all of the aspects of that. And so that’s probably 
going to be coming within the days and weeks ahead. 
 
And then we have the cuts to the regional parks. And, Mr. 
Speaker, last budget, many of the communities were hit with 
that cut, and again with this budget they’re hit again. And it 
seems to me that the heaviest hit were Saskatoon and Regina 
with Meewasin Valley Authority and Wascana Park. And so 
both of those cities were hit hard too with the grants-in-lieu 
being eliminated. 
 
Communities weren’t prepared for these levels of cuts, Mr. 
Speaker. They were prepared that, you know, there was going 
to be some tightening of the belt buckle, and they implemented 
some of that in their budgets, but not what equals millions and 
millions of dollars. And there was no consultation and no 
contingency plan for them to implement these changes, which I 
think was very irresponsible and unprofessional for this 
government to implement. 
 
And so when I look at Prince Albert in itself, in this budget 
there was no mention of money for a second bridge, and we 
definitely need a second bridge. They continue to talk about 
doing surveys on our bridge and seeing how much life it has, 
but we can’t afford to only have one bridge and continue to 
have one. We need two bridges, Mr. Speaker. And the residents 
of Prince Albert should not be put on the backs of them, 
because it is a regional bridge. It’s one that’s used by many in 
this province to get up to the North and to stimulate economy in 
the North. 
 
We also didn’t see any money put towards Victoria Hospital to 
address the wait times and the overcrowding. And there was 
talk of some money being put towards Saskatoon, Regina, but 
Prince Albert also has some issues. And this issue was brought 
up actually at the chamber of commerce meeting that we had in 
Prince Albert where the Finance minister came and spoke to the 
audience. And he indicates, and I’ll quote from the article that 
was in the Daily Herald: 
 

If there’s a problem in ER, the Minister of Health needs to 
know that and senior management here in the health region 
need to know that. If it’s a matter of dollars, we have some 
additional dollars in the budget. Regina and Saskatoon tend 
to be the most clogged areas, but if that’s the case here in 
Prince Albert, we need to address that. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I wonder why did the Minister of Health not know 



March 28, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1961 

about this? We have a cabinet minister right from Prince Albert 
sitting at the table, and he should be telling the Minister of 
Health that our Victoria Hospital is oftentimes overcrowded and 
our ER wait times are extreme. And what’s the benefit of 
having a cabinet minister at the table if the issues of Prince 
Albert aren’t going to be addressed right there? And so I 
thought that was a little bit sad and disturbing that these issues 
are not being discussed right here. And people were pretty 
excited to have a cabinet minister representing Prince Albert, 
but obviously the voice is not there. 
 
We also didn’t see any money for mobile crisis, and we know 
that they deal with crisis issues. We know that there’s been a lot 
of crisis issues in Prince Albert. We have one of the highest 
levels of poverty. We have highest levels of domestic violence. 
We have highest levels of suicide rates, and we had cuts to our 
mobile crisis unit. Instead of investing money into mobile crisis, 
they’re just going to continue to off-load the crisis intervention 
work on to other agencies like the Victoria Hospital ER 
[emergency room] and our city police. So that’s not very cost 
effective, and it’s not the best way to manage crises either. 
 
Our minister from Prince Albert, the one that’s responsible for 
Crown Investments Corporation, was the one that signed and is 
sealing the deal to cut the grants-in-lieu, which is going to cost 
Prince Albert residents millions of dollars along, like I said 
before, along with a lot of other Saskatchewan residents. But 
when people in Prince Albert are starting to get their taxes 
increased, they could blame the minister for Prince Albert 
Carlton, the Minister for CIC, the member for Prince Albert 
Carlton because that is a definite big hit for Prince Albert. 
 
And then we have here, when discussing the multi-million 
dollar cuts to municipalities, the Minister for CIC was quoted 
saying, “It’s their way of contributing to the deficit, to the 
tougher economic times that the government is facing.” Mr. 
Speaker, municipalities did not cause or contribute to the 
provincial deficit, yet this government is wanting them to be 
responsible to pay for it. So that’s unacceptable. 
 
And we also have to remember that the member from Prince 
Albert Carlton is also the Minister for STC, who has made the 
ultimate decision on eliminating STC. And when talking about 
eliminating STC services, SUMA released a statement that said 
this is a vital service to Saskatchewan’s hometowns. People and 
businesses are being stranded by these cuts. This is a slap in the 
face to all SUMA members, but especially those in the North. 
 
Again no voice for Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. We’ve got more 
jobs that are lost. We’ve got taxes going up, nothing for 
resource development, and no money for infrastructure for 
Prince Albert. So you know, it’s very troubling when we know 
we have that minister right from our home community, and he’s 
not looking out for our best interests. 
 
And also community-based organizations lost a significant 
amount of money with the cuts to agencies that provide services 
to our most vulnerable, programs that were deemed as valuable 
and important by the Sask Party government until they became 
broke. And then they thought, oh, well maybe we could do 
without these programs. 
 
One of those programs is the parent mentoring program, and 

this is a program that was offered across the province. But I’m 
going to talk about the impact that it’s going to have on Prince 
Albert. 
 
Prince Albert Family Futures were the ones that implemented 
the parent mentoring program, and they’re being forced to lay 
off one of their outreach workers. So again, we’ve lost our crisis 
services, intervention programs. We’re losing a parent 
mentoring outreach worker, and outreach workers provide rides 
to medical appointments, milk coupons, and information on 
prenatal health. 
 
The executive director, Donna Strauss, worries that Prince 
Albert could see a spike in problematic pregnancies, perhaps 
even an increase in complications like fetal alcohol syndrome 
due to the cut in this program. She says, “When we are talking 
about the most vulnerable families, we’re talking about poverty. 
We are talking about the lack of information about prenatal 
care.” This, Mr. Speaker, is a backwards move. When we’re 
talking about reducing the caseload of social services, we need 
to provide the supportive services to families and the most 
vulnerable. 
 
When we’re talking about reducing the caseload for social 
services, we’re also seeing a lot of cuts that will reduce that; for 
example, the cuts to libraries. Mr. Speaker, people use the 
libraries to find employment. And as quoted in an article in the 
StarPhoenix: “For a province that likes to talk about this budget 
is about future generations, cutting already underfunded 
libraries hurts low income families, including children the 
hardest [hit].” 
 
[16:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also see cuts to job readiness programs. We 
see cuts to adult basic education and $2.1 million decrease in 
the provincial training allowance. Such backwards moves if 
we’re looking at, you know, reducing the caseloads for social 
services. And this makes me wonder, do the ministers talk and 
discuss plans together in a future direction? Because I realize a 
lot of these cuts were from other ministers and their portfolios, 
but if their priorities are one thing, shouldn’t they be discussing 
this together and working towards a plan? 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the areas of many that I find very troubling 
is the loss of spiritual services offered in the hospital, and the 
cuts to funeral services to people that are on assistance. And I 
would say that that was a very cruel and short-sighted decision. 
Saskatchewan is about to become the only province in Canada 
that will not pay for spiritual care in health region facilities. 
This is again another backwards move when we talk about 
promoting mental health. Philip Weaver from the Canadian 
Association for Spiritual Care said it well when he said: 
 

Without addressing those kinds of spiritual needs around 
connection and meaning, the physical body may heal but 
the spirit remains damaged. By ignoring this whole 
dimension of human existence, people are going to have 
prolonged distress, longer hospital stays, more expensive 
hospital stays. 

 
Mr. Speaker, spiritual care extends beyond patients and their 
family. The spiritual care aids also worked with health care 



1962 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2017 

professionals who might be struggling with the loss of a patient 
or a difficult situation that came within the health system. And I 
know that first and foremost because in Prince Albert we had a 
spiritual care aid, his name is Dennis Serfas, and he built a 
really good relationship not only with patients and families but 
with us staff members. And when we lost a client from suicide 
. . . And I can remember one case in particular, he came over 
and talked to us and wanted to make sure that we were handling 
things, and did some debriefing with us. And it was more than 
just religion, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It was about taking care of 
your spiritual side and your spiritual self, and that means a lot. 
 
And I know when my dad was dying in the hospital and the 
spiritual services would come, that meant a lot for us to have 
someone who said, you know, I’m thinking about you guys, and 
I want to make sure you’re doing okay. And that meant 
especially a lot for my mom who is a very spiritual person. My 
dad was in the hospital in the city and we come from a small 
town, so to have our priest from our town to come was not very 
likely. So this is another impact, I believe, for rural people who 
might not have the services locally available because when your 
health issues become severe, you do end up in Saskatoon or 
Regina. And so to not have this offered and saving simply a 
million dollars is cruel, cruel and short sighted, like I said 
before. 
 
But that’s not where the cuts end, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There’s 
been an increase to Social Services budget but that’s because 
the utilization rates are going up. So nobody’s benefits are 
going up. Actually it’s the opposite. According to a media 
release from the Ministry of Social Services, “Some benefits in 
the TEA, SAP, and SAID programs will be reduced or 
eliminated while others will be reviewed, for [an] estimated 
savings of up to $10.6 million.” 

 
So they were bragging about adding more, but they’re looking 
at reducing. And in the backgrounder, in this news release, it 
indicates that all TEA [transitional employment allowance] 
clients will be receiving $20 per month reduction. And they say, 
“For example, after July 1, a single parent in a major centre will 
receive $946 dollars per month after the change . . .” And right 
now they’re currently getting $966 per month. Wow, Mr. 
Speaker, a single mom is receiving less than $1,000 a month, 
and they’re taking money from her. If she’s on the TEA 
program, she’s working on improving her life and the future of 
her family and is receiving a pay cut from this government. And 
that seems, again, backwards thinking. 
 
And so I have a few quotes from some really important people 
here. And the first quote is from Peter Gilmer, the Regina 
Anti-Poverty Ministry, and he says, “If we’re going to make 
cuts towards the most vulnerable people in the province, we 
think it adds insult to injury to be looking at corporate tax cuts 
and tax cuts to the wealthy.” And the Saskatoon StarPhoenix 
columnist, Jordon Cooper says, “After hurting the poorest of the 
poor in our province, this government brought in a tax cut for 
corporations.” So we’re looking at taking money from the poor 
and giving it to the rich and that’s very sad. 
 
So families on social assistance now also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
will have to find a way to pay for school supplies because that 
funding was cut. Children that are living on social assistance 
and are poor due to no fault of their own are now going to be 

further identified as being poor because Social Services didn’t 
feel that it was a priority to pay for their school supplies. 
 
This budget affected the most vulnerable low-income families 
with increases to having to pay more for children’s clothes. 
Insurance premiums are going up, power bills will be going up, 
and property taxes will be going up which will translate to rent 
going up. And so there was a definite message here from the 
Sask Party that the poor don’t matter in Saskatchewan. 
 
And then we also have the $11 million cut to housing which I 
don’t know where that’s coming from, but I know that’s going 
to be a big hit and an increase to the Social Services budget. 
Like I said before, the increase to it is because the utilization 
rates are going up. But I also didn’t see any more money for 
new social work positions. So current workloads are going up 
— and already are unmanageable and we know that — but 
there’s not an increase in any new positions. And we had all the 
ministers go up north and say that, you know, the suicide crisis 
in the North is a major important issue for them, and I do 
believe that that should be the case. But there’s no new 
resources in this budget for that. I didn’t see anything 
mentioned about providing more money to address those 
suicide crisis issues. 
 
Also I looked and looked and looked, and I hope that I just did 
not see it and I just went past it, but I didn’t see any money set 
aside in this budget for the calls of action from the Truth and 
Reconciliation. And that is a really sad, sad case because those 
calls of actions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, aren’t just 
recommendations; they’re calls of actions to implement now. 
And they’re important, and so it would have been nice to 
actually have that mentioned within the summary and identified 
where the money going towards those are. 
 
So the Minister of Social Services talks about a plan for income 
assistance redesign, but if their redesign is in any way related to 
the cuts that they have presented in this budget, I am concerned 
that the most vulnerable in this province will lose more. And so, 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve got endless amounts to talk about here, but I 
really wanted to make sure I touched on those issues. 
 
And I want to reintegrate, like, that the minister . . . We’ve 
heard them say that they talk about working on focusing on core 
services which are education, health, and social services. But 
yet in this budget there’s been cuts to education, cuts to health, 
and cuts to social services. So they say one thing, and they 
invest in another. 
 
I really hope that members across use their critical thinking, 
study the budget, go talk to municipal leaders in your 
community, talk to educators in your community, talk to the 
school board members who will tell you that their voice and 
autonomy has been compromised. And talk to front-line 
workers in your health centres, in your community-based 
organizations, and use your critical thinking abilities and vote 
for a budget based on what is the best decision for the residents 
in your constituency. And I know that the answer is that this 
budget will not improve the lives of the people that they 
represent. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be supporting the 
amendment that was brought forward by my colleague, but I 



March 28, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1963 

will not be supporting this unfair, cruel budget. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social 
Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there’s no question that this has been a 
challenging budget and that many very difficult decisions have 
been made that each of us has been heavy-hearted about, 
especially in those areas where the result has been the loss of 
jobs. 
 
But I want to challenge the disturbingly inaccurate 
characterizations which have been made by members opposite 
over the past number of weeks and increasingly over the last 
number of days. Mr. Speaker, on budget day in front of a 
packed gallery, we heard the Leader of the Opposition say, and 
I quote, that we “. . . blew through the savings . . .” The Finance 
critic in her response said that, and again I quote, we “. . . 
arrogantly and recklessly spent . . .” And even more 
offensively, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition last 
Thursday said our government has “. . . a deficit of 
decency . . .” 
 
I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if a deficit of decency means increasing 
the Social Services budget, a budget which helps the most 
vulnerable people in our society, to a record level at a time 
when we have had a $1.2 billion drop in revenues over the last 
three years. I wonder if we were being arrogant and reckless 
when we introduced the SAID [Saskatchewan assured income 
for disability] program in 2009, when we’ve across all of our 
ministries invested $3.7 billion to help people with disabilities 
and have effectively eliminated the 440 wait-list generated by 
decades of neglect by the former government. 
 
Merv Bender, the Chair of the program implementation 
advisory committee team remarked just on budget day: 
 

I am very pleased that government is continuing its 
commitment to the program with a $16 million increase to 
the SAID budget for next year. It is especially meaningful 
in a challenging financial situation that the province chose 
to make this investment in support of people with 
significant and enduring disabilities. 

 
I wonder if our arrogance and recklessness is demonstrated by a 
person-centred process to transition people from the 
institutionalized setting at Valley View Centre into 
communities where individuals have the opportunity to be 
included as citizens and where as we, as citizens, have the 
opportunity to meet, interact with, and hopefully make friends 
with neighbours who have physical and mental challenges. This 
work continues to be supported in this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I sat in this House and listened to almost every 
budget since 2007, and over the years I’ve been shocked at just 
how much this government has invested in helping vulnerable 
people. Those vulnerable people have included families of 
children with autism, or women fleeing domestic violence who 
are in need of shelter, low-income seniors, and people who are 
at risk of homelessness. These investments in year after year 
after year have been made to support people, people who are 
struggling, Mr. Speaker. 

Yet day after day after day we hear about our reckless spending 
or our mismanagement and waste. I guess we differ here, Mr. 
Speaker. I don’t think it’s been a waste to support people with 
disabilities. I’m proud of the 2009 creation of the SAID 
program. The NDP record on supporting people with 
disabilities was that . . . well they just didn’t. They let people 
languish on a wait list. It must not have been a priority which is 
why, I guess, they characterize decisions like this as reckless 
and arrogant when they talk about our spending during the 
so-called boom years. 
 
But I guess what is most frustrating, Mr. Speaker, is that the 
members opposite speak from both sides of their mouth. On the 
one hand, our spending over the years, much of the investments 
in services, benefits, and supports for people in the Ministry of 
Social Services has been part of a record that, according to 
them, is characterized by mismanagement and waste. 
 
[16:15] 
 
And then, almost in the same sentence sometimes, Mr. Speaker, 
the same member or one of their colleagues will follow up by 
saying we’ve made callous cuts, or we make the most 
vulnerable pay. And then after that, Mr. Speaker, the Finance 
critic or the Leader of the Opposition will talk about deficits. 
Well which is it, Mr. Speaker? Anyone with even the most 
rudimentary level of basic economics knows you can’t 
simultaneously criticize too many investments, not enough 
investments, and running a deficit. 
 
And now remember, Mr. Speaker, that I’m speaking largely to 
the Ministry of Social Services. But this problem is even more 
pronounced when members get up to petition for an 
infrastructure project like a bridge and then turn around and call 
the largest infrastructure investment in the history of our 
province, which is creating thousands of jobs, an example of 
scandal, mismanagement, and waste. 
 
I think we can all agree, Mr. Speaker, that these arguments are 
completely incoherent. And it might be because of the fact that 
outside of providing criticisms of us on absolutely everything, 
even if those criticisms contradict each other, Mr. Speaker, they 
have absolutely no plan of their own. And as was duly noted by 
the member of Martensville earlier, this is not what we should 
see by a so-called government-in-waiting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have a plan, Mr. Speaker. We have a plan as a government 
to manage economy and get back to balance in three years. And 
get this. While there have been some very, very difficult 
decisions in this budget and even in the Ministry of Social 
Services, our government has continued to support people who 
are vulnerable. The Ministry of Social Services has its largest 
budget to date, Mr. Speaker. Our income assistance area saw a 
13 per cent increase. Our disabilities programs have gone up by 
7.6 per cent, and child and family program areas have gone up 
by 5.5 per cent. These increases, Mr. Speaker, are there to make 
sure people who are struggling continue to get supported. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin has talked a lot in his former life about housing and 
homelessness. For example, in an op-ed piece in the Huffington 
Post last year, the member for Saskatoon Meewasin argued that, 
and I quote: 



1964 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2017 

The most pressing problem — finding stable housing for 
those who are currently homeless or at risk for 
homelessness — is one that, fortunately, can be solved. We 
need to start by collecting real-time, person specific data 
on homelessness and expanding the application of the 
Housing First model of supportive housing for individuals 
with greater challenges. Housing First is an evidence-based 
approach to ending homelessness that provides direct 
access to permanent housing and support. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, instead of just talking about this, we’re 
actually doing it. Through the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation, we have provided $50,000 to the United Way to 
assist with tracking and monitoring the effectiveness of 
Housing First through Journey Home in Saskatoon. We’ve 
invested $60 million to develop 634 units, for those who are 
homeless or at risk of homelessness, since we formed 
government. 496 of those are completed right now and another 
138 are under construction; 352 of those, Mr. Speaker, are 
aimed at those who are specifically hard to house. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our average investment in hard-to-house units for 
people who are homeless or at risk of homelessness, since 
forming government, has been about 70 per year. And we are 
committed to continuing that work. To that end, we’ve been 
working at the FPT [federal-provincial-territorial] tables to 
emphasize the importance of investments like this. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t really like to go back in time, but I 
think it speaks volumes when I look at NDP investments in 
hard-to-house units. For a political party that prides itself on 
standing up for people who are vulnerable, Mr. Speaker, I find 
it rather surprising that they built 12 — that’s right, just 12 — 
new hard-to-house units in the last six years in office. That’s an 
average of two per year, Mr. Speaker. We’ve invested 70 per 
year, Mr. Speaker. It is part of our reckless and arrogant 
characterization of our government’s spending plan over the 
last 10 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we don’t just talk about helping people; we 
actually do it. And while I am ever mindful, I am ever mindful 
that there’s always, always, always more work to do, I’m 
comforted by two things, Mr. Speaker. One is, that I’ve said, we 
have a plan to grow our economy and get back to balance in 
three years. And two, Mr. Speaker, is that this is actually in line 
with the poverty reduction strategy whose very first line, on 
page 6 of the document states, “Our Government recognizes 
that first and foremost, to reduce poverty in our province . . . 
[the] economy must be strong.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is so obvious that it shouldn’t need repeating. 
But given the trajectory of the narrative I have witnessed since 
I’ve had the privilege of sitting in this Assembly, it needs to be 
emphasized that creating jobs, expanding the tax base, and 
growing the economy by fostering the conditions for investment 
enables us to pay for the services, programs, and benefits that 
people enjoy in health, social services, and education. These 
three areas, Mr. Speaker, consume 70 per cent of our provincial 
budget, 70 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our job creation record has consistently been one of the best, if 
not the best in Canada, Mr. Speaker. We’ve had one of the 
lowest unemployment rates in the country despite the economic 

challenges that we face. We’ve grown the population to where 
it now sits at 1.13 million dollars. We are the most attractive 
mining jurisdiction in the world, Mr. Speaker. We enjoy a AAA 
credit rating. We have the lowest debt-to-GDP ratio in the 
country. 
 
In addition to all of these investments I’ve already identified 
and more, Mr. Speaker, all these positive economic outcomes 
have enabled us to remove 112,000 low-income people off the 
tax rolls. In this budget we have seen the Saskatchewan 
low-income tax credit enhanced so as to mitigate the impact of 
other tax changes. I submit, Mr. Speaker, that those are not 
examples of callousness, recklessness, or arrogance. The point, 
Mr. Speaker, is that there’s a very important relationship, a very 
important and I think underappreciated relationship between our 
economic management and the services we provide for people. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if we want to know what those impacts 
would be with a different economic management plan, we just 
need to look next door in Alberta. We have our very own case 
study right next door. We have both relied on natural resource 
revenue which has created challenges for us both. However, 
that is where the similarities end, Mr. Speaker. They support 
carbon tax. We don’t. They don’t have a plan to get back to 
balance and are just kicking the can down the road. We have a 
plan to get back to balance in three years. 
 
And what are the results? Alberta’s unemployment rate was 7.9 
per cent in 2016 and is already at 8.3 per cent in 2017. This 
places it among one of the highest in the country and above the 
national average, Mr. Speaker. By contrast, Saskatchewan’s 
unemployment rate was 6 per cent, one of the lowest in Canada. 
 
And while nearly every other province in Canada posted 
increases in average weekly earnings, Alberta’s dropped by 1 
per cent. In Saskatchewan our average weekly earnings, Mr. 
Speaker, increased by 1.8 per cent. Considering this abysmal 
employment and earnings numbers, Mr. Speaker, I’m shocked 
to see that the Alberta budget includes a mere 2.2 per cent 
growth in operating for ministries like Social Services. How can 
a so-called socially democratic government have only a 2.2 per 
cent increase in income supports at a time when it is clearly 
evident that more people will need them? This can not come 
even close to meeting the utilization pressures in that province. 
 
They’ve also drained their contingency plan to cover operating, 
and unlike our government, they haven’t built one in to cover 
unexpected changes in utilization — not in ’17-18, not in 
’18-19, and not in ’19-20, Mr. Speaker. I am not making this 
up. 
 
The case study for what happens when you don’t have a sound 
economic management plan, or frankly any plan at all, is right 
next door, Mr. Speaker. And it doesn’t look very good — not 
for employment, not for the economy, not for deficit 
management, and certainly not for vulnerable people. 
 
And for that reason, Mr. Speaker, I am proud to support the 
good work of the Finance minister and his team and seconded 
by the member from Moosomin. I will be supporting this 
budget. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 



March 28, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1965 

Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. First off, I’d 
just like to express a few thank yous. First my wife, Carla, 
who’s letting me live the dream. My CA, Rick McIntyre, brand 
new to the business but he’s quickly picked up the 
responsibilities and adapted very well. I’d like to thank my 
mom, who I think is probably sitting around the big-screen TV 
in Royal Estates right now with probably the local residents 
having potluck. But best of all I’d like to thank the constituents 
of Melville-Saltcoats who have given me the ability to stand 
here today and speak to the support for the budget that we 
presented. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I too would like to add comments and provide 
support to the 2017 budget presented by the Finance minister 
last week. I compare this reaction to the simple football analogy 
— we’re second and goal in the big game. We have a number of 
options in our playbook or we can just decide to punt the ball 
and hope for the best. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have decided to 
review all the options. We have utilized a suite of tax 
incentives, consumption taxes, budget reductions, and funding 
increases. And if the play unfolds like we practised, we will 
have this province back to balanced budget by 2020. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a far better strategy than punting the 
ball on second down and hoping that something positive 
happens in the future, as the opposition really prefers to do. 
That play was made well over 10 years ago by a former 
government, Mr. Speaker, and the outcome was closure of 
schools, hospitals, and job losses in the thousands. That is not 
what the majority of citizens in this province want. They ask for 
a fiscally responsible, well-planned strategy to ensure that this 
province prospers and makes sure that our kids and my 
grandkids, your grandkids are not paying for the outrageous 
things that the NDP would have us do right now. 
 
Although, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on the subject of the NDP’s 
plan, or really lack thereof, we hear a lot of noise from members 
opposite but it often sounds contradictory, one moment calling 
for more spending yet the next time they’re saying, oh you guys 
are spending way too much. Unfortunately, this rhetoric from 
the members opposite is hardly surprising. 
 
Really in fact, in the last election, their platform had 18, 18 
uncosted promises that would cost us hundreds of millions of 
dollars every year, a platform that all of those members, with 
the exception of the member from Meewasin, ran on. Do they 
still support that sort of budgeting, pretending that they don’t 
have to pay for things in order to get votes? I think the outcome 
of the last election shows what the people of this province 
thought of that. 
 
Further, the member from Meewasin supports a carbon tax, a 
tax on everything that would disproportionately impact our 
province. NDP members have pledged support for the 
principles of the Leap Manifesto. And we know through past 
examples that the NDP here, the NDP in Alberta, the NDP in 
other provinces, the NDP federally are willing to say almost 
anything to get elected and then abandon their platform as soon 
as the polls close. 
 
Our government wants to get our province back to a balanced 

budget, and we have a plan to get there. Unfortunately the NDP 
opposition, the NDP government in Alberta, they’ve shown no 
game plan. There’s not a plan there. They have no vision as to 
where they want to move this forward. So it’s pretty close to 
call the game from the bleachers. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Even though the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats has quite a strong voice, there is a lot of 
conversation happening across the way and it’s on both sides of 
the House. And I would ask those members to take their 
conversations behind the bar and let the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats continue. I recognize the member. 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So this 
contrasts with our government moving . . . who’s willing to 
make tough decisions necessary to keep Saskatchewan moving 
forward and not downloading current spending on future 
generations, my grandkids. 
 
The budget will not balance itself, and we take it seriously as 
our responsibility to the people of Saskatchewan. Dominion 
Bond Rating Service just last Thursday gave a thumbs up to the 
budget, commenting they recognize that the plan is ambitious, 
and views the plan as credible because of the extent and 
immediacy of the proposed measures. They ended up providing 
a solid rating with a stable trend. 
 
[16:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I spent an afternoon at the Melville Chamber of 
Commerce trade show last Friday talking about the budget with 
the many valued businesses of the Melville area. On the way 
home after session on Thursday, I talked to a number of 
businesses and ag producers from the constituency of 
Melville-Saltcoats who get, they get what we’ve laid out in the 
budget of 2017. They understand that something had to be 
done. They understand what it’s like to sacrifice some things to 
ensure that their businesses, their farms would remain viable for 
the future. 
 
They weren’t all patting us on the back and saying, good job. 
You know, I get that. But they all said we need to pay a bit 
more now to ensure that we don’t pay a lot more into the future. 
Everyone agreed that there are a lot of tough decisions that were 
made. They weren’t going to be popular with everyone. 
 
But it was a lot better than the past record of the NDP, which 
was to tax everything, stifling investment and productivity. 
Their record is one of increasing income tax, significantly 
increasing the PST over and over again. Mr. Speaker, those 
ideas were tried in the 1990s, the early 2000s, so we know 
whether or not it works. Spoiler alert: it didn’t work. Our 
population dropped. We had the worst job creation record. We 
lost doctors. We lost nurses. We lost teachers, hospitals. 
Long-term care facilities closed. Mr. Speaker, those truly were 
the dark days for our province. In football terms we were 
getting smoked 44 to 0, and I would even assume that bus 
ridership out of the province was on the increase during that 
time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are indeed challenging times. I believe 
everyone knows the numbers: resource revenues declined over 
1.3 billion; resource tax revenue is down by hundreds of 



1966 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2017 

millions of dollars. We’re in one of the more protracted periods 
of low resource values that we’ve seen in recent memory. As 
world economies, the buyer resource has begun to slow down or 
contract, we suffer. We suffer from those uncertainties. 
 
As the Premier indicated in his pre-budget address, for our part 
as government we have to take responsibility and “we must take 
action to rebalance our spending and our revenues to reflect this 
new . . . [era].” 
 
As many of our constituents remember, we’ve been through this 
before and proverbially have the T-shirt, saying we survived. 
And we start seeing some of these indicators change, albeit 
slowly. Oil prices have come off their lows of under $40 a 
barrel. Potash price is slowly increasing, and ag commodities, 
they’re holding steady. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a part of every good sports team is having a good 
offence, having the bodies that could put points on the board, 
people and policy that can make things happen. During the 
period of low resource prices, this province, our province, 
continued to grow with the population. We have added over 
162,000 more people in the last 10 years, reversing the trend of 
population decline that we faced during this previous 
government’s mandate. 
 
The community of Churchbridge, my community, has 
experienced over a 20 per cent increase in population since the 
last census. Our schools are full. In fact they’re overflowing; 
they’re bursting at the seams. Property listed in our town is 
gone within a week, maybe two at the most. This is 
unprecedented growth not seen since this province’s inception, 
since really Confederation over 100 years ago. 
 
It’s interesting to note really that the NDP, they’ve been quoted 
numerous times saying a population increase couldn’t, 
wouldn’t, shouldn’t happen. Mr. Speaker, yes, it’s put a strain 
on vital services. But those new citizens have also contributed 
to the positive growth and economic fortunes of this province. 
For the first time in this province’s history, the average weekly 
earnings were above $1,000 and remain the third highest among 
provinces, all provinces. 
 
“Saskatchewan people are taking home more money at the end 
of the week, and this a reflection on our economy and the 
opportunities in our province.” That’s the Minister of the 
Economy was quoted as saying. “The increased earnings 
showed that our wages are very competitive and this remains an 
attraction for skilled workers to our province.” 
 
New job creation, it’s been steady to increasing over the last 10 
years. We’ve observed an increase of over 90,000 new jobs 
since 2006, or an increase of 18.6 per cent. In the November 
2016 Sask jobs report: 
 

Major year-over-year gains were reported for professional, 
scientific and technical services up 4,000; public 
administration up 3,800; and trade up 3,700. 

 
These are great jobs. These are high-paying jobs. They’re on the 
increase in this province. 
 

Off-reserve Aboriginal employment was up 4,200 [just 

under 10 per cent] for five consecutive months of 
year-over-year increases. Aboriginal youth employment 
was up 1,000 (+13.3 per cent) for seven consecutive 
months of year-over-year increases. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these statistics are not the signs of an economy 
that has been discouraged by government policy. Found in this 
budget are many more factors that are going to improve and 
expand the Saskatchewan economy. By lowering personal and 
corporate income tax rates, we’re going to ensure 
competitiveness across the country. Everyone at every income 
level is going to pay less tax. Saskatchewan will have the 
lowest corporate tax rate and manufacturing and processing tax 
rate in Canada. 
 
Numerous officials quoted over the last week, including the 
Maclean’s editorial board, Fraser Institute, Paul Martin, they’ve 
all acknowledged the value of keeping the province competitive 
in the field of tax applications. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I could repeat the iconic empty-folder 
demonstration by my predecessor Bob Bjornerud to 
demonstrate what the repressive tax strategies of the NDP in the 
’90s and early 2000s did to stimulate investment in this 
province. Nothing; no major projects of any kind, not a single 
new project developed during that time. No wonder they didn’t 
expect the population to grow; they didn’t give them any reason 
for being here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the capital expenditures by private business in and 
around our constituency in the last 10 years have been 
astounding: Mosaic coming into the fourth quarter of 
completing the $3 billion expansion at our K3 shaft in 
Esterhazy. PCS [Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan Inc.] 
Rocanville just completed a $3 billion expansion late last year. 
In June 2010, Richardson Pioneer opened a $200 million crush 
plant in Yorkton. July 2010 the LDM [Louis Dreyfus Mitsui 
Foods] canola crush plant, also a hundred-million-dollar crush 
plant, opened in Yorkton. Last Friday, Grain Millers Canada, 
Yorkton announced a hundred-million-dollar expansion to their 
oat plant in Yorkton — 25 more new jobs and 110 during 
construction come with that announcement. 
 
Today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, G3, a major grain company, 
announced two significant grain-handling facility builds, one 
located in Melville. 
 
These are projects, investments that benefited hundreds of 
individuals and companies in Melville-Saltcoats, companies 
like EMW construction in Saltcoats, Noble Construction in 
Esterhazy, Saskpro Machine Works in Esterhazy, N&R 
Concrete in Melville, DJ Miller & Sons Construction in 
Langenburg, Duncan Construction in Spy Hill, Norenda 
Construction in Gerald, and the list goes on and on. These are 
companies employing local people — people who make up our 
communities, volunteer at our arenas and our dance studios, 
who populate our schools and pay tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m quite confused. Really I’m confused by the 
response and criticism by the opposition. Throughout our term, 
they and their media personalities have been criticizing this 
government for not paying enough attention to the Crowns, not 
investing enough money into infrastructure to keep them viable, 



March 28, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1967 

relevant, and competitive with external forces. 
 
Murray Mandryk, Leader-Post, August 27th, 2016: “What 
seems clear is that cost problems at SaskPower aren’t simply 
about an aging infrastructure that’s admittedly in need of a 
massive capital injection.” Then we read in the opposition’s 
election platform where, well, you know, we anticipate that 
some borrowing will be required for the capital requirements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you look at the numbers, it’s evident: we’ve 
invested in our Crowns, and we will not apologize for that. In 
2017 we will continue to invest, invest $3.7 billion. And further 
we’re going to continue to invest in our schools, in our 
hospitals, and our care homes. 
 
And our highways, Mr. Speaker, our highways, our constituents 
in Melville-Saltcoats are going to be blessed with a significant 
investment into the No. 80 Highway from Esterhazy to 
Churchbridge. This is a highway that at least half of the 1,200 
employees of Mosaic travel every day and every night in our 
constituency. 
 
You know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? A lot of holes in capital 
spending that were left to us from the previous government, we 
have to fill those holes. And it seems like the opposition wants 
us to abandon all those investments, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They 
don’t want us to build new schools, but I can attest that’s not 
what our constituents want. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, every year 40,000 farms in this province 
make a major, major cash investment, really sticking millions, 
billions of dollars into the ground or on our pastures with the 
anticipation of a reasonable return at the end of the year. 
Agriculture in this province now exports over $14 billion 
annually. This is an increase of over 180 per cent since 2006. 
That’s a big number. We’re first in the world for a number of 
commodities, including pulse crops, canola and other oilseed 
products, oats, mustard. The list goes on. 
 
This year this government has provided the highest coverage 
ever through crop insurance for the products that we produce. 
 
As well we have world-class research facilities found at the 
University of Saskatchewan Crop Development Centre. This 
government continues to support research with a $26.8 million 
investment in this budget. The rookie crop of varieties released 
by the CDC [Crop Development Centre] has their production 
requested specifically around the world. It might be CDC 
varieties of wheat going into the Warburtons program in 
England. Maybe it’s the malt barley varieties going into 
Sapporo Breweries in Japan. It might be a chickpea variety 
needed in India or an oat variety that General Mills specifically 
asked for in the United States. Important, one-of-its-kind 
research in the area of irrigation continues to flourish with this 
government’s assistance in Outlook, Saskatchewan. 
 
VIDO-InterVac [Vaccine and Infectious Disease 
Organization-international vaccine centre] continues to take on 
world first-of-its-kind groundbreaking research in Saskatoon in 
the area of controlling infectious diseases in humans and 
animals, with continued support from this government. 
 
Livestock producers in this province believe the government 

doesn’t need to be in the land ownership business. We know 
and trust really that producers can manage pastures a lot better 
than we can as a government. They support the winding up of 
the Saskatchewan pasture program and look forward to 
providing input as to how they envision these pastures should 
be managed into the future. Values extracted from the pasture 
sales could be put to far better use ensuring the patrons of those 
pastures, kids’ schools, or their parents’ care homes are 
adequately funded and maintained. 
 
Another rookie on our roster is the first of its kind in North 
America, the innovation patent box incentive that’s designed to 
support the commercialization of new and transformative 
innovations to ensure that Saskatchewan companies or those 
willing to locate in Saskatchewan can take full advantage of 
their wealth of creative, world-leading research and technology. 
This will encourage innovative companies such as CreateCafe 
3D Printing in Saskatoon to be the world leaders in 3-D [three 
dimensional] printing technologies. Not too distant future, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, they’re going to be 3-D printing a house or a 
barn. 
 
Companies like the Ag Exchange Group of Saskatoon that 
continue to develop and market new products like their online 
grain trading system. Or maybe Coconut Calendar, a company 
in Saskatoon producing a web-based time management 
application potentially used around the world. 
 
There are a number of fascinating and very innovative 
companies existing in our province right now that are 
revolutionizing or have the potential to revolutionize how we’re 
going to operate in this technologically crazy world. We have 
Innocorps Research Corporation, which provides innovative 
water treatment solutions for the oil and gas industry; Polytenna 
technologies, who have developed polymer antennas for the 
emerging mm-wave wireless device market; SED Systems, who 
have been involved in projects such as a deep space antenna 
network for the European Space Agency; or the SiriusXM 
digital satellite systems; and the Classic aeronautical gateway 
systems for Inmarsat. 
 
Or how about Solido Design Automation, who created the 
world’s top CAD [computer-aided design] software? And their 
chips are used in products selling around the world: in 
cellphones, tablets, computers to chip cards, smart TVs, and 
cars. How about ISM Canada, who’s world renowned for big 
data analytics and data mining, social media analytics, cloud 
computing, smart mobile solutions? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have a Silicon Valley of the north. But 
we need these as innovators and we need to ensure that we can 
retain them and encourage them to produce their products here 
in Saskatchewan. Attracting and retaining high-income earners 
also attracts their investment in the business opportunities in 
Saskatchewan and it promotes economic growth. 
 
The Saskatchewan commercial innovation incentive and Sask 
research development tax credit are more tools in the tool box, 
announced or improved in this budget, that are going to 
continue to encourage these companies to establish here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that there are people who are going to be 
affected negatively by this budget. A few people are going to 



1968 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2017 

lose jobs. We get that, and we do not take these tough decisions 
lightly. We understand that. However in true Saskatchewan 
fashion, many are finding opportunities in what others call 
negatives. Already in Melville, I have talked to a small 
husband-and-wife company who have created a courier service 
that big companies don’t normally serve. They are anticipating 
hiring five more trucks, full-time people, and bringing more 
trucks on to cover more routes in the courier business. It would 
not surprise me that services that are reduced or eliminated will 
be filled in by local entrepreneurs who will find the 
opportunities where others believe there are obstacles. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, this province was built on hard work, 
perseverance, and innovation — innovation that we see every 
day in small-town Saskatchewan. 
 
[16:45] 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, back to the football terminology — we are 
coming out of the huddle with a plan. The biggest obstacle we 
face is the opposition who have a totally unknown game plan. 
We have all our players ready to meet the challenge they have 
in front of them. We are not going to punt the ball and hope for 
the best, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have to deal with lower 
resource revenues by restructuring the tax base, control 
spending, and getting the province back to balance soon. 
 
We are leading the country in all positive growth statistics. 
We’ll make sure we are the most competitive jurisdiction in the 
country, allowing for innovation, and we will continue to be the 
province that people will continue to want to be in versus the 
place where everyone was from. 
 
In closing, I would once again like to voice my support for the 
2017 budget introduced by our Minister of Finance last 
Wednesday and make it clear that I do not support the 
amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. It’s my pleasure to rise in the House and speak 
to 2017-18 budget, as tabled by the Finance minister. And I’m 
not sure if I’ll manage the clock effectively, but hoping so. And 
if not, I’m going to be supporting the budget and the motion 
seconded by the member from Moosomin and not the 
amendment. 
 
But as is customary, I have people to thank as well. And I’d like 
to thank the people of Coronation Park for their support and 
giving me the privilege to serve again. I’d like to thank you for 
your trust in me as your MLA. 
 
I would like to thank my partner, Lisa —actually I call her the 
Lisa — for her continued support and your belief in me. Thanks 
for running the campaign. I couldn’t have done it without you. 
 
And I know that my mom is watching so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
I’d like to thank my family and my mom in particular. And 
she’s certainly no stranger here, and she likes coming, and I’d 
like to acknowledge that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d also like to thank my constituency association for their 

tireless work and the volunteers that continue to amaze. 
 
I would like to thank the steady stream of constituency 
assistants who do their best to keep me organized or close to it. 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if it’s me or it’s the job, but either 
way, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank Kristy Shaw, who has 
recently returned from maternity leave, and the myriad of others 
who filled in to assist during that time. Mr. Speaker, the list, in 
no particular order, during this mat leave was Maggie, Marlene, 
Tessa, Hayley, and Bonnie. That’s just this year. I’d like to 
thank . . . their conscientious work serving the people of 
Coronation Park, Regina, in the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
They filled in admirably. And again, maybe it’s me, but okay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget was a challenge. Difficult choices 
were made, but it was our belief as government that we weren’t 
going to kick the can down the road for future governments to 
deal with. Our decision was to formulate a plan, and as is this 
case, a three-year plan. Mr. Speaker, we believe that the people 
of this province want to see a plan; not a shrug of the shoulders 
and an oh well, we’ll sort it out sometime in some fashion. No, 
Mr. Speaker, that is not what we want and how we’re going to 
deal with our fiscal challenge. We’re going to face it. We’re 
going to outline, and outline with a plan of how we’re going to 
deal with it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the province of Saskatchewan is facing a revenue 
challenge. Since 2015 our resource revenues declined over $1.3 
billion. Tax revenue is down by hundreds of millions of dollars 
due to resource sector shutdown. 
 
The population has grown by 162,000 people in the 10-plus 
years, putting pressure on vital services. Now this is not the 
worst problem to have. The province has grown. That’s a good 
thing. People have chosen to live here. That’s a good thing. 
This is their new home and the place they want to work and 
raise their family. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve had the opportunity to speak to 
hundreds of newcomers in my former role as minister and as the 
Legislative Secretary for immigration and culture, Mr. Speaker. 
Their story is one of perseverance, struggle, tragedy, and spirit. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, their singular goal is to have a better life, a 
life that is first and foremost safe, safe for themselves and their 
family. They’ve lost everything or given up everything for the 
hope, and make no mistake, it is hope for a better life. They 
want what everybody wants. 
 
They want their children to have a better life than they had, and 
they have found that. They saw snow for the first time and 
giggled in gratitude. They laughed at the sight of their children 
playing in the snow and enjoying themselves, just as every 
Canadian kid does and still does. 
 
They want to have better lives, and now that they’re safe they 
want to contribute to their new home and their new 
communities. They’re learning English and looking for work. 
And this is not easy as they’ve also had to learn the culture of 
Saskatchewan. So how do you explain not only the 
Saskatchewan culture but Canadian culture to newcomers? 
 
Through organizations like the Open Door Society, they’re 
doing just that. They’re learning about their new home. I had 



March 28, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1969 

the opportunity this past Saturday to attend my fourth 
INVOLVE [integrating newcomers with volunteer opportunities 
to add leadership values through education] Day, integrating 
newcomers through volunteer and networking experiences, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. This provided 20 newcomers from 16 different 
countries an opportunity to network and volunteer, which is so 
typically Canadian but also so Saskatchewan. We volunteer 
more than any other province. 
 
So in discussion with them, I asked what they think of 
Saskatchewan, and what is it to be Canadian? After some 
thought, one person from Ghana said, you have to say “sorry” a 
lot. And yes, I had to agree, we do say sorry a lot. They 
wondered why we did that when we have done nothing wrong. I 
said if they go to other countries that’s reserved for when 
they’re apologizing. I’m not sure how to square that circle, but a 
good cultural nuance we have. 
 
They also wanted to know where my soldiers were. And I said, 
soldiers? They go, yes in our country no politician goes 
anywhere without soldiers, or a limo, and certainly they don’t 
talk to regular folk. Soldiers, yes — where are mine, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker? I am wondering that. Where are my soldiers? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Right behind you. 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Right behind me. My colleagues are right 
behind me, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
In the budget we made some difficult choices to ensure core 
public services like health care, education, and social services, 
and make sure that they’re sustainable for the long term. We’ve 
always pursued growth as a government because it pays for 
these important services Saskatchewan people depend on. We’ll 
continue making important investments like these as we follow 
our plan to bring the budget back to balance in 2019. We’re 
going to invest in people, and we’re going to continue to. Part 
of that investment, Mr. Speaker, in this budget is a 9 per cent 
increase to Social Services to support our most vulnerable — 
the largest budget in Saskatchewan history.  
 
So where did the money go? Forty new schools plus another 
two in Rosthern and Weyburn; 889 new child care spaces; $3.3 
million for the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency; $12 million 
increase to reduce the ER wait times in Regina and Saskatoon. 
We spent money in infrastructure and paying down debt. I’m 
puzzled by the criticism of building schools, hospitals, and 
highways. What was the choice? Not doing any of that or doing 
a few and leaving things as is, so we chose schools, hospitals, 
and long-term care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m wondering if we can somehow get to the point 
where there are facts in relation to the bypass, as one particular 
issue. I’m a little confused. I don’t know how many petitions 
were brought forward by the interim leader of the NDP. 
 
An Hon. Member: — 80. 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Eighty about the dangerous truck traffic on 
Dewdney Avenue. So are we to assume that because you no 
longer are bringing petitions forward that you’re in favour of 
the bypass? Or the people who signed the petition are okay with 
it, or what? I’ll assume that, since in opposition you’re 

obligated to complain about everything, that when you’re silent 
you’re in agreement. I guess that is what we will have to believe 
since I can’t remember you ever saying you agree, but okay. 
 
The members opposite sure like to torque things. They like to 
take a few words and phrases and then beat them into oblivion. 
So as an example, they like to use the term “corporate money,” 
“big money,” “big business money.” They want to get corporate 
money and union money donations out of Sask politics. Well 
that would be interesting because, as the member from 
Martensville pointed out yesterday, a lot of you would have 
very little donations if you lost your union donations. You’d 
probably have zero. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, in this budget there are tax breaks, and 
specifically business tax relief as well as personal income tax 
reductions. But the members opposite like to paint the picture to 
suit their narrative as corporate tax breaks. Big, bad 
corporations are benefiting again. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what they don’t say was this is also business 
tax relief and in particular small-business and medium-business 
tax relief, Mr. Speaker. But that won’t fit their narrative. 
Members opposite say they’re the defenders of the little guy. 
Well they can explain that when small business questions them, 
or they can stay on their narrative and oh, I made that one up, 
Mr. Speaker. Oops, sorry about that. Maybe they want to be a 
real boy, all doom and gloom, sky’s falling, Eeyore, Chicken 
Little, Henny Penny, Turkey Lurkey — all there, Mr. Speaker, 
right across. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to tour the province as part 
of the crime reduction committee. We toured a lot of the 
province. One thing I didn’t expect, Mr. Speaker, was to be one 
— I was one with rural Saskatchewan. Me. I didn’t grow up in 
rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and Coronation Park is 
entirely urban. I have spent most of my working life working 
with children in need of protection, and young offenders to 
name a few, so I have a pretty good understanding of crime.  
 
But I was amazed when we met with the Saskatchewan cattle 
association and they spoke about rustling, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
They spoke about cattle rustling. Well I was a little bit 
gobsmacked. Of course I had a few more questions to ask. I got 
puzzled looks from my colleagues and the cattle association. I 
just couldn’t wrap my head around how one might engage in 
rustling. And I’m thinking westerns and driving them field to 
field and all the logistics of that. 
 
No, it was big trucks pulling up and place a temporary ramp and 
load them up and drive away. Not the theme from Rawhide, as I 
envisioned. Load ’em up; move ’em out. I think I’m learning. 
What I know now, I’m offering my cattle expertise to the Ag 
minister. That’s bovine, don’t you know. I’m going to be the 
Legislative Secretary or maybe a consultant to the Ag minister, 
and I’m ready to go. Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m ready to go. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, my first degree was a Bachelor of Science 
in earth science and geology and I’m particularly interested in 
sedimentary petrology. And we have an abundance of that in 
our province in the coal fields of Coronach and Estevan — the 
member from Estevan, there you go — to the Bakken formation 
and the oil and natural gas, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have oil 



1970 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2017 

and the safest way to move it is through pipelines. Or, as the 
members opposite have countered, leave it in the ground. Well 
if we need to move it and the pipelines are the best mode, then, 
Mr. Speaker, we need to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had an opportunity to speak with the minister 
responsible for Energy and Mines, and in this budget you’ll see 
there was a significant enhancement to the regulatory oversight 
for the oil and gas industry. Mr. Speaker, there was additional 
funding allocated to the number of initiatives. The pipeline 
regulation enhancement program, $600,000 to that as a start-up. 
There’s $500,000 increase to core funding to a number of field 
inspection offices: Estevan, Swift Current, Kindersley, 
Lloydminster. $250,000 funding to expand technical capacity of 
the ministry’s support of Government of Saskatchewan’s 
climate change commitments related to the upstream oil and gas 
industry. And I quote, Mr. Deputy Speaker, “The changes 
announced today, including the amendment to the 
administrative levy will enable the Government of 
Saskatchewan to deliver on significant improvements to its oil 
and gas regulatory programs.” That’s Energy and Resources 
minister, our Energy and Resources minister said. “Public 
confidence in our regulatory system is vital to the long term 
growth and development of our oil and gas industry, [Mr. 
Speaker].” 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s very interesting that it seems that there’s some 
national press taking notice of our response to getting back to 
balance in comparison to the NDP Alberta. Maclean’s 
magazine wrote the following: 
 

Alberta and Saskatchewan have budget problems. And 
they’ve had them for decades. 
 
Easy money from resource revenue provided roughly 
one-quarter of all provincial revenue only a few short years 
ago. The collapse in oil prices, which aren’t expected to 
rise any time soon, revealed each province’s shaky budget 
foundations for all to see. 
 
Though they . . . [see] similar challenges, their responses 
are anything but. In Alberta, budget debates are highly 
polarized . . . It doesn’t need to be this way, [Mr. Speaker]. 

 
On Wednesday, the government of Saskatchewan 
presented a budget offering what one might call a middle 
ground. That is, they will solve their budget problem with 
both revenue and spending measures (in fairness, Alberta’s 
provincial-named party — the Alberta party — is also 
proposing a similar middle ground approach). 
 

Mr. Speaker, we’re getting attention, national attention in 
regards to this budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and they absolutely 
are standing with Saskatchewan, knowing full well we are 
responsible fiscal stewards. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It now being 5 o’clock, this House 
stands recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1939 
  McCall ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1939, 1940 
  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1939, 1940 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1939 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1940 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1940 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1940 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1941 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1941 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1941 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1941 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1941 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1941 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1942 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1942 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1942 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1943 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Gender Diversity Awareness Week 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1943 
 Prince Albert Students Compete at Model United Nations Assembly 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1943 
 Humanity First Launches Nationwide Campaign 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1943 
 Empowering Immigrant Women Workshop 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1944 
 New Grain-Handling Facilities in Saskatchewan 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1944 
 Local Businessman Receives Business for Peace Award 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 1944 
 New Schools in Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1945 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Regina Bypass Project and Financial Support for Municipalities 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1945 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1945 
 Government’s Fiscal Management 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1946 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1947 
 Ownership of Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1947 
  Marit ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1947 
 Saskatchewan Transportation Company Assets and Services 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1947 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1947 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1948 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1948 
 Funding for Libraries 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1948 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1948 
 Provincial Sales Tax Exemptions 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1949 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1949 
 Funding for Post-Secondary Students 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1949 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1949 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 53 — The Provincial Health Authority Act 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1949 
 



 

 Bill No. 54 — The Provincial Health Authority Consequential Amendment Act, 2017 
 Loi de 2017 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Provincial Health Authority Act 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1950 
 Bill No. 55 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Economy — Audit Assessments) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1950 
 Bill No. 56 — The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2017 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1950 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Dennis ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1950 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1953 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1957 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1959 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 1963 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1965 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1968 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


