






















































Hansard: November 09, 2017


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 10A  THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 9, 2017, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Nicole Sarauer 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Hon. Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Hon. Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Kindersley 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2887 
 November 9, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
To you and to all the members of the Assembly, it’s my very 
distinct pleasure to introduce a few very special guests to the 
Assembly this morning. Seated in the Speaker’s gallery is the 
family of a fallen First World War Captain, David McAndie. 
Joining with us are three of Captain McAndie’s great-nieces. 
There’s Wendy McAndie, Brenda McAndie, and Helen Harvey 
as well as Helen’s husband, Wayne Harvey. I also wish to 
recognize Captain McAndie’s great-nephew Mackenzie 
McAndie who may be, I’m told, watching today’s proceedings 
online from Scotland. 
 
We have two more special guests today, Lieutenant-Colonel 
Peter J. Boyle, curator of the Calgary Highlanders Regimental 
Museum and Archives, and his guest, Ms. Nancy Saxberg. 
They’re from Calgary. Colonel Boyle’s a Canadian Armed 
Forces veteran with more than 25 years of service. He is an 
active member of various veterans’ organizations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Colonel Boyle brought forward a nomination for 
Captain David McAndie to be recognized through our 
province’s geo-memorial commemorative place name program. 
In a ministerial statement after question period, I look forward 
to outlining the details of that initiative.  
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s proud of its military history and 
heritage, and it’s our duty to declare, this time of year but 
throughout the year, to never forget the 6,400 brave men and 
women from this province who laid down their lives for our 
freedom. 
 
Mr. Speaker, among those names listed on the Saskatchewan 
War Memorial, you’ll find the name of Captain David 
McAndie, a young man who fought for our country with 
courage and honour and made the ultimate sacrifice. We will 
remember him. 
 
So I ask, Mr. Speaker, all the members of the Assembly to 
welcome these guests here this morning. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official 
opposition, I want to join with the minister in welcoming the 
McAndie family to their Legislative Assembly, and to say thank 
you on behalf of a grateful province for the service and for the 
sacrifice. 
 
I note, in the notes pursuant to the announcement soon to come, 
that Captain David McAndie fought all the way through World 
War I and was tragically cut down with just three months to go 

in that terrible war. But that sacrifice and the benefit that we 
gained from that, Mr. Speaker, lives on, and I’m very glad to 
say and see, on behalf of the official opposition, another way to 
memorialize and to remember and to make sure that we never 
forget that sacrifice that has been made. So thank you very 
much on behalf of a very grateful official opposition. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Seated 
in your gallery are two individuals I’d like to introduce to all 
members of the House through you. The first is the president of 
the Saskatchewan Party, James Thorsteinson. He’s from 
Lloydminster area where he is a successful rancher, and he has 
led our party very, very well. I’m grateful for that and for his 
friendship. And he’s been, frankly, very busy of late at various 
debates and dealing with all of the issues that have arisen as a 
result of the announcement back in August. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, you’ve noted quite rightly that he’s not 
wearing his cowboy hat. I’m not sure that’s allowed in the 
gallery. It’s hard for us to even recognize him without it, but it’s 
good see him in the House. 
 
Seated beside him, I notice Doug Shaw is there, who has been a 
long-time political activist in the province and has helped in 
Saskatoon Northwest, where he’s been a constituency president. 
He’s also a good friend. I’d just like all members to help me 
welcome these two gentlemen to their Legislative Assembly 
today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, in your gallery, I’d like to introduce 
representatives Bob Martinson and Jeff Delzer of the North 
Dakota House. Bob and Jeff are here representing The Energy 
Council, which is a mixture of energy-producing states and 
provinces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to say this coming June Saskatchewan 
will be sponsoring The Energy Council spring meeting. This is 
a chance to showcase everything this great province has to offer 
to legislators from across North America. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve represented Saskatchewan on The Energy 
Council for the past six years and consequently have become 
good friends with these fine gentlemen, right down to the fact 
of giving Bob cooking lessons. He’s learning, Mr. Speaker. 
He’s learning. 
 
I would ask all members of this Chamber to please welcome our 
friends and fellow legislators from North Dakota to this 
Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Seated in the 
west gallery are two good friends, Jim and Barb McAllister. Jim 
McAllister ran for the Saskatchewan Party in the 2003 election 
in Saskatoon Fairview, been very active in political events since 



2888 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2017 

that time. He retired in 2014 as a project manager from Magna 
Electric. His wife, Barb, is with him. She had worked until her 
retirement in the media department of SaskEnergy. 
 
They’re enjoying their retirement in the way that I would like to 
enjoy it — travelling around Canada on their Harley-Davidson. 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know my colleagues opposite would like me 
to retire earlier, but I plan to be around for a long time. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to welcome some 
guests that we have seated in the east gallery today, that join us 
with the Open Door Society. Thank you for coming today.  
 
We know that the Open Door Society does such fantastic work 
— thanks for the wave — the Open Door Society does such 
fantastic work welcoming new Canadians, helping them get 
situated, helping them to understand this, you know, world 
around you. I can’t even imagine going into a completely 
foreign country and trying to figure out what’s happening in it. 
So thank you for all of the efforts that take place in that 
initiative and for the important work that you’re doing. And I 
will welcome you to your Legislative Assembly and ask all 
members to do the same. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to take a 
moment to introduce Mr. Dale Burnay up in the east gallery as 
well. He is a very keen political follower and is always happy to 
send me Twitter messages about things that are going on, and 
so I really appreciate that. But, Mr. Speaker, he also has done a 
lot of work for the Progressive Conservative Party of 
Saskatchewan, and I think is certainly someone who’s a citizen 
fully engaged in the political life in this province. So I would 
like to, on behalf of the Assembly, welcome Dale to his 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Bonk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Seated in your 
gallery today, I’d like to introduce Stephen Scriver. Give us a 
wave there, Stephen. Besides being an active member on my 
campaign team in Moosomin constituency, Stephen is a 
member of the Wolseley town council, a driving force behind 
the Wolseley Heritage Foundation archive, on the executive of 
the local junior hockey team, and a member of the Canadian 
Legion, and Lions Club. And as you can see, a very good cook. 
Stephen is also the author of seven books, including the 
best-selling All Star Poet, and has written and researched 
documentaries that have appeared on History television. 
 
Stephen has spent most of his life in the province and he loves 
Saskatchewan. He’s a trusted source of advice and a great 
friend. I ask all members to help me welcome him to his 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d just 
like to join quickly in saying hello to the Open Door Society 
class and the teacher, Ms. Deana Pageot. Faithful attendance to 
their Legislative Assembly, and it’s always great to see these 
folks that come from around the world to be right here to give 
truth to our province’s motto, “from many peoples, strength,” 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But it’s also great to see today in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, two 
individuals seated. I’m speaking of Jen Adams, who I had the 
privilege of working with for the people of Saskatchewan in 
this building once upon a time. It seems like quite some time 
ago, but it’s great to see Jen. I know she’s thriving in the 
community and always paying a lot of interest in what’s 
happening in this place. But such is her interest, she’s brought a 
friend, Cassandra St. Onge, hailing from Oakshela, 
Saskatchewan, to take in the proceedings. And I just want to ask 
all members to warmly welcome them here to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just 
want to indicate, on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan 
and members on this side of the House, how pleased we are that 
folks from the Open Door Society could be joining us here 
today to witness the proceedings at the Legislative Assembly 
this morning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, newcomers to our province are a huge part of the 
success story that has been population growth in Saskatchewan 
for the last number of years. Our population, as members will 
know, has grown by 160,000 in the last decade. Fully 38 per 
cent, 38 per cent are newcomers. And so they are giving life and 
breath to the motto of this province, “from many peoples, 
strength” and they’re making Saskatchewan a better place. And 
we want to welcome them here to the Legislative Assembly as 
well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you and through you to all members of the House a special 
guest in your gallery, Captain Rod Dignean. He is a reservist 
here in Saskatchewan, a member of Canadian Reserves. He is a 
teacher from Cudworth, Saskatchewan and many of us will 
know Rod in various military schools. Rod, if you can give a 
wave. Rod has an incredible display of various artifacts of 
military campaigns, and we’ll be sure to see that probably on 
Saturday at the Legion on Spadina Crescent. But, Mr. Speaker, 
I would ask all members to give Rod a warm welcome to his 
legislature. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Northwest. 
 
Mr. Wyant: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d be remiss if I didn’t also acknowledge and follow 
the Premier in acknowledging Doug Shaw who’s in the gallery 
today. Doug’s been spending quite a bit of time with me over 
the last two and a half months travelling around Saskatchewan. 
I think we’re up to about 21 000 kilometres. Fortunately it’s my 



November 9, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2889 

brother’s truck, so I’m good with that. 
 
But Doug’s been very supportive. He’s been a good friend and 
provided some great advice to me over this last period of time. 
He’s my constituency president and chaired my last campaign 
for Saskatoon Northwest. So I wanted to welcome him to the 
Assembly. He’s been a very, very good friend, which is 
probably the most important thing, Mr. Speaker. So I’d ask all 
the members of the Assembly to welcome him to his legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I too would like to acknowledge Jim and Barb 
McAllister in the west gallery. Their friendship and support has 
meant a lot to me through my endeavours in this career, and I 
would like to thank them for coming down today. And I would 
ask everyone to please, once again, welcome them to their 
Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Medstead, 
Midale, Spiritwood, Leoville, Rabbit Lake. I do so present. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
[10:15] 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
proud to stand in my place once again to present a petition on 
behalf of the residents of Balgonie, Saskatchewan. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the undersigned residents are concerned about the 
permanent closure of Main Street access to Highway No. 1 for 
the town of Balgonie. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Take the necessary steps and actions to leave the west-in 
and west-out driving access for vehicles into and out of 
Balgonie at the intersection of Highway No. 1 and Main 
Street. 

 
The community also requests that the Government of 
Saskatchewan put up a locked gate on the apron between 
the eastbound lanes and westbound lanes of Highway 
No. 1 and Balgonie’s Main Street intersection, [Mr. 
Speaker]. This gate would allow emergency services 
access to the eastbound lanes of Highway No. 1 and to 
Main Street at the Balgonie intersection, but would not 
allow the public access to cross the east- and westbound 
lanes. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as we’ve done day in, day out, and 
presented page after page of petition, I do so again today. And 
the people that have signed this particular page of the many, 
many pages of petition that we have received on this matter are 
from Balgonie, Mr. Speaker. They’re from Regina. They’re 
from Swift Current. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition calling for critical supports for survivors of 
domestic violence. The individuals signing this petition wish to 
bring to the attention of this House the following: survivors of 
domestic violence . . . Saskatchewan has the highest rates of 
domestic violence amongst the provinces in Canada. Employers 
should be obligated to reasonably accommodate survivors of 
domestic violence in the workplace, and employees who are 
victims of domestic violence should be able to take a leave of 
absence from their employment without penalty. And, Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatchewan must do more to protect women and 
children who are survivors of domestic violence. I’d like to read 
the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan call on the 
Legislative Assembly to pass legislation providing critical 
supports for survivors of domestic violence. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing the petition today are from 
Prince Albert and Saskatoon. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I’m rising today to present a 
petition to end the unfair Sask Party tax hikes for Saskatchewan 
families and businesses. The individuals who have signed this 
petition wanted to bring to the attention of the Assembly the 
following: because of the Sask Party’s PST [provincial sales 
tax] increase, Saskatchewan has become the only province in 
the country where people are charged PST on life and health 
insurance premiums; and as well the Sask Party’s new tax on 
crop insurance is a devastating hit on producers. Mr. Speaker, 
this was overwhelmingly supported by the delegates at the 
recent SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities] conference. 
 
And many small and medium-sized businesses, including those 
in the restaurant, tourism, and construction industries, will be 
hit hard by the Sask Party tax hikes, and these businesses will 
be forced to pass these rising costs on to their customers. So I’ll 
read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Sask Party to immediately stop their unfair tax hikes on 
Saskatchewan families and businesses. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals who have signed this petition 
today are from the city of Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 



2890 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2017 

Ms. Rancourt: — I’m proud to stand in my place today to 
provide a petition to increase the funding to Prince Albert 
mobile crisis. The individuals signing this petition would like 
me to draw these points to your attention: Prince Albert mobile 
crisis unit has had to close its door during daytime hours 
resulting in a loss of resource to people in distress. The daytime 
closure of Prince Albert mobile has put stress on the Prince 
Albert police services, Victoria Hospital, and other agencies 
who may not be trained and/or qualified to provide counselling 
and intervention services to clients. And, Mr. Speaker, with 
Prince Albert having high rates of suicide and interpersonal 
violence, having no crisis service available puts people and 
families at risk. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to increase funding to 
Prince Albert mobile crisis unit so they may once again 
offer 24-hour emergency crisis service. 

 
The individuals signing this particular petition, Mr. Speaker, 
come from the communities of St. Louis and Prince Albert. I do 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
presenting a petition to reopen the Buffalo Narrows 
Correctional Centre. Mr. Speaker, this cut and closure came as a 
hard loss to the people of Buffalo Narrows in the North in last 
year’s legislative session, and that loss is still ringing through 
that community. 
 
In the prayer that reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan immediately reopen the 
Buffalo Narrows Correctional Centre to better our 
community for generations to come. 

 
Mr. Speaker, as you might expect, this particular petition is 
signed by citizens from Buffalo Narrows though it certainly 
enjoys support throughout the province. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition calling on 
the government to stop the attack on our kids’ classrooms. 
Those who have signed this petition wish to draw our attention 
to the following: that the Sask Party has cut at least $674 in 
government funding for every student across this province, and 
that they’ve also hiked education taxes by $67 million while 
cutting an additional $54 million out of the classroom; that even 
though the Sask Party is . . . to the fact that the Sask Party is 
making us all pay more and that our kids are actually getting 
less; and that the Sask Party cuts mean that Saskatchewan 
students will lose much-needed supports in their classrooms, 
including funding for buses for kindergartners and programs 
that help children with special needs and autism. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call upon 
the government to reverse the senseless cuts to our kids’ 
classrooms and stop making families, teachers, and 
everyone who works to support our education system pay 
the price for the Sask Party’s mismanagement, scandal, and 
waste. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those who have signed this petition reside in 
Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition calling 
for support for mental health emergency units. It’s well known 
that in Saskatchewan we have rising challenges with mental 
health and addictions, but our mental health funding is actually 
the lowest in Canada. And despite funding from the federal 
government and a private donor, the Sask Party has failed to go 
ahead with plans for a promised emergency mental health unit 
in Saskatoon. The Sask Party’s own report, the mental health 
action plan, seems to be a lot of plan and very little action, 
including the refusal to prioritize this unit, which leaves patients 
without the care they desperately need and puts excess pressure 
on emergency rooms. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Assembly call on the Sask Party government to 
support mental health emergency units across the province, 
and commit to supporting the otherwise funded mental 
health emergency unit in Saskatoon. 

 
The individuals signing the petition hail from Saskatoon. I do so 
present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 

Donation to Children’s Hospital 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand in the 
House today to thank a generous family in our province for 
their donation to the Jim Pattison Children’s Hospital. Mr. 
Speaker, the Broda family has donated $1 million for a spiritual 
space at the new children’s hospital in Saskatoon. The donation 
was made by Barb and Gord Broda, as well as Casimir and 
Marie Broda Family Foundation. The CEO [chief executive 
officer] of the family’s foundation, Brynn Boback-Lane, 
released a statement saying “Through the Broda family gift, Jim 
Pattison Children’s Hospital will support families of all faith, so 
that healing and hope remain a pillar of the family-centered care 
that this children’s hospital represents.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, this multi-faith space will be open 24 hours a day 
on the main floor of the hospital. It will accommodate various 
spiritual practices such as a ventilation system that will allow 
for smudging and pipe ceremonies. Mr. Speaker, we live in a 
diverse province with many children in need, and it’s our duty 



November 9, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2891 

to supply them with the best medical practices possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members please join me in thanking 
Barb and Gord Broda as well as the Casimir and Marie Broda 
Family Foundation on their generous donation to the Jim 
Pattison Children’s Hospital. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Honouring Saskatchewan’s Oldest 
Female Indigenous Veteran 

 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As a 
very proud son of a World War II veteran, it gives me a great 
honour to rise today to honour Virginia Pechawis, the oldest 
female indigenous veteran in our province. Virginia is a 
member of the Mistawasis First Nation and she left her home 
reserve for the first time at the age of 18, enlisting at a Canadian 
Army office in Prince Albert. After a short stint in Regina, she 
found herself in Kitchener for basic training. After that she was 
off to Quebec City, working to transport lumber. 
 
After the war, Virginia was given a parcel of land as a thank 
you for her time in service. And of course the issue at the time 
was that this land was land that was traditional indigenous land. 
In fact the land was on her traditional reserve. Virginia still 
lives on this land, Mr. Speaker. In 2012 she was awarded a 
Queen Elizabeth II Diamond Jubilee Medal, and in 2014 she 
received her Military Service Pin from the Lieutenant 
Governor, both to honour her contribution to military service in 
Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every year we have fewer veterans to hear from, to 
hear their stories. Ahead of Remembrance Day, and with 
Aboriginal Veterans Day having taken place this week, I would 
like to take this opportunity to proudly say and to greatly 
honour Virginia Pechawis’s service to our country alongside of 
all other indigenous veterans and all veterans who served our 
province and our country. I say to her, thank you, Virginia; and 
to her family, thank you for your grandmother, mother, and 
aunt’s contribution to our great country. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Canora-Pelly. 
 

Sturgis Lacrosse Teams Win Two Provincial Titles 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand before the 
House today, not only to congratulate two very successful 
sports teams, but a lacrosse program on their commitment to the 
sports in a community of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the U-16 [under 16] and U-19 [under 19] Sturgis 
lacrosse team took home provincial titles this past summer. The 
U-16 team took home many individual awards as well, 
recognizing William Hauber, Durban Hleboff, Seth Rayner, 
Jake Huska as well as Kishaun Gervais took home the 
tournament’s MVP [most valuable player] title. The U-19 team 
was made up of students from both Sturgis and Yorkton who 
took out many perennial favourite teams throughout the 
province and eventually winning the gold. 
 
I would also like to congratulate the coaches of these teams, 
Craig Folk, Lisa Serdachny, Amber Bartch, Conrad Peterson, 

Cary Franklin, Mark Huska, Brad Secundiak, and the club’s 
president, Brad Cameron, on their involvement with the team. 
 
Mr. Speaker, lacrosse was first introduced in 1988 in Sturgis 
Composite High School. It quickly became a favourite to the 
students and over the next years they would go in to win nine 
provincial titles in a row. Today there are over 120 athletes who 
are a part of this program competing from ages 8 to 19. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 
Sturgis lacrosse program on their two recent provincial titles 
and thank its organizers and their efforts and commitment to the 
athletes. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 

Service and Sacrifice 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I stand to recognize the 
selfless service and sacrifice of our veterans and of those 
currently in service. Saskatchewan has a proud history of 
service to our nation. People from all corners of our province 
have served courageously in every branch of the Canadian 
Forces. Like so many in our province and in this Assembly, this 
includes my family. 
 
My grandfather left Saskatchewan as a young farmer to serve 
Canada with the distinguished Royal Regina Rifles in the 
Second World War. He landed on the beaches of Normandy and 
advanced with the Allied forces until he was wounded in 
Germany in the Battle of Moyland Wood on February 18th, 
1945. And I have family that continues to serve. 
 
Such stories of sacrifice and of service are common across our 
province. They cross political divides and they shape our 
identity as a nation and a province and certainly as families and 
as individuals. 
 
Importantly on Remembrance Day we come together. As I do 
each year, I’ll stop in at the Legion to say thanks. And I’ll stand 
shoulder to shoulder at the cenotaph holding my son’s hand, not 
unlike the way I stood with Grandpa at the cenotaph when I was 
young. 
 
And while we set aside this one day to remember, we should be 
thankful every day. I ask all members of this Assembly to join 
with me in extending our thanks and our respect to those that 
serve, have served, and importantly, those that we’ve lost. May 
we always remember and may our resolve for peace be strong. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Funding for Langenburg & District Activity Centre 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
summer I had the wonderful opportunity to announce $220,000 
worth of funding from our government for the Langenburg & 
District Activity Centre. This centre has been supporting people 
with disabilities since 1980. They operate three group homes, 
two day programs, a supportive living program, and a Sarcan 



2892 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2017 

depot in both Langenburg and Esterhazy which serves 
approximately 20 people. 
 
It provides an environment where persons with disabilities have 
the opportunity to gain a sense of purpose and to interact with 
others. This capital funding will go a long way towards making 
the washrooms fully accessible and repurposing rooms to allow 
for better programming, to improve safety, and increase 
manoeuvrability. 
 
[10:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan disability strategy is committed 
to ensuring that all people with disabilities have supports that 
address their needs in a very respectful and dignified way. It is 
focused on the foundational work of six priority areas 
including: transportation, respite, accessibility legislation, 
residential services, service coordination and navigation, and 
awareness and understanding of the rights of people 
experiencing disabilities. This new funding to the activity centre 
will help participants of Langenburg’s day program experience 
that vision. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking and 
celebrating the Langenburg & District Activity Centre for 
supporting those with disabilities for over 30 years. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kevington-Wadena. 
 

Theodore Citizen Receives Sovereign’s 
Medal for Volunteers 

 
Mr. Nerlien: — Mr. Speaker, “To choose to act in recognition 
of a need, with an attitude of social responsibility and without 
concern for monetary profit, going beyond one’s basic 
obligations.” Mr. Speaker, every community in our province is 
blessed with volunteers that meet and often exceed this simple 
but profound definition. 
 
Today the Sovereign’s Medal for Volunteers are being 
presented by the Honourable Lieutenant Governor of 
Saskatchewan to exceptional people in various categories. It is 
with great personal pride that I stand in the Chamber today to 
recognize recipient Betty Baranesky of Theodore. 
 
Betty is an integral part of her community, serving with her 
church, serving as a member and treasurer of the community 
recreation board, and serving as a member of the Theodore & 
District Senior Citizen’s Club. In fact, Mr. Speaker, there are 
really no community events that Betty is not only engaged in 
but is seen as a leader and facilitator. And somehow she also 
finds time to be the volunteer editor of the Theodore Press, a 
community newspaper that rivals any of the larger media. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is truly people like Betty who make 
Saskatchewan strong. I have had the great pleasure of getting to 
know Betty and her equally community-minded husband, Mike, 
over the past few years. Mr. Speaker, in my experience the 
earlier definition of volunteer could be more succinctly put as 
“Be Like Betty.” Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

EY World Entrepreneur of the Year 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am proud to 
rise here in the House today and acknowledge an extraordinary 
Saskatchewan entrepreneur, Murad Al-Katib.  
 
I’ve known the Al-Katib family my whole life, as he grew up in 
Davidson and his father was my doctor. I’ve been closely 
following all his success with his business, AGT Food and 
Ingredients. Recently he was awarded the EY World 
Entrepreneur of the Year. Mr. Al-Katib was one of 59 nominees 
from 49 different countries competing for this prestigious 
award. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since founding AGT predecessor Saskcan Pulse in 
2001, Mr. Al-Katib has grown his business immensely. Today 
AGT has over 2,000 employees, 48 processing facilities, and 
almost $2 billion annually in sales from over 120 countries. Yet 
even with this international success, he’s remained committed 
to building his company further right here in Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in a recent interview he referenced the 
Saskatchewan work effort as a crucial factor in AGT’s success. 
And in the same interview he credits the provincial government 
for building transportation and infrastructure such as the Regina 
bypass and the Global Transportation Hub. 
 
This government will continue to develop projects like this so 
hard-working entrepreneurs have greater access to global 
markets. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate Mr. Al-Katib for 
winning this prestigious award and thank him for being a strong 
advocate for Saskatchewan. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Management of the Provincial Economy 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, when the Sask Party were first 
elected, they inherited an economy that was on the rise. 
Commodity prices were high and getting higher all the time. 
Jobs were growing, and times were good. All they had to do 
was take the credit and spend the wealth. Now that times are 
tough, we see a tired government that has nothing but excuses. 
They hide from questions about their scandals and arrogantly 
deny their flagrant mismanagement and waste. 
 
Meanwhile, every month more Saskatchewan people are losing 
their jobs. Some are a direct result of their cuts — thousands 
thrown out of working in our schools, hospitals, and seniors’ 
homes. And some are lost because the Sask Party has done 
nothing to save them — thousands of jobs lost in agriculture, 
oil, gas, and mining. These were the cornerstones of our 
economy. But despite their rhetoric, we’re losing family farms, 
losing control of our mines, and they haven’t built an inch of 
pipeline to tidewater. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 845 more people in northern Saskatchewan 
learned they lost their job last night. What is the government 
doing to help get these people get back to work? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 



November 9, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2893 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, there’s much that 
is wrong about the Hon. Leader of the Opposition’s preamble. 
In fact the economic record of the province, notwithstanding 
three years of low resource prices, I think would say otherwise. 
I would offer though this to the hon. member, that I think that 
preamble politicizes a very serious issue for many, many 
families in northern Saskatchewan today as a result of layoffs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would point out as well that I’ve been in contact 
with the CEO of the company, and so have officials, the 
ministers on this side, because this is very, very serious. It is a 
temporary layoff so we’re hopeful that after the 10-month 
period, as Cameco has said, folks will get back to work. I’m 
grateful for the fact that Cameco is talking about topping up 
some benefits. They’d like to keep those people available for 
the production when it resumes. 
 
As for our part, Mr. Speaker, rapid response resources with the 
Ministry of the Economy will be deployed to assist workers in 
the event that there is transition issues that they’re wanting to 
pursue. And finally, Mr. Speaker, I will say this: our 
government has worked very hard for 10 years to open up new 
markets for our uranium in China and India. We have made 
uranium a priority on our trade missions, Mr. Speaker. We will 
continue to do that. The long-term solution here is demand for 
uranium around the world. That’s been our priority, Mr. 
Speaker, and it’ll continue to be our priority going forward. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do appreciate those 
words from the Premier and that he’s taking this issue very 
seriously. We can’t do anything overnight to solve all of the 
problems, but that’s why we’ve been calling on the Sask Party 
to stop cutting and start investing in diversifying our economy, 
attracting new investment, and nurturing local ideas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they say they want 50 per cent renewable energy 
by 2030, but the clock is ticking, and they’ve barely even 
started. Mr. Speaker, they’ve built a bypass that doesn’t work 
for farm equipment, in Saskatchewan; a football stadium that 
can’t handle snow, in Saskatchewan. And now they’re going to 
disturbing lengths to push an imaginary megamall at the GTH 
[Global Transportation Hub] that, even if it becomes a reality, 
may never create a single job for anyone in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why has the Sask Party put so much emphasis in 
supporting a conglomerate from France and a megamall for 
Chinese businesses, but so little effort into making sure that 
Saskatchewan people can find and keep a family-supporting, 
mortgage-paying job? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, once again, there’s so much 
wrong with that preamble, especially in a very serious debate in 
the wake of an announcement from Cameco that’ll affect 
800-plus families in the province, contractors and direct 
employees. Mr. Speaker, her characterization of the bypass and 
its accommodation of agricultural equipment is wrong. Her 
characterization of a megamall at the GTH is fundamentally 
wrong and incorrect. 
 

Mr. Speaker, they’ve done this with issues like the bypass, the 
largest infrastructure . . . She’s asking, why wouldn’t the 
government be directly involved in the economy? Well the 
largest infrastructure project in the history of this province is 
that bypass. They characterize it as a project that’s gone from 
400 million to over a billion dollars, Mr. Speaker, without 
mentioning to anybody that it’s because the scope has changed, 
that it is now a true bypass, Mr. Speaker, and that it’s coming in 
on time and on budget, that I think it’s up to 90 per cent of 
contractors involved in the construction are from this province. 
 
In fact they stood in this House when the NDP [New 
Democratic Party] were . . . I think the member who’s chirping 
from his seat, the Deputy Leader, was running down the project 
and running down who was doing it. The people that were 
working on the project from this province, to the extent of 90 
per cent of the content, were sitting up in the gallery. And I’m 
sure they felt a disconnect between themselves and what they 
were hearing from members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, throughout this challenging time in our economy, 
we’ve seen our unemployment rate at about the national 
average. Now it’s below the national average, Mr. Speaker. I 
would also note for members opposite that after the growth plan 
of this province has been in place by this government for 10 
years, there are 64,000 more jobs than existed when they were 
in office in 2007, and 1.16 million people. We’re going to 
continue with our growth plan. We’re going to continue to work 
to be competitive and open up new markets for the resources 
that we produce here in the province. 
 
The Speaker: — Members, today we’re having a little bit of 
troubles with the mikes. So I’d ask that all members please 
extend extra respect to the members answering the question and 
asking it. 
 
I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Map of Global Transportation Hub 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, at the GTH the scandal just 
keeps getting worse. We now know that one of the 
government’s own websites is advertising a map of the GTH 
that exists only in Bill Boyd’s dreams. Mr. Speaker, there are 
buildings that aren’t really there and even companies that just 
don’t exist. There’s even one called — wait for it — Brad. 
What is this Brad company, Mr. Speaker? Mr. Speaker, it’s not 
being sold as a rendering; it’s being sold as fact by this 
government. And, Mr. Speaker, with all that effort, we already 
know that the megamall they’re pushing won’t create a job for a 
single Saskatchewan person. 
 
Remember, the Sask Party designed and are promoting with 
their Chinese partners a loophole for any business that sets up 
shop at the proposed megamall to dodge the rules, and instead 
of having to hire two Saskatchewan workers, could hire zero. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the Premier letting a government website 
host a misleading advertisement to help create jobs for other 
people while Saskatchewan people need his help so much 
more? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Global 



2894 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2017 

Transportation Hub. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, what the member opposite, what the Leader of the 
Opposition is referring to is a conceptual map, Mr. Speaker. 
Conceptual maps are used by developers. I think all one has to 
do is drive around the city of Regina and look at the giant 
billboards of new developments that are being built. 
 
In fact the members opposite would know that, as they’re 
driving out to the Global Transportation Hub they would drive 
by the Westerra development, Mr. Speaker. And I would 
encourage members to go on the Westerra website, which has a 
map, a conceptual map, conceptual design of what that 
community will look like. It includes a grocery store, drug 
store, gas bar, and c-store [convenience store], hotels, boutique 
shops, senior living, apartment living. Mr. Speaker, we know 
that those things are . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, we know that those are 
developments that the proponents of that development, 
Westerra, would like to see and are planning to build for in the 
future. But we know that they’re in phase 1 and so that there is 
minimal development there at that point. But every single 
developer in this city and this province — dare I say, in the 
world — uses conceptual maps to show what the plan is for the 
future. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Support for Northerners 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, let me repeat for this House: 
845 workers got notice that they lost their jobs yesterday. These 
are Saskatchewan people who had good, family-supporting jobs 
in the North. These job losses will have a devastating effect on 
the economy of our whole province, but especially in the North, 
where this government has forgotten. In these communities and 
in our families, the pain is unbearable, Mr. Speaker. As well as 
the northern workers, many workers come from across the 
province too, from Moose Jaw, Regina, Prince Albert, 
Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a crisis. Besides this government’s 
supposed rapid response team, I want to know what concrete 
efforts is the Sask Party going to take? What is it going to do to 
help Cameco get these workers back on the job sooner than in 
10 months? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — I want to thank the member for his 
question. Mr. Speaker, there’s no question about it. This 
particular industry has a great track record ensuring that First 
Nations, Métis, that northerners are employed in good jobs, in 
very good-paying jobs. And that’s a credit to the companies that 
are there. I think that 48 per cent number is specific in fact to 
Cameco. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the problem that we face now is that we have a 
price that is lower for longer. We’ve seen these kind of 
temporary layoffs in the potash industry in the past as well, and 
the good news is that they’ve been, for the most part, 
temporary. Mr. Speaker, I’m going to take the word of the CEO 
of the company and Cameco officials when they say this is a 
temporary measure, and that they’re going to work to be there 
for their employees in the meantime because they want them 
back. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the other thing governments can do in 
addition to offering any rapid response for those seeking a 
transition, which we’ll do, governments can be unequivocal in 
their support for uranium and for the use of nuclear energy 
around the world, even if it doesn’t make economic sense in our 
province, because when nuclear energy is used around the 
world it obviously creates a demand for our product, for what 
we mine. I would also point out to my hon. friend and to all 
members of the House that our government has worked very 
hard to open up new markets. 
 
[10:45] 
 
Prior to our trade mission initiatives with the Harper 
government, we weren’t selling any uranium into India. I had 
the pleasure of being at the presentation with Prime Minister 
Modi of India when that changed, when Saskatchewan uranium 
moved into the market. It’s true in China as well. We now are 
seeing Saskatchewan uranium move into China, which was not 
available to us as a part of our engagement. 
 
So that’s the direct answer to my hon. friend. We’ll continue to 
support employees now, but we’ll also, in the long term, work 
to ensure open markets, more markets for uranium. And one 
final point — I hope he has another question — we’re going to 
continue to make sure our royalty structure is competitive. And 
I look forward to a discussion of that as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier and the 
Saskatchewan Party have known for quite some time with the 
low uranium prices that there was a definite threat to our mining 
sector in northern Saskatchewan, and they sat on their hands, 
Mr. Speaker. Instead of developing and diversifying our 
northern economy, Mr. Speaker, they cut valuable programs 
like NORTEP [northern teacher education program]. They shut 
down the Buffalo Narrows Correctional Centre. There’s no new 
housing construction in the North. They totally ignored the 
northern highways challenges, Mr. Speaker, and the list goes 
on. 
 
And now we have 845 more people joining the 2,200 workers 
in Prince Albert and northern Saskatchewan that are out of 
work year to year. This is devastating, Mr. Speaker, and the 
number will only get worse. The spinoff of job losses will come 
soon, Mr. Speaker, if there’s no action from this government: 
the services, the suppliers, local businesses, and the list goes on. 
 
We need the government to act and act now instead of sitting on 
their hands for the past 10 years when they knew this day was 
coming. We in the opposition, Mr. Speaker, will work with 
them on any effective action that they take to support the 



November 9, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2895 

families affected and the communities in need. 

Again, Mr. Speaker, what is the government doing to get these 
workers back on the job as soon as possible? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Leader of the NDP 
wants to, I guess, take some political shots related to this 
particular . . . He just said yes, he does. Mr. Speaker, well one 
thing we can do in this Assembly as political parties, as 
legislators, is be unequivocal in our support of uranium mining 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Leader 
of the party just said, the Deputy Leader of the party just said, 
and we have. 

Mr. Speaker, the leader, the would-be premier of the province, 
the member from Meewasin who is running for the leadership 
has not been unequivocal in his support of nuclear energy. He 
has not. We’ve got the quotes here. I mean if they want to be 
political about this, you have not, and we need to be in this 
Assembly. Fifteen per cent of the world’s uranium comes from 
our province. I would say to that member through you, Mr. 
Speaker, that we do need to be unequivocal of our support for 
nuclear energy around the world. 

Have there been candidates from the NDP, even in the last 
election, who said we shouldn’t even mine uranium, Mr. 
Speaker? So while the member says, what are we going to do, 
we will continue to work with the workers in terms of rapid 
response. We have increased any number of supports and 
investments in northern Saskatchewan. We will continue to be 
supportive of northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And more 
to the point, we will be unequivocal in our support for uranium 
mining and for the nuclear energy industry around the world 
that creates a demand for that uranium industry. And we will 
continue to open up markets and keep royalties competitive, 
something members didn’t vote for either, something they 
opposed as well, Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, my heart is with the 845 
families who don’t know where their next paycheque will come 
from. And I understand that the government is saying they can 
only do so much, but it’s because they have been ignoring the 
North for so long. We need the government to stop ignoring the 
North. They don’t do enough on our health care. They don’t do 
enough with mental health. They cut NORTEP. They cut 
education. They cut jobs. And they cut off the rest of us, and 
they cut us off from the rest of the province by cutting STC 
[Saskatchewan Transportation Company]. 

Mr. Speaker, when will the Sask Party stop making excuses and 
start investing in the northern economy and start supporting 
northern people? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 

Hon. Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to 
the member for the questions. I guess I would just highlight a 
few things that we are doing in the North, and one under Social 

Services, community living service delivery funds, a total of 26 
community-based organizations that serve northern 
communities. This year we’re providing 28.3 million to 
northern disability community-based organizations. Funding to 
Social Services northern disability community-based 
organizations has more than doubled since 2007, with an 
overall increase of 16.1 million. 

Mr. Speaker, a community mental health nurse and suicide 
prevention community wellness worker has been hired to 
provide mental health and addictions services in La Loche. 
Northern medical services provide funding support for monthly 
visiting psychiatry services in La Loche and other northern 
communities. Services are also available by Telehealth. 

Mr. Speaker, we’re doing lots in the North. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

Access to Bus Services for Northerners 

Mr. Vermette: — And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, we’re losing 
so many of our young people to suicide. Mr. Speaker, the 
people of the North need more than words and excuses. They 
need respect and they need action. It seems like the only time 
the North doesn’t get ignored is when it comes to the cuts. 

Mr. Speaker, they didn’t think about how the North would be 
hurt when they cut STC either. In fact they didn’t look at it at 
all. They didn’t consider the economic impact. And from Health 
to Corrections, not a single ministry was asked how important 
STC was to them. Since they didn’t do their homework at all, 
how do they justify this heartless cut that has left people and 
communities across the North cut off and stranded and forced 
many to hitchhike on dangerous roads? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 

Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we did analyze STC before the decision was made to wind it up, 
Mr. Speaker. And the losses of 85 to $100 million over the next 
five years, Mr. Speaker, were just unsustainable. Mr. Speaker, 
we felt that very strongly that 85 to $100 million could be put 
into other programs, Mr. Speaker, such as health and education 
and other services for the North, Mr. Speaker. 

I’m very happy, Mr. Speaker, that a lot of private industry has 
picked up and more are applying and picking up routes that will 
service the North, such as Beauval, Ile-a-la-Crosse, Mr. 
Speaker, and La Ronge. Mr. Speaker, this will happen and 
people will be able to have rides from the North and throughout 
the province, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 

Maintenance of Benefits for Reservists 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Captain Rod Dignean 
is a Canadian reservist, and he is here with us today. From April 
2013 to March 2014, Rod completed a tour of service with the 
Canadian Armed Forces in Afghanistan. Mr. Speaker, Rod is 



2896 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2017 

also a teacher and he took a one-year leave from his teaching 
position to serve in Afghanistan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Rod tried to buy back his pension benefits for the 
year he was serving his country, but he can’t. We have 
legislation that we worked together on that protects reservists 
while they take that leave to go and fight for our county. But 
that support ends when they come back home. 
 
So today can the minister commit to taking steps to support 
veterans and ensure that they receive their pensions? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is 
absolutely right that we worked together to pass a bill to make 
sure that reservists, when they go on active duty, have their 
employment status protected so that they’re able to return to 
work. We’re a grateful province, and we thank all veterans for 
the service that they provided. And we want to make sure that 
we do everything we can to facilitate their return back to private 
life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d be pleased to meet with the member opposite 
and with the gentleman here and see what we can do, and see 
whether there’s changes that are necessary to ensure that his 
pension is restored, and that we’re able to go forward and give 
them every support that they deserve. And from a grateful 
province, we thank them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the words from 
the minister. And I appreciate that he will meet with the 
reservist, and that we work together to finish that loop and tie 
that loop together that we started 10 years, 10 years ago, and it 
moved right across Canada. 
 
So again, to the minister: just to make sure on the commitment 
that you will meet with the member after question period to 
discuss this issue and we’ll work together to resolve this issue. 
Is that correct? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Usage of Government Email Account 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, every time I ask the Premier 
about his broken promise to only use his government email for 
government business, he either ignores the question altogether, 
he laughs, or he comes up with a list of excuses instead of 
saying that his government email is just not working . . . or 
including, my apologies, saying that his government email is 
not working. In fact even though there is no supporting 
documentation of any kind, the Premier’s office claims that his 
email was down for the better part of two weeks. 

Mr. Speaker, if the Premier of our province can’t rely on his 
email to work, if it goes down for weeks at a time, and if he 
trusts his party’s email server more than the one the people of 
this province are paying for, I think we can all agree that this is 
a pretty serious problem. Surely the minister responsible for IT 
[information technology] has looked into this. So can the 
Minister for Central Services please update the people of 
Saskatchewan? What work has she done to ensure that the 
Premier’s email issues are being addressed? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
grateful for the good group of women over at ITO [Information 
Technology Office] who work with government to ensure that a 
very large and a complex IT system is working as best as 
possible. I think it’s fair to say, though I’m sure no expert in the 
IT sector, Mr. Speaker, any number of people would testify to 
that, I do think though that it’s fair to say that in larger, more 
complex IT environments, there are more challenges.  
 
In fact I understand, I’m told by members — I haven’t been 
emailing yet here in the last while — but I’m told by members 
that it’s down. The server’s down right now. And so on an 
occasion like this, were there to be an email message I really 
needed to get out on an urgent basis, and we’ve been talking 
about urgent issues in this place, I’d use whatever email I could. 
And if the server the member said wasn’t working, I’d use a . . . 
I have a Gmail account too. I’d use that one and get the 
message out, knowing that the emails are available to the FOI 
[freedom of information] as they should be, and also knowing 
that they can be collected and are being collected for the 
Provincial Archives. Thanks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Education Curriculum 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, we know that the Education 
minister isn’t all that happy with the curriculum these days. Her 
statements about there being too much infusion of indigenous 
education have raised alarm bells with people all across this 
province, and the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation and the 
FSIN [Federation of Sovereign Indigenous Nations] are 
speaking out. Well, Mr. Speaker, they, along with the rest of 
Saskatchewan people, deserve an explanation about her 
comments or, at the very least, they deserve an apology.  
 
Mr. Speaker, is the minister willing to admit that she was wrong 
and retract her troubling statements? Or is it her position that 
the entire province misunderstood what she said? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’ve 
spoken to Bobby Cameron of the FSIN, and Pat Maze at STF 
[Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation] yesterday to clear up any 
confusion, and I was very clear. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government was the first in Canada to 
implement treaty education in K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 
12]. And we are proud of that record, and I am proud of that 



November 9, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2897 

record, Mr. Speaker. As Education minister, I will continue to 
ensure that all K to 8 and 9 to 12 students are taught the history 
of our indigenous people, treaties, and residential schools. Since 
2012, Mr. Speaker, we’ve provided the Office of the Treaty 
Commissioner over $1 million to deliver treaty education and 
renew resources which are in use in schools across the province 
and will continue to be. No question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, it is alarming to say the least. We 
have the most powerful Education minister in the history of this 
province threatening to make wholesale changes to our 
children’s education because of a story that was relayed to her 
about one homework assignment.  
 
And, Mr. Speaker, now she’s talking about overhauling the 
math curriculum. Well just a few years ago, Mr. Speaker, the 
current Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport along with the 
former Education minister conducted extensive consultations on 
the math curriculum. At that time, the Education minister, the 
current Finance minister said, “Feedback was generally positive 
regarding the curriculum.” Mr. Speaker, she added, and I quote, 
“Additional instruction supports may be required for teachers 
and parents.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, provincial math teachers agree, but it’s hard 
to do when you’re cutting millions out of the classroom. Has 
the minister consulted with her ministry, teachers, or members 
of her cabinet on her latest whim? And has she at least 
considered their recommendations? And when will this minister 
come clean about her motivation and plans for any changes to 
our kids’ curriculum? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
[11:00] 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. There is some 
exciting curriculum developments coming out of Education that 
are great news for this province, Mr. Speaker. For one, tech 
groups in this province said last week, after lobbying for years, 
that they were thrilled at our announcement in the Throne 
Speech that we plan to introduce coding. French groups in the 
province were quoted as saying they were extremely pleased 
that we plan to decrease obstacles for young teachers from 
francophone provinces who want to teach here. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the biggest tsunami came in math. Last week 
I did a number of interviews discussing our plans to expand 
reinforcement and supports for students in school so they don’t 
have to go to outside tutors to broaden access to common sense 
methods that have proven successful in other jurisdictions. 
 
And what about the radical idea that you let your kids take their 
textbook home so they can actually study from it? And I’m not 
saying it; it’s parents, Mr. Speaker: “Being allowed to bring a 
textbook home, what a great idea.” “I’m happy to see you 
challenging the math curriculum. It’s been a long time coming 
but better late than never,” Mr. Speaker. “Gives me confidence 
that things will be sorted out before my little guy goes to 
school,” and “Good things are coming in Saskatchewan.” If the 

responses we’ve received across the province last week are any 
indication — and, Mr. Speaker, they’re still pouring in — we’re 
on the right track. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 

Geo-Memorial Program Dedication 
 
Hon. Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Captain David McAndie was a gallant and well-decorated 
Canadian officer of the First World War. Today, just a few 
short days away from Remembrance Day, I have the privilege 
of sharing with the Assembly on behalf of the government that 
a geo-memorial dedication will officially be named to honour 
this Canadian hero. 
 
David Ross McAndie was born in Tarbet, Scotland on the 17th 
of May in 1887. At the age of 17, he joined the Seaforth 
Highlanders where he served for three years prior to being 
transferred to the Army Reserve in 1907. 
 
In 1911 he immigrated to Canada and homesteaded in 
Saskatchewan near Assiniboia. As we know World War I broke 
out in 1914 and in April of ’15, McAndie enlisted with the 46th 
Battalion Canadian Expeditionary Force in Moose Jaw. 
 
Leaving Canada on the 5th of July, he arrived in Plymouth, 
England just two weeks later. Immediately he moved to 
Shorncliffe Camp where he was trained prior to being assigned 
to the 10th Battalion, Canadian Expeditionary Force. He then 
sailed to France on the 28th of August 1915. With past military 
experience, McAndie quickly moved up the ranks and by the 
fall of 1916, the now Sergeant McAndie fought at the Battle of 
the Somme with the Fighting Tenth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in less than three years with the Battalion, 
McAndie would earn four gallantry declarations. He was 
awarded the Distinguished Conduct Medal during the Battle of 
the Somme for displaying great courage and coolness on several 
occasions under heavy fire. At Vimy in April of 1917, he was 
awarded a Mentioned in Despatches for gallant and 
distinguished services in the field. 
 
In the Battle of Arleux he would be awarded a Military Medal 
when “the officers of his company having become casualties, he 
took charge and displayed the greatest initiative and 
resourcefulness in carrying the attack through the village and on 
to the objective.” 
 
In the summer of 1918, McAndie was commissioned and 
serving as a company commander during the great breakout, 
which started the last hundred days of the war. 
 
On the 8th of August 1918, Captain David McAndie was hit by 
enemy shellfire in Beaufort village. Tragically he succumbed to 
his injuries just one week later at the age of 31. There was less 
than three months left in the war. 
 
For his actions and ultimate sacrifice on that day, McAndie was 
awarded the Military Cross, one of the highest honours of the 



2898 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2017 

First World War. His Military Cross citation states: 
 

For conspicuous gallantry during an attack. He led his 
company splendidly, capturing and consolidating the 
position. He then rapidly pushed his men forward and 
filled an important gap in the line. He later captured and 
held a very strong garrison position considerably in front 
of the final objective. He did very fine work. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we formally announce the naming of McAndie 
Coulee, located on the Lake of the Rivers near Assiniboia, 
Saskatchewan. This prominent coulee is located in the region 
homesteaded by Captain McAndie. We’d like to thank 
Lieutenant Colonel Peter J. Boyle, curator of the Calgary 
Highlanders Regimental Museum, for bringing forward the 
geo-memorial place name nomination. 
 
The geo-memorial commemorative naming program was 
established to honour Saskatchewan military personnel, police 
officers, emergency responders, and others who are killed in the 
service of the country or our province. 
 
I think we can all agree that the brave and selfless actions 
Captain McAndie displayed in the face of great danger through 
many battles in World War I needed to be remembered and 
honoured. He, along with countless other brave women and 
men, made the ultimate sacrifice so that we could have freedom. 
We will remember them. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Just to 
briefly respond to the ministerial statement on behalf of the 
official opposition, I want first of all to thank the minister for 
providing an advance copy of his remarks, and certainly it tells 
an amazing story, an amazing Saskatchewan story for which we 
are all grateful as people in this province. And that the name of 
Captain David McAndie might ring out from that coulee down 
in the south country is a wonderful memorial to a storied 
military career and a tremendous sacrifice that was made for the 
people of this province and for the people of Canada, as 
Canada, even at that time, struggled to become a nation. 
 
So I just want to say on behalf of the official opposition, Mr. 
Speaker, again thank you to the minister for providing the 
advance preview of the remarks. But certainly, for many 
families, geo-memorial is a tremendous way that that name 
might ring out through the ages. And I know that there’s a 
McCall Lake in northeastern Saskatchewan that we in the 
McCall family look to in part of our commemoration of 
Corporal Roy McCall who is buried in northeastern Italy and 
died in that campaign in World War II. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we thank the McAndie family for their service 
and we thank all veterans, and again do our part in making sure 
that we will remember them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, I will be asking for leave of the 
Assembly to move a motion of urgent and pressing necessity 
under rule 61 with respect to yesterday’s announcement of over 
800 jobs lost in northern Saskatchewan. I have the text of the 

motion to read to the Assembly and will provide a brief 
reasoning as to the urgent and pressing necessity of this motion. 
 
The Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition may briefly 
explain the motion and read the text of said motion. I recognize 
the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 61 
 

Support for Northern Workers and the Nuclear Energy 
Industry 

 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
issue is of urgent and pressing necessity to not only northern 
Saskatchewan, but all of us as well. We heard just last night 
about the suspension of operations at the Cameco McArthur 
River mining and Key Lake milling operations. Mr. Speaker, 
845 workers will lose their jobs. These job losses will have a 
devastating effect on the economy in our whole province. These 
workers come from across the province and, Mr. Speaker, these 
jobs add to the 2,200 that were already lost in the North since 
last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for these and other reasons, it is important that this 
Assembly address this matter immediately. And, Mr. Speaker, 
since you’ve asked for the text of the motion — I’m not moving 
it yet because I do have other remarks if this House allows me 
to give them. But the motion reads: 
 

That this Assembly, in response to the announced 
suspension of operations at Cameco McArthur River 
mining and Key Lake milling operations, take immediate 
action to support the families of the more than 800 workers 
who have lost their jobs as well and the hundreds more and 
entire communities that will feel the impact of this 
shutdown. 

 
The Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has requested 
leave. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’d like to thank 
members on both sides of the House for this opportunity to have 
this very important emergency debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 845 more people in northern Saskatchewan 
learned that they lost their jobs last night. That’s on top of the 
2,200 jobs that disappeared in the North since last year. These 
job losses are a devastating shock for northern Saskatchewan 
but also to the entire province. We’re rising here today to help 
ensure that these workers can get back to work. 
 
We have to understand and realize that as a province when one 
region suffers, we all suffer, and the job losses and the impact 
felt by working families won’t be limited to the 850 jobs that 
were lost yesterday. Workers from across the province 
depended on these jobs to help put food on the table. The 
spinoff job losses will also come soon if there is no action from 
this government — the services, the suppliers, local businesses, 



November 9, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2899 

caterers, the flight contractors. Mr. Speaker, the list goes on. 
 
When people are working in the North, people are contributing 
to the economy in the North. What we need today is a 
commitment from the government to work with Cameco and 
these workers to get them back to work. 
 
The Sask Party has failed to diversify the economy in the 
province and so when times are tough, like we’re seeing today, 
workers have no where to go. That’s why we’re seeing job 
losses across the province because the Sask Party has no plan, 
no plan for our economy, and their cuts and mismanagement 
isn’t inspiring confidence for anyone. So today we need a 
commitment from the government to help these workers in the 
short term, but we also need a plan, a real plan that talks about 
diversifying the economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in March of 2013 the Premier said, “Do you know 
what, the best program for First Nations and Métis people in 
Saskatchewan is not a program at all — it’s Cameco.” Mr. 
Speaker, relying on a private company in a boom and bust 
industry is not a plan at all. We need a balanced approach that 
allows people to put food on the table in good times and in bad. 
 
In the last Throne Speech there was nothing, no mention at all, 
of anything in the North. We know that more heartless cuts and 
mismanagement won’t help the workers at Cameco. It won’t 
help the thousands of others looking for work or those who 
have given up looking. 
 
So in addition to the government needing to support these 
workers, we’re calling on them to come up a plan for the North. 
The North doesn’t need sympathy. They don’t need charity, but 
we need action and we need a plan. The Sask Party must stop 
cutting and start investing in diversifying our economy, 
attracting new investments, and nurturing local ideas. The 
people of Saskatchewan and the future of our province depends 
on it. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move the motion. I’m sure 
others will want to join in on this debate. So I move: 
 

That this Assembly, in response to the announced 
suspension of operations at Cameco McArthur River 
mining and Key Lake milling operations, take immediate 
action to support the families of the more than 800 workers 
who have lost their jobs as well and the hundreds more and 
entire communities that will feel the impact of this 
shutdown. 

 
The Speaker: — We’ll take the motion as read. The Leader of 
the Opposition has put forward the motion. Is the Assembly 
ready for the question? I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. First of 
all, I want to thank the hon. member for the motion. We will be 
proposing an amendment after the conclusion of my remarks. 
But, Mr. Speaker, I do want to thank the Hon. Leader of the 
NDP, the official opposition, for raising what is a very, very 
important issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the very first thing I would like to say, through 
you and through this Chamber, is our concern and thoughts for 

the employees and for their families. We have direct employees 
impacted. We have contract employees impacted. And 
obviously their families will be feeling the effect of this. And 
it’s quite right for the mover to indicate that these are 
employees that live all over the province, a lot of them in the 
North, which is very positive, but people working in the 
particular mines in question here, at McArthur River mine, at 
the mill at Key Lake, are also from different corners of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
[11:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I remember I was in India on a trade mission in 
2011 where we were in part trying to work to open up the 
Indian market to Saskatchewan uranium because it had been 
closed to Saskatchewan uranium for decades. Mr. Speaker, 
some of the challenges related to the status of India, the 
non-proliferation treaty. And we worked with the Harper 
government at the time to say it was very important in a country 
that had a robust civilian nuclear energy industry, that 
Saskatchewan uranium, our uranium, some of the richest in the 
world in terms of the quality of the ore, and even in the amount, 
should be accessible to the Indian customers that we might 
have. 
 
And right about that time when we were there in 2011, 
Fukushima happened — a terrible, terrible disaster that threw 
the entire nuclear energy industry into a lot of understandable 
upheaval. Mr. Speaker, no one, no one can even imagine what it 
was like for those who were directly in the wake of the nuclear 
fallout, if I can use that word, of that particular tsunami of the 
Fukushima disaster. 
 
And understandably since then, we all know what happened in 
Japan, which was also another source for our robust nuclear 
energy and who . . . and by the way, they had been stockpiling 
uranium. They just stopped production. They stopped obviously 
using uranium to make electricity in Japan, and interestingly 
enough, they’ve moved in part to coal since then. Very slowly 
have some reactors in Japan, I think it might only be one as of 
last March — maybe now two, the Deputy House Leader tells 
me — have come back online. 
 
But what happened in the wake of that, Mr. Speaker, was a 
historic drop in uranium prices. Seventy per cent, Mr. Speaker, 
uranium prices have dropped 70 per cent since 2011. 
 
And so the companies involved, not just Cameco but Areva and 
other concerns in the North, have faced the challenge of trying 
to stay operational with a 70 per cent drop in prices. And I think 
it’s fair to say that Cameco in particular, but all the companies, 
have worked hard to avoid layoffs, to keep people working. 
But, Mr. Speaker, obviously the company has come to the point 
where . . . Cameco anyway has come to the point where it just 
doesn’t make any sense anymore. 
 
They’ve even signalled they’re dropping their dividend. So it’s 
not like shareholders are going to maintain the same sort of 
source of income while employees are being laid off. They’re 
reducing their dividend and indicating, I think, to employees, 
that there will be additional support for them over and above 
what they would be eligible for. They’ve also indicated that it’s 
a 10-month, temporary production shut-off, and that they fully 



2900 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2017 

expect workers to come back. 
 
I think they’re working to make sure that they can retain their 
employees because they’re good employees and they’re valued 
by Cameco. I note, Mr. Speaker, that one of the — and this will 
be in the body of the amendment that we’re proposing, I’ll 
propose a little bit later on — that the United Steelworkers 
Local 8914 president, Denis O’Hara, said this about Cameco, 
that they are “a fair and compassionate employer.” And then he 
noted as well, Denis O’Hara did, that they’ve committed to 
reopening the two facilities, topping the benefits off to the 
laid-off employees, and encourage that approach by Cameco, 
which I would too in this Assembly. 
 
I think this motion needs to acknowledge that Cameco has 
handled this in a way that I think is compassionate, but we need 
to encourage them to continue to do that. We need to encourage 
them in this Assembly to make sure they follow up on the 
commitment they’ve made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a government we have been exceedingly proud 
of this industry, not only because we’re responsible for 15 per 
cent of the world’s production; not only because I think it’s 
about 3 per cent of the lights in the United States will burn 
tonight because of Saskatchewan uranium involved in their 
nuclear cycle; not only because this resource puts us on the 
world map, puts us on a real map; but because in part, Mr. 
Speaker, I would say of the record of the employers in the 
industry in employing First Nations and Métis people, they 
have a better record. I would say this in this House. I believe 
they have a better record, Cameco in particular, than any other 
mining company I’m aware of, than any oil company that I’m 
aware of. I think the current number is 48 per cent of the 
workforce, women and men that work for Cameco, are First 
Nation, Métis — northerners. 
 
We need more of that, Mr. Speaker. We have two members 
from the North on the other side who I think very sincerely and 
passionately advocate for their constituents. Mr. Speaker, I want 
those members to know that we understand that northern 
Saskatchewan obviously contributes to so much more of the 
province than just the immediate North obviously. But all of 
Saskatchewan benefits from this resource and others that we 
find in the North that are sustainably developed. 
 
So this is not good news. When I got the call and had the chat, 
obviously this is terrible news for those workers. There’s some 
optimism here though, as we’ve seen in the potash industry. 
Where potash companies have announced temporary layoffs, 
people have gone back to work. We see, Mr. Speaker, that’s the 
commitment here from Cameco, and I’ve come to appreciate 
the leadership of Cameco as a group of women and men that do 
what they say they’re going to do, that keep their word. And I 
do not think, I’m very confident that they would not have made 
public a commitment to put those folks back to work in 10 
months or so if they didn’t absolutely intend to do that. 
 
We will work with Cameco. We will work with the workers as 
well through our rapid response unit. I mean it is not a perfect 
solution here. There is no perfect solution when someone’s lost 
their job, even if it’s temporarily. But there are resources that 
we can offer to workers in terms of transition. Some may want 
to . . . We know that in some layoffs in some other industries, 

some just decided they didn’t want to do that work anymore and 
they moved on to something else, and I think we were able to 
provide some counselling and resources to assist that. We’ll 
make that available. 
 
What else can we do as legislators for this particular sector — 
for Cameco itself; for the employees that are laid off and we 
want to come back to work — but for the industry? Well, Mr. 
Speaker, we can ensure that our royalty rates are competitive. In 
2013 this government undertook the beginning of an overhaul 
of our royalty structure. The uranium companies came to us, 
Cameco included, and said you’re not . . . This is not a very 
competitive place. We’re competing with Kazakhstan, and to 
some extent in the United States and other parts of the world 
where they’re making it very difficult for us to make the case to 
our board and our shareholders that we should invest more or 
operate more in the province. And part of the problem is the 
royalty structure, they said.  
 
And we thought there was some credence to the case and began 
to make changes, indicated that we could only do it in steps to 
make sure it was affordable in terms of the budget context. Mr. 
Speaker, we could all in this Assembly be unequivocal in our 
support for competitive royalties, not for breaks or giveaways to 
any company, but just that we would be competitive. And I 
would say to my hon. friends opposite, respectfully, they have 
not been unequivocal about that. They didn’t support those 
changes. I remember ads they ran against a competitive uranium 
royalty structure. I remember that. Under a different leader, on a 
different day. That’s a mixed signal that doesn’t help the 
industry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve worked very hard as a government to champion new 
markets in India and China. The Chinese situation’s very 
important for our uranium industry because they, as I 
mentioned in question period, they have the most expansive, 
robust, and growing civilian nuclear energy program on the 
planet. They’re building reactors. And so we’ve worked very 
hard with our then federal prime minister, Harper. I worked 
directly with him. We raised it at every Chinese trade mission 
with the right officials there to try to ensure that our uranium 
could be a part of their civilian energy system. 
 
Here’s the good news . . . And a lot of people said, I don’t think 
it’s ever going to happen. I’m not sure if Cameco . . . Well, they 
were optimistic. They believed it. But I’m not sure if all of 
those stakeholders in the industry believed it could ever happen. 
And I remember the prime minister saying, you know, it would 
be really good if they do this. I’ve got some political issues here 
in Ottawa because if I do this, I have people in the House of the 
Commons, and they’re brethren and sisters of the party 
opposite, who will oppose this because it involves uranium, 
because it involves nuclear power. 
 
So he said, I’m hoping you’ll be able to generate some support, 
especially if you could have northern leaders and First Nations 
and Métis leaders say, this is good for our province. This is 
good for the uranium industry, and it’s good for northerners. 
And I want to thank those who did that. I think the member 
from Meadow Lake worked closely with First Nations leaders 
to ensure that that fulsome support was there. 
 
And then we did the same thing in India, as I mentioned in 



November 9, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2901 

question period, India who’s not currently in on the 
non-proliferation side of things, by the way. They also have a 
robust civilian energy program, nuclear energy program, and we 
weren’t accessing the market. We worked on that hard with the 
prime minister, and we see some success. Obviously the 
demand’s not high enough to keep this mine and the mill open, 
so we need to continue to work on that. 
 
And one final thing I would offer to members opposite who are 
members and leaders in a political party, who set a tone for the 
business environment even though they’re in the opposition. I 
would encourage them to be unequivocal in their support of 
uranium mining, and more so, nuclear energy. Because it’s hard 
for me to understand how the members can advocate for the 
uranium mining industry when they don’t like nuclear energy, 
because there’s no other use for the uranium. Well, there’s the 
. . . obviously there’s a medical application, and we’re leading 
in that worldwide because of the investment we’ve made at the 
University of Saskatchewan. 
 
But without the support for the nuclear energy industry, and if 
you are public about your opposition to it, how can you then 
send the signal to those workers today or to the world markets 
today or to those who invest in uranium that this is the 
welcoming place that it should be, with 15 per cent of the 
world’s production? Just in 2015 at the New Democrat 
convention there was a resolution that said the Saskatchewan 
NDP oppose expanding international trade in Saskatchewan 
uranium with any nation that is non-signatory to the nuclear 
non-proliferation treaty or the comprehensive test-ban treaty 
That’s India, because of the history between two countries there 
obviously. 
 
And I don’t know if this passed. The members would probably 
say, well don’t worry; it didn’t pass. But that sends a signal. 
That sends a signal to the industry and to the workers. If one 
political party that’s aspiring to be the government says, you 
know what? We would want to ban the trade of our uranium 
with India, after we’ve worked so hard to open up that market. 
 
Here’s another resolution: 
 

Be it resolved that the NDP urge the Saskatchewan 
government to not move forward with any nuclear and/or 
uranium development. 

 
And we see it in convention after convention at the party. And I 
get that you want open debate, but I hope as leaders in the party 
you will say to those constituency associations, this is the 
wrong signal for the North. Let’s not send that signal to 
northern workers, whether they’re still working or laid off. I 
hope you will say to your constituency associations, bring 
forward whatever you want. But please let’s send a signal of 
defence and support for the people working in the industry, not 
resolutions that, if they ever were government policy, would see 
more job losses, permanent job losses. That’s what would 
happen. 
 
We have the leader of the NDP, the former leader of the NDP in 
the campaign signed the nomination paper of a candidate that 
said, lots wrong with nuclear power — he was a candidate — 
that is one resource I’d agree to be left in the ground. That’s 
what he said . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The Deputy Leader 

is heckling on this point. This candidate . . . He wants to fight 
for uranium jobs in the North, and I appreciate that. But, Mr. 
Speaker, to the Deputy Leader, they had a candidate that said, 
lots wrong with nuclear, and that’s one resource I’d agree to be 
left in the ground. The only way I’d agree to nuclear is if we 
can store the spent rods in Brad Wall’s house, is what the tweet 
. . . That’s a candidate. 
 
So I would say to the hon. member, I do not doubt her sincerity. 
I do not doubt it for a moment, the Leader of the Opposition, in 
this respect. I do not doubt the sincerity of the members for 
northern Saskatchewan, because they live there. They know the 
importance of uranium mining. They know the importance of 
the nuclear cycle and how it drives demand for what we do, that 
creates high-paying jobs. 
 
But I am not sure, but I am not sure that those in leadership in 
that party, others in leadership who aspire, to a degree . . . 
Because the member for Saskatoon Meewasin who wants to be 
the premier of this province, has said, say no to the 
development of reactors, uranium refineries, and storage. He 
says nuclear power is not and can never be clean energy. In a 
world that wants to reduce GHG [greenhouse gas] emissions 
. . . He wants to be the premier. He wants to lead the province 
that’s home to 15 per cent of the world’s uranium production 
and he opposes nuclear development and he says it’s not clean. 
 
It’s what the former Premier said. I have a lot of respect for Mr. 
Calvert, but in 2003 he said, nuclear energy is the dirtiest form 
of energy in terms of what comes out of the tailpipe. That’s 
when they were in government. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have to provide support for the workers. 
We have to open up markets. We have to make sure our royalty 
structures are competitive. We will work on all of those things, 
continue to work on them. 
 
But here’s the other thing we need to do if we’re serious about 
this industry. We need to be unequivocal in our support for the 
end use for that uranium and for the uranium mining itself, and 
hopefully — the members asked about diversification — also 
hopefully to diversify into maybe refining. 
 
We lost a refinery in the ’80s to Port Hope, I think it was. We 
need to be thinking long term. Be with those employees now, 
but then in the long term, open up markets, support uranium 
mining, support nuclear energy around the world that gives a 
demand for people in this province that we serve, people in the 
North that we serve, to keep working and to get back to work. 
 
[11:30] 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I do have an amendment to the motion by 
my hon. friend: 
 

That all words after “Assembly” be deleted and the 
following added: 
 
recognizes the hardship experienced by workers at 
Cameco’s McArthur River mine and Key Lake mill due to 
the temporary layoffs caused by falling uranium prices; 
and 
 



2902 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2017 

commends Cameco for being, in the words of United 
Steelworkers Local 8914 president, Denis O’Hara, a fair 
and compassionate employer that is committed to 
reopening the two facilities and topping up the benefits to 
laid-off employees; and 
 
encourages that approach by Cameco to continue, and 
further, encourages the Government of Saskatchewan to 
continue to deploy resources to assist workers and to work 
closely with the Government of Canada to develop markets 
for uranium sales around the world; and 
 
that this Assembly unequivocally supports the nuclear 
energy industry as a source of demand for Saskatchewan 
uranium that will keep Saskatchewan people working in 
the industry. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has moved, amended the main 
motion. We’ll take the amended motion as read. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To join in on the 
emergency motion and just a few comments. I want to start out, 
of course, we’re thinking about the 845 workers and families 
that will be impacted, and many of the contractors and many 
that provided a service to both of the mines in northern 
Saskatchewan. I don’t think any of us from the North will not 
be impacted with our family members or our good friends, our 
neighbours. Our communities in the North will be impacted 
greatly with the announcement that came out yesterday from 
Cameco. 
 
But I want to acknowledge Cameco reaching out. And we’ve 
been in talks with them, Buckley and myself. The member from 
Athabasca and myself have been in contact with them and we 
will be following up a meeting with them. And I just want to 
say to them, thank them for reaching out and the conversation 
that we had and their commitment to a temporary layoff of 10 
months. And we’ve heard that back and forth and I think both 
the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition have talked about 
that in the announcement. It’s a temporary layoff. They’re 
going to give support to their workers and that’s a good point. 
 
You know, at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the 
day, you know, we have an area where northern Saskatchewan 
has been impacted so greatly by the government. And we talk 
about a plan. The government’s been here 10 years, 10 years. If 
you look at northern Saskatchewan, many, many of our 
communities have been impacted. This just adds to the impact 
of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
We have a government for years, could have done many good 
things. And I talked about that today in question period. And 
we’re going to go back and forth here saying this and that, and 
we’re going to have their version; we’ll have our version. But at 
the end of the day I remind the government and the members on 
the other side, northern people and many Saskatchewan people 
will be impacted, will be impacted by this temporary cut-offs so 
much. We’re going to talk about . . . And they’re going to be 
looking for government. They’re going to be looking for their 

leaders in their communities. And I think about some of the 
challenges that many of our leaders in northern Saskatchewan 
are facing. And we’ve heard them talk about the cuts. There has 
been cuts. And I mean in question period today, and we talk 
about that. 
 
And you know, the Premier says that he believes the members 
on this side, the northern two members that represent northern 
Saskatchewan, he believes them to be sincere and we’re 
genuine from the heart. And that’s fine for him to say that but 
we need a government who looks at not just one area, not just 
one area to put all of the, I guess, his praise that he does. And 
we want to thank Cameco for being the employer to many 
northern people, First Nations, Métis. But when you have the 
Premier making comments, the best program for First Nations 
and Métis people, well there is no program; Cameco is it. When 
you have a Premier making comments like that in March of 
2013, it makes you wonder. And I mean people were offended 
and they should be offended. 
 
You need to diversity our economy. We talk about that. You’ve 
had 10 years. You’ve had record, record revenue to do some 
good things for the North. But the North has been impacted so 
greatly. We’ve talked about that. We’ve raised those concerns, 
whether it’s the leaders, whether it’s First Nations, the Métis 
leaders, our municipal leaders, you know. We look at . . . All 
sectors in the North have felt the government. I’ve had some of 
their own members, you know, that support them say, and is it 
politics? 
 
The government has an obligation to serve everyone in this 
province and I’m hoping at the end of the day that we will work 
together with the government. We’ll do all we can as members 
of the opposition. And I think about — again I go back home — 
of individuals to make sure that every worker gets back to 
work, that it is temporary. So if we can do whatever we can do, 
working together, to make sure that northern people and those 
that are impacted, whether they’re from, as my colleagues have 
talked about, whether they’re from Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, 
Regina, there’s many different places . . . rural Saskatchewan, 
that are employed in the mining sector. And you know, I even 
know, you know, some of the people that I have talked to, they 
actually, they farm. And they work up there and then they farm. 
So it’s going to impact many in our province. 
 
So having said that, I think we have to . . . It can’t just be great 
words and say, oh, we’re going to have the rapid response team 
because I’ve seen that, them deploy the so-called rapid response 
team. We’re going to have to see and we’re going to monitor to 
make sure that there is some action behind that and that this 
government is held accountable. You say you’re willing to 
work, you’re committed to working with Cameco, and I’m glad 
to hear that — work with the families, those communities that 
are impacted. We’ll see what kind of supports will come out. 
But like I said earlier, it seems like, you know, the North gets 
dealt a certain way. And the government, and I’ve had their 
own members say that. 
 
So I’m hoping at the end of the day that on both sides of the 
House we can come together and work, Mr. Speaker, on dealing 
with this crisis. And I say it is a crisis because it’s going to 
impact so much of our economy, you know, for 10 months as a 
temporary. But at this point I hope at the end of the day we can 



November 9, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2903 

come together, work together to make sure we do all we can to 
support those families and those workers to get back to work, 
support Cameco in the way. 
 
And again the last thing I will say for Cameco reaching out, 
that’s great. We’ll continue to have meetings with them and to 
find out what exactly we can do as opposition, and I know the 
government will be meeting with them to see what we can do to 
work with the families, the communities, and any community 
that’s impacted by, you know, the announcement of yesterday’s 
cuts of 845 workers. So at this point I have no further comments 
on this debate. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to stand today and enter into debate, the emergency 
motion, that is of some significant economic challenges to 
many people throughout our province and more importantly to 
the northern constituents that I of course represent alongside my 
colleague, the member from Cumberland. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I was very, very pleased and honoured that 
our leader of the provincial NDP stood in her place today and 
requested an emergency motion to debate this particular 
challenge and devastating news. And I commend her for her 
great and gracious support. It’s important to note that the people 
of Saskatchewan and those that have lost their jobs, that 
obviously is something that affects the entire province and it is 
something that is, as I said at the outset, devastating, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This is not a good day for anyone. This is a horrible day, not 
only for Saskatchewan’s North, but throughout the entire 
province. As I’ve indicated time and time again, there are many 
benefactors to northern industries and throughout the province, 
and of course some of the benefactors include the Government 
of Saskatchewan. More importantly, many of the people that 
work in the mining sector hail from many other communities 
besides Saskatchewan’s North. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s no question in our minds that we 
have to make sure that we recognize that there are people that 
work in these northern mines from Regina, from Moose Jaw, 
from Prince Albert, from Saskatoon, and the effect of losing 
almost 1,000 people from these two mines will be felt for years 
and years to come. But more so, Mr. Speaker, the immediate 
trauma to some of the families, the immediate devastating news 
to some of the families is something that we can never belittle 
in this particular Assembly because obviously it is something 
that has a dramatic shot-in-your gut response to many people, 
the men and women that work at these northern mines. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that leadership be 
provided from this day to help the communities and help the 
families — more importantly the families — as best we can. I 
am not confident that the first response that was alluded to by 
the Premier, when he talked about a rapid response team . . . 
What is a rapid response team? The terminology sounds good, 
Mr. Speaker, but I know from the fact that you look at some of 
the actions of the rapid response team, is this a bunch of people 
hopping in a few vans and driving to the North? I have no idea 
how they’re going to respond to this crisis with the rapid 

response team, the so-called rapid response team. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think I want to give a bit of information as 
to what I think it is important that the people of Saskatchewan 
ought to know. When we hear that 845 more people are looking 
for work in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we know that 
this is on top of the 2,200 workers from Prince Albert and 
northern Saskatchewan that have lost their jobs. So year over 
year, Mr. Speaker, there’s 2,200 more people from last year, 
compared to this year, that are looking for work. They’ve lost 
their jobs. They’re out of work, Mr. Speaker. And now we have 
this devastating news that Cameco is shutting down the mines 
for the next 10 months, Mr. Speaker. Now if you add those 
numbers, now we’re well over 3,000 more people looking for 
work, and the tax implications for the province of 
Saskatchewan, the spinoff benefits to the local communities, 
Mr. Speaker, is devastating. This is a lot of money that’s going 
to be lost to these communities. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, we’re still not done. As I indicated in 
my opening statement, Mr. Speaker, that there’s other cuts 
coming as we look at the shuttering of some of these mines 
even on a temporary basis, Mr. Speaker, that obviously the 
industries such as trucking, Mr. Speaker, the catering services, 
the security services . . . You’re looking at issues such as even 
the aviation services. Some of the contracts that service the 
mine sector, and in this case the two northern mines that are 
shutting down for 10 months, there’s also incredible job loss on 
that front as well. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what do these people do? What do the 
employees do? What do the contractors do? What do the 
communities do that obviously see this as a devastation to their 
local economies? And that’s something that’s really, really 
important for us to begin to understand and from there 
determine how we as a government . . . And we’ve made the 
opposition co-operation paramount on this particular debate. 
And that’s why, when I spoke of our leader standing up in her 
place and demanding an emergency debate on this particular 
motion, Mr. Speaker, the entire caucus of the NDP opposition 
has said to her leadership that, yes, the opposition will do all we 
can to support the government to mitigate these incredible 
losses of employment opportunities to northern Saskatchewan. 
 
But obviously, Mr. Speaker, the government has the resources. 
They have the personnel. They have the ability to do much 
more than what we’ve seen in the past. And what we can do as 
the opposition, as indicated not only by the leader’s 
commitment but by our caucus commitment that we will help in 
any way we can as the official opposition, to work closely with 
the government to determine how best and what best recourse 
there is to assist those families and get them back to work. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I also commend the member from 
Cumberland who talked about the incredible impact it’ll have 
on the families themselves. I think there’s no question that he 
understands that, from his own personal perspective, Mr. 
Speaker, because many of us from northern Saskatchewan, this 
impact are felt by many families, including the member from 
Cumberland and the member from Athabasca. So this is 
something that has hit us very, very hard. It is unexpected, Mr. 
Speaker, from our perspective. 
 



2904 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2017 

And certainly I would suggest that people don’t realize the 
incredible impact that this will have over the next several 
months, not only on the workers’ mental state, Mr. Speaker, but 
on the communities themselves. Because as we welcome our 
workers back from the mine, Mr. Speaker, they come to our 
communities, and they buy gas, and they buy groceries, and 
they go out and enjoy themselves at different fundraising 
events, and they spend money in the local community. And that 
money spins off in many, many more benefits. So you can see 
why, from our perspective, we talk not only about a job-loss 
opportunity and the devastating effect on personal people’s 
lives, but it also has an effect on our economy overall and our 
northern communities. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we know this is a serious issue and that this is 
a devastating decision. So where do we go from here? What 
kind of leadership do we provide as legislators in this province 
of Saskatchewan? Well one of the first things we do is we get 
our leader to recognize that this is an important issue and call 
for an emergency debate. That was done this morning with a 
great amount of effort and work, and I commend our leader for 
doing that. 
 
[11:45] 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, as the opposition, we want to offer our 
co-operation and support to the government on this front on 
anything that they could bring forward, any initiative that they 
bring forward, that we would work very closely with them, Mr. 
Speaker, and that we will try and find some resolutions 
ourselves, and co-operate with them to try and bring forward 
solutions that would help many of these families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sorry, but a rapid response team — we don’t 
know what it is, what it looks like. Is it a bunch of guys 
jumping in a van and driving off to Fond du Lac or to 
Kinoosao? We don’t know what the rapid response team would 
look like. And I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, beyond the 
terminology, I would suggest that the rapid response team is 
something that doesn’t exist and certainly wouldn’t apply in this 
case. So I would not want to hear from the government’s 
response, oh we’re employing our rapid response team, because 
we know there’s nothing there, Mr. Speaker. So don’t insult the 
intelligence of the northerners by using the phrase “rapid 
response team,” because we know that there’s nothing in that 
particular answer. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the other thing that’s also important is that 
we decry, we decry the lack of leadership for northern 
Saskatchewan for the last 10 years as one of the problems. And 
it was amazing to watch the Premier try and wiggle his way out 
of this one because, Mr. Speaker, not only was he attacking the 
people that were bringing this information forward. He begins 
to question the NDP’s motives when it comes to uranium 
development, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as well, what does he do, Mr. Speaker? He begins to 
market. He begins to market. And, Mr. Speaker, I would dare to 
say that if the Premier would have marketed Cameco and 
uranium as opposed to marketing the member from Meadow 
Lake, we wouldn’t be in this predicament. And that’s the 
problem and that’s the weakness of the Sask Party leadership 
over there is that they didn’t do their job. What they’re doing is 

they’re closing their ranks. They’re marketing each other, and 
sharing with them how great some of their members are when 
in fact, Mr. Speaker, they haven’t done anything to deal with 
the situation around the challenge of uranium mining in 
northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. In fact, they have become 
problematic. 
 
So again I reiterate, instead of the Premier marketing his 
members, maybe he should start marketing Cameco and 
uranium development in northern Saskatchewan as opposed to 
simply trying to blame this on the NDP. That is not leadership, 
Mr. Speaker, and I’ll tell you why. I’ll tell you why. I’ll tell you 
why. I’ll tell you why. Because, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to 
uranium development in northern Saskatchewan, when it comes 
to uranium development in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, the NDP have a proud history of ushering in northern 
development using the uranium opportunities as one of the key 
players when it comes to developing the northern economy. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the NDP took it further. Yes they invited 
uranium companies in to develop the northern mines, Mr. 
Speaker, and Cluff Lake was one of the first ones. And, Mr. 
Speaker, you look at the history of some of the northern MLAs 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly] and I go back to my 
earlier point. The former member from Cumberland, who’s now 
a retired gentleman, lives in Prince Albert and his name was 
Keith Goulet. Now, Mr. Speaker, Keith Goulet orchestrated an 
amazing training program that somehow trained 1,100 people to 
work in the mining sector, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So not only did the NDP usher in the uranium development of 
northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, they also established 
parameters in which northern people should be engaged. And, 
Mr. Speaker, they also provided training opportunities, as I 
mentioned Mr. Goulet’s work. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, you know what we also did, Mr. Speaker? 
We created what is called a Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan where we invested into roads, where we invested 
into airports, Mr. Speaker, where we invested into the northern 
economy on essential things like decent housing, Mr. Speaker, 
and decent health care. That was what the NDP did to 
complement what we were trying to do, and bringing in 
industrial development in the North called uranium 
development. 
 
So I will say this to the Sask Party caucus: don’t belittle the 
efforts and the impact that this cut has done by blaming the 
NDP, because that is not leadership, Mr. Speaker. That is plain 
petty and silly politics and shame on the Premier for starting 
that process, because I can tell the Premier, I am proud of the 
history of the NDP when it comes to development of northern 
Saskatchewan using the uranium companies, such as Cameco, 
to really begin to work in building a northern and independent 
economy. But, Mr. Speaker, we’ll continue being proud of that 
work. 
 
That being said, so where do we go from here? I want to say to 
the people of Saskatchewan and to the mining companies or to 
the people that lost their job as a result of this decision, this 
point: is that when the Premier gets up and blames the NDP, 
that’s not leadership, Mr. Speaker. When the Premier gets up 
and markets his member from Meadow Lake as opposed to 



November 9, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2905 

marketing Cameco and uranium overall, that’s not leadership, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
When he makes a quote, when he makes a quote, Mr. Speaker 
— “We know the best program for First Nations and Métis 
people in Saskatchewan is not program at all. It’s Cameco.” — 
that, Mr. Speaker, is not leadership. When he is simply 
removing himself from making any kind of positive impact as 
Premier and allowing all the stress and all the pressure and all 
the demands on Cameco, Mr. Speaker, that is not leadership, 
Mr. Speaker. That is not leadership. 
 
So let me be unequivocal in my statement that the NDP have 
always and will continue to support uranium development. And 
perhaps your right wing party should stop making the assertion 
and blaming the NDP for your inability to govern and provide 
leadership. Shame on you, Mr. Speaker. Shame on them. 
 
So I want to point out again, Mr. Speaker: we’re proud of our 
history. We’re proud of our history. It wasn’t the Saskatchewan 
Party who ushered in uranium development in northern 
Saskatchewan. It wasn’t. You guys were still in the backrooms, 
Mr. Speaker. It was the NDP that brought in uranium 
development in the ’70s. And not only did they bring it in, Mr. 
Speaker, but they complemented it with proper infrastructure, 
proper training, and they also diversified the economy to an 
effort called the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And what did the conservatives do when they got in? They 
killed off the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. They 
became very bitter and, I would say, jealous of the effect and 
impact that the Department of Northern Saskatchewan had in 
developing the northern communities. So, Mr. Speaker, we 
have a rich history as a party in ushering in and developing the 
uranium industry in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we go back to this number. We go back to this number of 
what the Premier was talking about. We are asking the Premier 
for some solid leadership today, Mr. Speaker, and once again he 
has proven that he can’t provide that leadership when it comes 
to devastating issues of this sort. And what does he do, Mr. 
Speaker? He gets up; he markets his members, and then he 
attacks the NDP. And I think, Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan, especially those families impacted by this 
terrible loss, they deserve better than that from their Premier, 
Mr. Speaker. They deserve better than that from their Premier, 
and they deserve better than that from this Saskatchewan Party 
caucus. And I say, shame on every single one of them, every 
single one of them because they sat on their hands, Mr. 
Speaker, while they were making devastating cuts to the North. 
 
So what happens now? As I’ve said before in the Assembly in 
my opening question, Mr. Speaker, the people in the Sask Party 
benches across the way, they knew as well as the Premier and 
the cabinet, they all knew that with the uranium prices being so 
low and the challenge around the Fukushima disaster, Mr. 
Speaker, that our uranium industry, our uranium industry was 
going to go through some trying times in the coming years. 
They knew that, Mr. Speaker. They knew that very well, and 
they sat on their hands and didn’t respond in any way, shape, or 
form. Like I said all the time, you know, collectively crossing 
their fingers and toes, hoping that some of these commodity 
prices will come back, is not an economic plan, Mr. Speaker. It 

is not an economic plan. And today now we’re dealing with 
well over, in my estimation, well over 1,000 people losing their 
jobs as a result of these two mines not opening up. So, Mr. 
Speaker, what happens? What happens if they sit down and they 
don’t do anything on this issue, Mr. Speaker, they don’t provide 
leadership? And from the first response by the Premier, it is 
very, very, very poor, a poor display of leadership, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now as I’ve said before, had this Premier, even if he was able 
to get up and say yes, we anticipated it, and had he said, 
because we anticipated this we invested in the North to make 
sure we mitigate these losses because we can’t keep counting 
on Cameco . . . So, Mr. Speaker, he didn’t. They didn’t invest in 
the North, and that is the problem, Mr. Speaker. They didn’t 
invest in the North. And instead today they play their petty 
politics of making amendments to the motion, blaming the NDP 
and, Mr. Speaker, and marketing their own members. 
 
And I say, shame. Shame on them for not getting the job done. 
Shame on them more so for sitting on their hands when they 
knew very well that this day was coming, Mr. Speaker. And I 
would also say, shame on them for the hurtful, harmful cuts that 
they put in place for northern Saskatchewan that now has us in 
the situation where not only are we suffering the cuts but, Mr. 
Speaker, we now have a significant job loss year over year in 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I’ll close on two more points, Mr. Speaker, two more 
points. Number one is that this party enjoyed record revenue. 
They enjoyed record revenue in the last 10 years. They enjoyed 
record revenue, Mr. Speaker. They have never . . . Never in the 
history of Saskatchewan has any government enjoyed as much 
record revenue as the Sask Party has had in the last 10 years. 
You have had record revenues. 
 
And now what they’re saying, Mr. Speaker, they had over $120 
billion; $120 billion they had over the last 10 years at the very 
least, Mr. Speaker. At the very least they’ve had over 120 
billion. That’s with a “b,” Mr. Speaker, with a “b.” And never 
in the history of Saskatchewan will we see a government 
enjoying that much money, Mr. Speaker, in that short period of 
a time. 
 
But what did they do for the North, Mr. Speaker? They cut the 
NORTEP program. There is no new housing development. No 
investment into housing development, Mr. Speaker. They shut 
down the Buffalo Narrows Correctional Centre. There’s no 
highway construction in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
How about tourism development? How about training 
development? How about cogeneration opportunity? None of 
that was done by the Sask Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would say this. After 120-plus billion dollars 
over 10 years and you sit back and you don’t do anything to 
address the impending problems we have with the uranium 
industry, you turn around, you cut every program in the North, 
and then along comes the Premier and blames the NDP for all 
that. That, Mr. Speaker, is not leadership. And I say shame on 
every single one of them. Shame on you because you had a 
chance and a opportunity to do something. These are 
Saskatchewan people. These are Saskatchewan people and this 
is an area that’s rich in resource and has always shared, have 
always shared the benefits and the resources of northern 



2906 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2017 

Saskatchewan. And this is the treatment we get, Mr. Speaker, 
from a callous, cold government that just can’t figure it out. 
 
So on that point, Mr. Speaker, of course I’m going to be 
standing in my place and supporting the motion put forward by 
the member, by my leader, Mr. Speaker. And I’ll say to the 
people of Saskatchewan, number one is that the NDP are 
supportive of the uranium industry. And I want to commend 
Cameco, Mr. Speaker, because I agree with the president of 
United Steelworkers that Cameco is a good employer, that they 
have done a tremendous amount of good, not only for the 
province, but for the North as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And every single member on this side of the Assembly values 
the mining sector of our province of Saskatchewan. And if they 
want to play politics, which is evidenced by the Premier’s 
position and by their motion, you go ahead and play politics. 
You play your little petty politics. But on this side of the House 
we know the impact on real families. We know the impact on 
our communities. We know the devastation to our provincial 
economy, Mr. Speaker. And we’ll continue standing up and 
supporting the Camecos and the people of this province and the 
northern people. And we should also point out, Mr. Speaker, we 
need to invest more in these communities so in the future when 
you have these decisions, that the hurt isn’t as painful as it is 
today. So I say to the families, I pray for their safety and 
comfort, and I pray that they find the supports they need out 
there because this is going to hurt a lot of families. 
 
And I would also add, Mr. Speaker, to Cameco, that you’ve 
been a good employer. You’ve been a great citizen, a corporate 
citizen for northern Saskatchewan. We support your industry. 
We support your industry. And, Mr. Speaker, we implore and 
we beg and we support every effort, when we talk about 
Cameco’s role, is get our workers back to work. Get our 
workers back to work as soon as you can because a lesson that 
we’ve learned as a result of this closure is that Cameco is a 
company that we need to be strong and vibrant in the North. 
And do not let the petty, silly lack of leadership politics played 
by the Saskatchewan Party drive a wedge between the builders 
of northern Saskatchewan and those parties that really want to 
see the North prosper and grow. 
 
And I dare say, Mr. Speaker, in this Assembly there’s only one 
party on this side that really cares about northern Saskatchewan 
and will continue defending that position. So on that note, I am 
voting for the motion put forward by my leader and my 
colleague. 
 
[12:00] 
 
The Speaker: — Currently the motion on the floor as amended 
by the member from Swift Current, we’ll take the motion as 
read. All those in favour of the amendment say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Speaker: — All those opposed say nay. 
 
The ayes have it. Call in the members. 
 
[The division bells rang from 12:01 until 12:23.] 
 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
to amend the main motion that has been put forward by the 
Leader of the Opposition. The amendment reads: 
 

That all words after “this Assembly” be deleted and the 
following added:  
 
recognizes the hardship experienced by workers at 
Cameco’s McArthur River mine and Key Lake mill due to 
the temporary layoffs caused by falling uranium prices; 
and 
 
commends Cameco for being, in the words of United 
Steelworkers Local 8914 president Denis O’Hara, “a fair 
and compassionate employer” that has been committed to 
reopening the two facilities and topping up the benefits to 
laid-off employees and encourages that approach by 
Cameco to continue; and further 
 
encourages the Government of Saskatchewan to continue 
to deploy resources to assist workers and to work closely 
with the Government of Canada to develop markets for 
uranium sales around the world; and  
 
that this Assembly unequivocally supports the nuclear 
energy industry as a source of demand for Saskatchewan 
uranium that will keep Saskatchewan people working in 
the industry. 
 

All those in favour of the motion please rise. 
 

[Yeas — 53] 
 
Wall Heppner Makowsky 
Stewart Reiter Morgan 
Harpauer Duncan Cox 
Marit Hargrave D’Autremont 
Merriman Doke Bonk 
Tell Eyre Brkich 
Harrison Ottenbreit Weekes 
Hart Kirsch Bradshaw 
Steinley Nerlien Phillips 
Lawrence Wilson Young 
McMorris Michelson Buckingham 
Doherty Lambert Beaudry-Mellor 
Moe Carr Dennis 
Kaeding Steele Fiaz 
Olauson Wyant Sarauer 
Vermette Belanger Sproule 
Forbes Rancourt Mowat 
McCall Beck  
 
The Speaker: — All those opposed please rise. 
 

[Nays — nil] 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the 
amendment, 53; those opposed, nil. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Now we’ll be voting on the motion 
that was brought forward by the Leader of the Opposition, with 
the amendment. That motion now reads, that this Assembly: 

 



November 9, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2907 

recognizes the hardship experienced by workers at 
Cameco’s McArthur River mine and Key Lake mill due to 
the temporary layoffs caused by falling uranium prices; 
and 
 
commends Cameco for being, in the words of United 
Steelworkers Local 8914 president Denis O’Hara, “a fair 
and compassionate employer” that has committed to 
reopening the two facilities and topping up the benefits to 
laid-off employees and encourages that approach by 
Cameco to continue; and further  
 
encourages the government of Saskatchewan to continue to 
deploy resources to assist workers and to work closely with 
the government of Canada to develop markets for uranium 
sales around the world; and  
 
that this Assembly unequivocally supports the nuclear 
energy industry as a source of demand for Saskatchewan 
uranium that will keep Saskatchewan people working in 
the industry. 

 
All those in favour say yea. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Yea. 
 
The Speaker: — All those opposed say nay. Yeas have it. 
Carried. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answers to questions 20 through 41. 
 
The Speaker: — Order the responses to questions 20 to 41. I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that this Assembly do now 
adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Pursuant to an order, this Assembly 
stands adjourned until Tuesday, November 14th, 2017. At that 
time, on Tuesday . . . This Assembly stands adjourned until 
1:30 next Tuesday. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:30.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 2887 
  McCall ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2887, 2888 
  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2887, 2888 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2887 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2887 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2888 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2888 
  Bonk ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2888 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2888 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2888 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2889 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2889 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2889 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2889 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2889 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2890 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2890 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2890 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2890 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Donation to Children’s Hospital 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2890 
 Honouring Saskatchewan’s Oldest Female Indigenous Veteran 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2891 
 Sturgis Lacrosse Teams Win Two Provincial Titles 
  Dennis ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2891 
 Service and Sacrifice 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2891 
 Funding for Langenburg & District Activity Centre 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2891 
 Theodore Citizen Receives Sovereign’s Medal for Volunteers 
  Nerlien ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2892 
 EY World Entrepreneur of the Year 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2892 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Management of the Provincial Economy 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2892 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2893 
 Map of Global Transportation Hub 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2893 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2894 
 Support for Northerners 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2894 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2894 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2895 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2895 
 Access to Bus Services for Northerners 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2895 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2895 
 Maintenance of Benefits for Reservists 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2895 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2896 
 Usage of Government Email Account 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2896 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2896 
 Education Curriculum 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2896 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2896 
 
 



 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Geo-Memorial Program Dedication 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 2897 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2898 
MOTION UNDER RULE 61 
 Support for Northern Workers and the Nuclear Energy Industry 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2898 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2899 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2902 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2903 
 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 2906 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2907 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

 
Hon. Steven Bonk 

Minister of the Economy 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 
Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Larry Doke 
Minister of Government Relations  

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 
Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Nancy Heppner 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Gene Makowsky 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  
and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 


