






















































Hansard: April 10, 2017


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 72A  MONDAY, APRIL 10, 2017, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 

 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 

Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 

 

 

 
 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 

Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 

Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 

Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 

Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 

Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 

Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 

Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 

Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 

Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 

Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 

Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 

Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 

D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 

Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 

Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 

Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 

Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 

Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 

Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 

Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 

Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 

Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 

Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 

Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 

Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 

Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 

Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 

Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 

Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 

Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 

McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 

Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 

Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 

Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 

Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 

Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 

Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 

Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 

Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 

Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 

Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 

Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 

Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 

Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 

Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 

Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 

Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 

Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 

Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 

Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 

Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 

Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 

Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 

Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 

Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 

Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 

Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 

 

 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 11 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2181 
 April 10, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d request 
leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
the gallery today are a number of individuals which I’d like to 
introduce: Jo-Anne Dusel, executive director of PATHS 
[Provincial Association of Transition Houses and Services of 
Saskatchewan], which is the provincial association of transition 
houses; Kirsten Lawson, the director of member programs and 
services from PATHS, I think is here with us as well; Crystal 
Giesbrecht, director of research and communications as well 
with PATHS; Melissa Coomber-Bendtsen, CEO [chief 
executive officer] of the YWCA [Young Women’s Christian 
Association] here in Regina; and Hillary Aitken, senior director 
of housing for the YWCA here in Regina as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these individuals are in the House today. Later on 
we’ll be discussing some issues around domestic violence, Mr. 
Speaker. These individuals are committed to the issue of 
domestic violence and helping solve that particular issue in this 
province. And as you know, we have a significant issue with 
domestic violence. So it’s with work with dedicated individuals 
like these, Mr. Speaker, that allow us to move forward and try 
to do things to address a very difficult issue which we have in 
the province, Mr. Speaker. So they’re here to witness some 
events that will happen in legislature a little bit later on. So I’d 
ask all members of the legislature to help welcome them to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, I’d like to join with the minister opposite to welcome these 
folks to their Legislative Assembly: Melissa Coomber-Bendtsen 
and Hillary Aitken with the YWCA; Crystal Giesbrecht, 
Jo-Anne Dusel, and Kirsten Lawson with PATHS. I’ve had the 
opportunity to work with all of them, both on the issue of 
domestic violence as well as some other work. 
 
I’m very happy to have all of you here today, and I’m very 
excited for the reason why you’re here, and I’m looking 
forward to further discussions on this matter. So I’d like all 
members to join me in welcoming them to their Legislative 
Assembly. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, I’d like to introduce 50 very enthusiastic grade 8 and grade 
12 students from Langenburg Central School. This will be the 
first graduating class from the new Langenburg school. And 
accompanying them today are Ms. Fallon Prince, who used to 
be my neighbour, Ms. Emma Castle who is one of our new 
teachers, and the educational assistant, Ms. Joanne Fuhr. And 
I’d like all members to welcome the Langenburg Central School 
to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — To you and through you to all members of 
this House it’s my pleasure to welcome some folks from the 
Saskatchewan Dental Hygienists’ Association here today. 
There’s members on both sides of the House who had an 
opportunity to meet with this group today at lunch, and they 
will continue our education a little bit later this afternoon as 
well, providing us information on how they can better serve 
people in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to welcome . . . There’s a list of 10 of them here today. 
I’d like to first welcome their president, Janel Parkinson. You 
can give us a little wave. We have Kellie Watson, who is the 
registrar and the executive director. We have Kaitlyn Fieger, 
Leanne Huvenaars, Nancy Newby, Paula Benbow, Ondina 
Love, Chris Gordon. I have to give a special shout-out to Chris 
Gordon. She’s a bit of a saint. She lives next to two Chartier 
families. Actually my one brother lives on one side of her and 
the other lives across the street, so that takes a pretty special 
person to live in such close proximity to so many Chartiers, Mr. 
Speaker. Gerrard Weinberger, Sharman Woynarski. And with 
that, I’d like to ask all members to welcome these folks to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to this Assembly, it’s my pleasure to join with the 
Health critic opposite in welcoming the Dental Hygienists’ 
Association here. As she mentioned, there was a luncheon today 
for a number of our colleagues and there will be a reception at 5 
o’clock today. I look forward to speaking at that and to meeting 
all the members and talking to them at that event. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to please join with me in 
welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
University. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 
would like to join with the member opposite as well as the 
minister in welcoming, particularly Melissa and Hillary from 
the YWCA. They’re very important partners in my ministry, 
Mr. Speaker. In addition to working with us on the cold weather 
strategy, they’re also very important partners in our child and 



2182 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2017 

family services programs. They’re great leaders in our 
community, and I’d like to just join with the other members in 
welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of 
Churchbridge. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. The people who have signed this petition are opposed 
to the Sask Party’s plan to scrap and sell off the Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company. They would like us all to know that 
STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company] provides a vital 
service to many seniors, workers, families throughout the 
province; and that by scrapping STC out of the blue and without 
asking permission of the owners, the Saskatchewan people, the 
Sask Party is sending a clear sign about how little they care 
about protecting our Crowns like SaskTel; and that STC helps 
to drive the economy with its parcel services that serves farms 
and other businesses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately stop 
the plan to scrap and sell off Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company, and to resume transportation services to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 

 
It is supported and signed by many good people of the province. 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present a petition today to improve the oral health of the people 
of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. The petitioners point out that 
citizens of Saskatchewan are concerned that our province has 
the third-highest rate of day surgeries for treating oral disease in 
Canada, only behind Nunavut and the Northwest Territories, 
costing the provincial government $3.3 million each year; that 
they point out that the rates of oral disease will only increase in 
our province as a result of the closure of the last dental therapy 
school and increasing number of oral health human resources 

vacancies in the North. 
 
The petitioners also point out that Saskatchewan’s 650 
registered dental hygienists are highly educated primary care 
providers committed to addressing the unmet oral health needs 
of Saskatchewan residents. They point out that The Dental 
Disciplines Act severely limits the ability of registered dental 
hygienists to deliver many necessary services directed to the 
people of Saskatchewan; and as well they point out that 
preventing and managing oral disease will reduce the burden on 
emergency rooms, reduce backlogs for acute care services, 
improve productivity, and enhance the overall health and 
well-being of residents in Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the 
prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the Government of Saskatchewan to take the necessary 
steps and actions to address the oral health needs of the 
people of Saskatchewan by updating The Dental 
Disciplines Act to remove restrictions and expand dental 
hygiene profession’s scope of practice. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Saskatoon, 
Hepburn, Hague, Warman, Rosthern, Osler, and other places, 
just to name a few. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise in 
my place to answer the call from the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote for anyone, someone in the Assembly to help 
her in her battle for a second bridge for Prince Albert. So I rise 
in my place to offer that support. And the need for a second 
bridge for Prince Albert has never been clearer than it is today. 
Prince Albert, communities north of Prince Albert, and 
businesses that send people and products to Prince Albert 
require a solution. So the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Ask that the Sask Party government stop stalling, hiding 
behind rhetoric, and refusing to listen to the people calling 
for action, and begin immediately to plan and then quickly 
commence the construction of a second bridge for Prince 
Albert using federal and provincial dollars. 

 
And as I say every day, Mr. Speaker, of this Assembly, again I 
am presenting yet another page day after day of people that are 
supporting the call for a second bridge in Prince Albert, and the 
people that have signed this particular page are primarily from 
Prince Albert. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I am rising to 
present a petition opposed to Bill 40 and the potential 49 per 
cent Crown corporation sell-off. People who have signed this 
bill want to bring to our attention the following: Sask Party’s 
Bill 40 creates a new, unheard-of definition for privatization 
that allows the government to wind down, dissolve, or sell up to 
49 per cent of the shares of a Crown corporation without 
holding a referendum. 
 
And now we know, Mr. Speaker, in ’15-16 alone, our Crown 



April 10, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2183 

corporations returned around $300 million in dividends to pay 
for schools, roads, and hospitals. Over the last 10 years we’ve 
received over $3 billion, Mr. Speaker, for schools, roads, and 
hospitals. Our Crown corporations employ thousands of people 
from Saskatchewan, across the province. And under section 149 
of the Income Tax Act of Canada, we know the Crown 
corporations are exempt from corporate income tax, provided 
not less than 90 per cent of the shares are held by a government 
or province. And we know, Mr. Speaker, that this government 
has the intention to sell off 49 per cent of SaskTel, and this is 
something that is not acceptable to the people of Saskatchewan, 
particularly without a referendum. 
 
So I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately stop 
the passage of Bill 40, The Interpretation Amendment Act, 
and start protecting jobs and our Crown corporations 
instead of selling them off to pay for Sask Party 
mismanagement. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people who’ve signed these petitions today 
come from the communities of Melville, Yorkton, and 
Bredenbury. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition concerning pay equity here in Saskatchewan. And the 
undersigned residents of the province of Saskatchewan want to 
bring to our attention the following: that the citizens of this 
province believe in an economy powered by transparency, 
accountability, security, and equity; and that all women should 
be paid equitably; and that women are powerful drivers of 
economic growth, and their economic empowerment benefits us 
all. 
 
And we know that the Canadian Centre of Policy Alternatives 
found that in Saskatoon in 2016, women earned on average 63 
cents for every dollar that a man makes, and in Regina, women 
earned on average 73 cents for every dollar that a man makes. 
According to the most recent StatsCan data, the national gender 
wage gap for full-time workers is 72 cents for every dollar a 
man makes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan eliminate 
the wage gap between women and men across all sectors 
where the Government of Saskatchewan has jurisdiction, 
provide a framework under which this can be done within 
the term of this Assembly, and that the Saskatchewan 
government call upon workplaces within Saskatchewan 
within the private sector to eliminate the wage gap between 
women and men. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
the city of Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition to increase the funding to Prince Albert 
mobile crisis. Prince Albert mobile crisis has had to close its 
door during daytime hours, resulting in a loss of resources to 
people in distress. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Prince Albert we have high rates of domestic 
violence, and we know those situations happen at any time, 24 
hours, 7 days a week. And without having the mobile crisis unit 
available to present to these situations . . . Those crisis workers 
are trained to handle situations such as this. They know of all 
the resources that are available, and they know how to 
investigate a situation and ensure that safety is provided for all 
members of the family. And so it’s really important to have this 
funding restored to mobile crisis so they can provide the 
daytime services that are much needed in the city of Prince 
Albert. 
 
The daytime closure of Prince Albert mobile has put stress on 
Prince Albert Police Service and Victoria Hospital and other 
agencies who may not be trained and/or qualified to provide the 
counselling and intervention services needed for clients. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to increase funding to the 
Prince Albert mobile crisis unit so they may once again 
offer 24-hour emergency crisis service. 

 
Mr. Speaker, people across the province realize that this is a 
situation that needs to be resolved, and these particular petitions 
are signed by individuals from the city of Prince Albert, the city 
of Saskatoon, and the city of Regina. I do so present. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition in support of sexual abuse prevention curriculum in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Those who have signed this petition wish to draw our attention 
to the following: to the fact that Saskatchewan has the 
second-highest rate of sexual child abuse in Canada; that 
statistics show that 1 in 3 girls and 1 in 6 boys will be sexually 
abused by the age of 18, according to statistics, Mr. Speaker. 
Up to 90 per cent of perpetrators are known to the victim, and it 
is estimated that 95 per cent of these cases will never get 
reported. Victims of childhood sexual abuse are four times 
more likely to commit suicide, and currently there is no 
comprehensive elementary or secondary curriculum regarding 
prevention and reporting of sexual child abuse in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan take immediate and 



2184 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2017 

concrete action to develop and implement Erin’s law; and 
such legislation would ensure that a comprehensive health 
education program be developed and implemented which 
would require age-appropriate sexual abuse and assault 
awareness and prevention education in grades pre-K 
through 12, along with training school staff on the 
prevention of child abuse. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those who have signed the petition today reside in 
Weyburn and Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition calling for fairer treatment for licensed, 
non-profit child care centres. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point 
out that such centres are taxed inconsistently throughout 
Saskatchewan. They point out that many of our licensed, 
non-profit child care centres pay commercial property taxes, 
something which is not done in Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario, BC 
[British Columbia], and New Brunswick. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they also point out that child care is essential to 
the economy, yet most centres struggle to balance their budgets; 
and that this issue threatens both the number of child care 
spaces and the quality of care.  
 
Mr. Speaker, in the prayer that reads as follows, the petitioners 
respectfully request: 
 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan recognize 
that licensed non-profit child care centres provide 
programs that are foundational to a healthy society by 
including them in the Saskatchewan education Act, and 
that they exempt all licensed, non-profit child care centres 
in Saskatchewan from property tax through changes to the 
appropriate legislation. 
 

Mr. Speaker, there’s an opportunity to do this in the days ahead. 
And this particular petition is signed by individuals from 
Weyburn and Regina . . . Pardon me, Mr. Speaker, from 
Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition to reverse cuts to Saskatchewan libraries. The 
Sask Party has cut funding for regional libraries in half or by 
$3.5 million and eliminated funding for libraries in Regina and 
Saskatoon. This drastic funding cut will have a devastating 
impact on libraries, especially regional libraries and the many 
people who depend on them. And I think we saw that support at 
the Friday rally across the province, Mr. Speaker. And if I saw 
correctly, the number of participants in that rally is counted at 
around 5,600 people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Libraries are a vital part of communities across Saskatchewan, 
and the services they provide enrich the lives of many. The 
drastic cuts imposed on libraries will lead to branch closures, 
program cuts, and reductions in hours, which will hurt the many 
people who use library services and the hard-working and 
dedicated public servants who work in libraries. 

Libraries are about more than borrowing books, Mr. Speaker. 
Meeting rooms are used by community groups, library staff 
host education programs and clubs, and the publicly accessible 
computer terminals are essential to many. There are services for 
seniors, children, employment support, language and reading 
groups, citizenship test preparation, and help for newcomers to 
build their resumés. 
 
These cuts will have a disproportionate impact on rural 
communities where libraries are vital community spaces. 
Potential closures or reductions in services will severely impact 
our communities. 
 
And speaking of reduction in services, Mr. Speaker, I saw on 
the Regina Public Library website that the interlibrary loan 
system has been shut down as of today. So effective today, any 
holds of materials located outside of your branch have been 
suspended, Mr. Speaker.  
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan renew its 
commitment to the invaluable programming, education 
opportunities, and public spaces our libraries provide 
across this province and restore the $4.8 million in funding 
for public libraries that was cut in the 2017-2018 budget by 
the Sask Party. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing this petition today come 
from Saskatoon. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today and 
present a petition calling on the government to restore funding 
to post-secondary institutions. Mr. Speaker, the contribution of 
our post-secondary institutions to the economy of this province, 
to the future prospects of young people, and to our 
understanding of the world is invaluable. And instead of 
recognizing it as invaluable, the Sask Party seems to think it 
shouldn’t be valued at all. 
 
The Sask Party is making students and their families pay for 
their financial mismanagement when students here already pay 
among the highest tuition fees in Canada. This budget cuts 
$36.8 million from post-secondary education, cuts funding for 
Saskatchewan aid for students and, breaking very quickly an 
election promise, is also cutting the first home plan. 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately restore 
funding to Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions and 
stop the damaging cuts to students. 

 
The people signing this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Saskatoon and Regina. I do so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 



April 10, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2185 

National Oral Health Month and National 
Dental Hygienist Week 

 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The month of April 
marks Canada’s National Oral Health Month. It is a month to 
recognize the impact that poor oral health can have on people’s 
lives, and to spread awareness on the good habits that can 
improve it. 
 
This week, April 8th to 14th, is an especially important part of 
Canada’s month-long oral health campaign as it marks National 
Dental Hygienist Week. This is a week to focus on helping 
Canadians understand the role and importance of the dental 
hygiene profession, and to promote good oral health practices. 
This year the theme of Dental Hygienist Week is Oral Health 
for Total Health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, poor oral health can have serious effects on 
people’s quality of life. It can influence the way a person 
speaks, eats, and socializes, and can have devastating effects on 
their physical and mental well-being of the young, old, and 
those in between. 
 
According to the Canadian Dental Association, approximately 
3,200 Canadians are diagnosed with oral cancer each year and 
relationships between oral health and other diseases have also 
been found. This is why we must recognize how essential our 
oral health professionals are, not just for our teeth, but to our 
overall well-being. 
 
Mr. Speaker, taking care of our mouth, teeth, and gums can 
positively impact all aspects of our lives. So I would like all 
members to join me today in celebrating Oral Health Month and 
Dental Hygienist Week, and in thanking all our oral health 
professionals here in Saskatchewan, especially our dental 
hygienists here today, for the hard work they do to improve the 
well-being of people in our province. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 

Balcarres Remembers the Battle of Vimy Ridge 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday here in our rotunda, at 
war memorials across Canada, and at the Vimy monument in 
France, people of all ages joined together to recognize the battle 
of Vimy Ridge. 
 
I would like to draw members’ attention to a remembrance 
project from the community of Balcarres. Gordon Michayluk 
and Glen Larson prepared a moving tribute which includes a 
video and a novella which were both released yesterday to the 
public, 100 years after Edwin and Edison Greenhow went over 
the top to charge Vimy Ridge. 
 
Edwin fell on April the 9th and Edison fell on April the 28th. 
Neither of their bodies were ever found. The novella, The Boys 
from Balcarres, was written by Glen Larson, great-nephew of 
the Greenhow brothers, and tells their story how these two 
young men from Balcarres fought on Vimy Ridge in April of 
1917. 
 
The video entitled A Community Remembers: The Memorial 

Park Story tells us of the 29 trees that were planted in 1949 in 
Balcarres Memorial Park. One tree was planted for each lost 
soldier. And they survived, Mr. Speaker, until 2014 when a 
plow wind damaged or destroyed all 29 of the trees. 
 
Not to be deterred, wood from the fallen trees was saved, and 
today two wooden carvings sit on either side of the memorial, a 
memorial that is a tribute to the supreme sacrifice of Edwin and 
Edison Greenhow and all the other lost soldiers of Balcarres 
and area. Lest we forget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

First Nations University of Canada 
39th Annual Powwow 

 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Hundreds 
of powwow dancers came together on the weekend to help kick 
off the First Nations University of Canada’s 39th annual 
powwow. It was a packed house at the Brandt Centre, Mr. 
Speaker, as thousands of spectators filled the stands. 
 
Myself along with the member from Regina Douglas Park and 
the member from Regina Rosemont had the honour to attend 
the event on Sunday and certainly enjoyed the Leader of the 
Opposition bringing greetings as part of the grand entry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the First Nations University annual spring 
powwow started from humble beginnings 39 years ago. 
Students organized the powwow to share their culture, identity, 
and pride with their classmates. It has now grown to one of the 
largest celebrations of its kind in Canada. This year there were 
750 dancers, 21 drums, and nearly 7,000 spectators at the 
Brandt Centre in Regina to celebrate. Mr. Speaker — records 
on all scores. 
 
The spring celebration powwow is the first of the season and is 
considered by many as the official kickoff to the annual 
powwow season. It’s a celebration of spring and a sharing of 
First Nations culture that adds to the diversity and cultural 
mosaic of Regina and indeed Saskatchewan, through song, 
dance, ceremony, and craft. Along with being a very significant 
tourist draw, the First Nations University powwow is one of the 
largest of its kind, attracting visitors from right across Canada 
and the United States. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say thank you very much to the 
organizing committee, to Chair Kevin Missens, and 
congratulations to Thomas Benjoe on yet another great year of a 
beautifully beaded powwow princess crown. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

Special Olympics Saskatchewan 
Celebration of Champions 

 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Friday, 
myself along with my daughter Courtney, a Special Olympian 
herself, and the member from Regina Pasqua attended the 
Special Olympics supper of champions to celebrate 13 
Saskatchewan athletes who had returned home from the 2017 
Special Olympics World Winter Games in Vienna. 



2186 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2017 

Two athletes from Saskatchewan returned with gold medals: 
Ron Brandt from Saskatoon, winning the 4 x 100-metre relay in 
snowshoeing; and Terry Livingstone of Regina, winning the 
speed skating 777-metre race. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to congratulate Team Canada West 
floor hockey team for their well-deserved silver medal. Their 
team included 11 athletes from Saskatchewan under the 
direction of head coach Ryan Unruh of Regina. 
 
The Special Olympics World Games is an opportunity to enrich 
lives of those with intellectual disabilities through sport, giving 
them an opportunity to showcase their talents on a world stage. 
The Winter Games in Austria was the biggest sports and 
humanitarian event anywhere in 2017 with 3,000 athletes 
representing 310 countries across the world. Mr. Speaker, the 
Celebration of Champions, which was hosted by Special 
Olympics Saskatchewan, was a great way to celebrate the 
success of all of our athletes. 
 
I ask all members in the Assembly to join me in congratulating 
the athletes of Team Canada, as well as all of the Special 
Olympian athletes around the world for competing in this event. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 
 

SaskTel Completes Cellular Network Expansion 
 

Mr. Steele: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our government is 
proud to announce that SaskTel has successfully completed the 
expansion of LTE [long-term evolution] coverage throughout 
the province, providing Saskatchewan’s largest LTE network 
and servicing 99 per cent of the residents in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the expanded reach of SaskTel LTE network will 
have a positive impact on residents living in rural Saskatchewan 
by providing fast, reliable communication services throughout 
our province. The LTE expansion project is part of SaskTel’s 
commitment to invest over 300 million in capital in 
Saskatchewan this year and 1.4 billion throughout 2016 and 
2021. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in light of the existing announcement, I am 
reminded by a statement made by a member opposite last 
Thursday. The member from Saskatoon Riversdale proclaimed 
that “. . . not everyone in rural Saskatchewan has access to 
high-speed services and most are still on dial-up.” Well, Mr. 
Speaker, once again the government has to correct the record. 
SaskTel’s 260,000 Internet customers, less than 3 per cent 
remain on dial-up. We get it, Mr. Speaker. As always the NDP 
[New Democratic Party] are out of touch with rural 
Saskatchewan. Maybe next time the member opposite should 
check the facts and learn something from actually spending 
time in rural Saskatchewan, a place that we all know they 
neglected while they were in government. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will take no advice from the members opposite 
when it comes to rural Saskatchewan and will continue to invest 
where it counts. Thank you. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Martensville-Warman. 
 

New Passenger Bus Service Between Martensville, 
Warman, and Saskatoon 

 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to stand 
today and let all of my colleagues know of an exciting new 
business venture in my constituency. AV Transit will begin its 
passenger bus service between the communities of Warman, 
Martensville, and Saskatoon on May 1st. AV Transit is part of a 
larger transportation company that provides courier services as 
well as special-needs transportation services. 
 
This new venture will see a 22-passenger bus run five days a 
week with multiple stops during the day in strategic places 
throughout those three cities. This service will allow commuters 
as well as senior citizens and others to get to and from 
Saskatoon easily and efficiently. 
 
Leadership from all three cities are supportive, with the city of 
Saskatoon offering curbside space downtown near Saskatoon’s 
transit bus mall. Warman’s mayor said, and I quote: “It’s a 
private business with a solid track record and a good business 
plan, so I think it will be very successful.” 
 
As for the cost to riders, the round trip price for a trip between 
Martensville and Saskatoon will be $15. Currently STC offers a 
round trip for 21, which is not a huge difference, Mr. Speaker. 
But the real difference is this: a return trip on this new privately 
operated passenger bus service will not have the $188 
taxpayer-funded subsidy attached to it, as STC does. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate this company and its 
founders, and I wish them all the best. It is yet another example 
of Saskatchewan private enterprise that I am sure will succeed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 

New Schools for Saskatoon 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise in the 
House today to bring attention to two new schools being built in 
the Rosewood neighbourhood of Saskatoon, part of the 
joint-use schools programs scheduled to open this fall. The 
schools are Saskatoon Public’s École Colette Bourgonje 
School, and Saskatoon Catholic’s École St. Thérèse of Lisieux 
School. This is a welcome addition to a thriving neighbourhood 
that continues to grow rapidly. 
 
Our record speaks for itself. We have opened a total of 40 new 
schools, 21 of which are opening this year, along with 25 major 
renovations to existing schools. When faced with the same 
challenges, the NDP chose to close 176 schools, and it sounds 
like their attitude hasn’t changed. In fact, Mr. Speaker, just last 
Thursday, in a response to a question about what their plan 
would be for Saskatchewan, the member from Regina Lakeview 
suggested that funding to regional libraries could be fully 
restored, and the cost of that could be “. . . well covered by the 
$9.5 million in this budget going to maintain brand new P3 
schools.” 
 



April 10, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2187 

Mr. Speaker, nothing has changed. They are simply the old 
NDP. If they were in government, they would cut maintenance 
money to schools and let them fall into disrepair, just as they 
did in the past. Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that we are not going 
to do any of those things, and we will continue to keep 
Saskatchewan strong by meeting the challenge. Thank you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Details of Land Transactions 
 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier doesn’t like 
taking questions about the Sask Party’s GTH [Global 
Transportation Hub] land scandal. He ducks questions day after 
day, but Saskatchewan people deserve some real answers. 
Instead, last week again the usual minister got up with his usual 
tired, irrelevant lines. And the Highways minister said that he is 
“not disagreeing with the Privacy Commissioner.”  
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if that’s the case, then why are they hiding 
the facts of the GTH land deal with CP [Canadian Pacific]? The 
Privacy Commissioner has been clear. These documents must 
be released. Mr. Speaker, the minister admitted that he hasn’t 
even read these documents yet. They’re not War and Peace. 
One is six pages long; the other one’s seven pages long, Mr. 
Speaker. If the Premier really has nothing to hide, will he 
simply release these documents on the GTH sale to CP, and will 
he finally, will he finally commit to coming clean and being 
straight with Saskatchewan people on his GTH land scandal? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Of course the Leader of the Opposition knows the 
process for freedom of information requests is the exact same as 
it was when those members were in government. Of course the 
member knows that ministers are not directly involved in that 
process. The process is handled by professional civil servants, 
Mr. Speaker, in a very clear and a very well-understood 
process. There of course are provisions for commercial 
confidentiality, and we are committed to working with the 
Privacy Commissioner going forward, Mr. Speaker. Thank you 
very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Financial Support for Municipalities 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, of course dodging the 
question again, and day after day they refuse to accept any 
accountability. They’re arrogant, Mr. Speaker, and they’re out 
of touch.  
 
But since the budget, day after day, Saskatchewan people have 
been coming together. They’ve been rising up and they’ve been 
speaking out. Across the province, people have been rallying 
against the Sask Party cuts and sell-offs: libraries, education, 
STC, parks, rinks, hearing aids, cities, and towns. Mr. Speaker, 
the list goes on and on. Saskatchewan people are calling out the 
Sask Party for not being straight to them, Mr. Speaker, for not 

being straight about the cuts that they knew were coming, for 
not being straight and still trying to hide some of the cuts by 
having the cities and towns of Saskatchewan do their dirty 
work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The leaders of our cities and towns were blindsided. They say 
they were ambushed. And, Mr. Speaker, as they reminded us all 
this morning, they are united. These big, unfair tax hikes and 
deep cuts, Mr. Speaker, are Sask Party tax hikes and cuts. Will 
the Premier finally have the decency to meet with these 
community leaders, and will he do the right thing and reverse 
these cuts? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to clarify for 
members of the House that there was notice certainly given to 
the municipal sector that everything was on the table. In fact, 
Mr. Speaker, while the members opposite laugh, the Leader of 
the Opposition was at the SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association] convention. And at the SUMA 
convention, I indicated at that time that the government would 
be considering reductions in a number of areas, and the options 
included municipal revenue sharing. The options included 
grants-in-lieu. In fact I was specific about that, as were 
ministers of the Crown, Mr. Speaker, and we repeated that 
message at SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities]. 
 
The fact of the matter is that when we formed government in 
2007, the NDP government had been neglecting the municipal 
sector for well over a decade. Mr. Speaker, that relationship 
changed markedly, and since then revenue sharing from the 
Government of Saskatchewan to the towns and villages and the 
cities of this province has more than doubled, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This particular budget, we faced a massive reduction in resource 
revenues, and we’re asking those towns and cities and villages 
to share in under 3 per cent of that gap. Mr. Speaker, 2.5 per 
cent of the total gap in revenue we’re asking those 
municipalities to share in from a position of strength. I would 
note that many of them have huge reserves. There is no need for 
them to increase taxes, Mr. Speaker, as we work towards a new 
relationship with that municipal sector, informed by our record, 
which is record revenue sharing for the municipal sector in our 
province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, for that Premier to pretend 
that he was straight with the leaders of our cities and towns is a 
disgrace to the common sense leaders all across Saskatchewan. 
They’re outraged, Mr. Speaker. In fact that’s the quote. I’ll 
quote from the Twitter feed of SUMA: “Our members are 
outraged, and so are we.” They’re angry and they’re feeling 
betrayed, and for good reason, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Rodger Hayward, the mayor of Naicam, said this morning that 
most of the towns affected by the cuts in the grants of lieu 
mostly haven’t heard anything from the province. He pointed 
out that instead of consulting and working with the cities and 
towns, the Sask Party is introducing legislation that will take 



2188 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2017 

their rights to defend themselves away. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Hayward, who is also SUMA’s vice-president 
of towns, pointed out that it’s our cities and towns who: 
 

. . . spent the last decade on the front lines of growth. We 
were doing our fair share during the boom — providing 
critical services and creating the quality of life we all 
expect in Saskatchewan. We were paying, not profiting. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, why is the Premier making them and all 
Saskatchewan people pay, pay now for the decade of Sask Party 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s been a decade of record 
revenue sharing for the municipal sector, Mr. Speaker. It’s very 
interesting to hear the NDP, they’ve found some religion on the 
road to Damascus when it comes to the cities and towns and 
villages in our province because for 16 years, including when 
they were sitting on hundreds of millions of dollars in a fund, 
they ignored the municipal sector, Mr. Speaker.  
 
Well that changed in 2007, and now we’ve seen . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Well they don’t want to hear the answer to this 
question, Mr. Speaker. They don’t want to hear the answer to 
the question because the fact of the matter is that there has been 
record revenue sharing with the municipal sector over the last 
10 years. It has more than doubled, Mr. Speaker, since when we 
formed office. And if you looked at all the different increases, 
investments from the Government of Saskatchewan, it far 
exceeds the massive increases in the post-secondary sector, in 
the education sector, and the health sector. 
 
The number one winner of what they call waste, I guess, has 
been the municipal sector revenue sharing. And now, facing 
over a billion dollars short of resource revenue, we’re asking 
that same sector to share 2.5 per cent of that overall net loss in 
revenue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We know — and I’ve got a list here — we know the municipal 
sector has been able to put away, well in this case, millions of 
dollars in reserves in part because of the revenue sharing from 
the province, Mr. Speaker. Some of them say, well that’s our 
rainy day fund. Well, Mr. Speaker, now is the time to use it as 
we work towards a new revenue-sharing formula. And I’m not 
sure how that’ll be constituted, but I promise you this, it’ll be 
markedly better than anything they got from the NDP. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s arrogant 
dismissal like that of common sense leaders across 
Saskatchewan that are losing that Sask Party support. Breaking 
trust with Saskatchewan people. SUMA vice-president of 
villages, Mike Strachan, mayor of Torquay in the heart of 
southeast Saskatchewan said, “We thought we were partners in 
building Saskatchewan, but this is not how partners act.” Cities 
and towns are feeling betrayed all across Saskatchewan and for 
good reason. 

Mr. Speaker, this refusal to work together is hitting our school 
boards hard as well, boards that are having their roles gutted 
and their funding cut. The minister asked the education sector to 
find $5 million in savings; they found nearly 20. The Sask Party 
asked for a 3.5 per cent cut in wages. Now they’re saying that 
they have to find it immediately “. . . through negotiated 
changes and total compensation and cannot be achieved through 
further reductions in staff levels, capturing attrition, or other 
cost reductions.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, how does the Premier expect to move forward if 
he’s burning bridges with everyone from mayors to teachers? 
And how can we strengthen our province if he refuses to 
support the very people teaching our kids? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
hidden on page 46 of the budget document indicates a human 
resources compensation measure line item of $250 million — 
not only in this budget, Mr. Speaker, for the ensuing three 
budgets after this — in each and every year after this, Mr. 
Speaker, $250 million compensation. 
 
The education sector, the K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] 
education sector comprises a large component of public sector 
wages in this province, Mr. Speaker. So I don’t think it’s 
unreasonable for the Government of Saskatchewan, in trying to 
achieve this $250 million compensation savings as the funder of 
the K to 12 system in this province, Mr. Speaker, to ask the 
heads of these school boards to sit down at the negotiating table 
with the unions in the education sector to try to achieve that 
$250 billion savings, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Government’s Fiscal Management 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — The question was to the Premier of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and it’s about the betrayal of that 
government to Saskatchewan people. On front after front, the 
Premier and the Sask Party are showing how arrogant and out 
of touch they are, and we see them drinking their own 
bathwater instead of showing any level of contrition and respect 
for Saskatchewan people and the partners that build 
Saskatchewan. Plain and simple, they’re not being straight to 
Saskatchewan people, and they’re not showing any respect to 
the partners all across our province. 
 
They weren’t straight, of course, about their financial mess. 
They weren’t straight about their plan to attack school boards 
and gut their roles and cut their funding. And they weren’t 
straight with our cities and towns with their plan to cut millions, 
ripping up a decades-old agreement without the decency of a 
heads-up. And they weren’t straight with Saskatchewan people 
about their plan to sell off our Crown corporations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that the Premier doesn’t have much 
interest in listening to Saskatchewan people anymore, but why 
didn’t he, as the Premier, at least have the decency and the 
backbone to be straight with Saskatchewan people about his 
damaging plans? 
 



April 10, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2189 

[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as it became evident 
that the resource revenues for the province were not going to be 
coming back any time soon, we began a dialogue with 
Saskatchewan people. It started back after the last election in 
terms of transformative change initiatives on the part of the 
government and continued for the months since then, up to and 
including the meetings that we’ve had with the different sectors 
including, Mr. Speaker, the municipal sector. And so, Mr. 
Speaker, we have, as a result of those consultations and also as 
a result of our determination not to procrastinate on the deficit, 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve taken the difficult measures that are 
outlined in the budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I understand they’re very, very difficult. They’re going to 
affect the lives of Saskatchewan families. They represent some 
reductions in government expenditure. They represent some 
revenue changes that include some tax reductions, but very 
definitely some increases in taxes as well. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it was the view on this side of the House that 
we — unlike every other province in the country — we weren’t 
going to procrastinate on the matter of the deficit. We would 
outline a three-year plan to get back to balance, Mr. Speaker, 
which has been noted by economists from outside and within 
the province as the right move, including the shift, in terms of 
our taxation system, away from taxes on jobs and income 
towards taxes on consumption, Mr. Speaker. 
 
All along we know that throughout the last 10 years or so, the 
different sectors around the province in education and health, 
and assuredly our municipal sector, have benefited greatly from 
when times were very good fiscally for the province. And now, 
Mr. Speaker, the message from this budget is that we’re 
determined to meet the goals that we’ve set out to get to balance 
and we need third party partners of the government to join with 
us. And we hope that will be the case in the days ahead, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, no matter how they want to justify 
it, the Sask Party cuts go directly to our kids’ classrooms. This 
is a minister who promised improved outcomes. He promised 
families who are watching today that he’d bring in advances in 
programming to improve curriculum and to be a leader in 
Canada to educate, inform, and protect our children. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, while they promised parents that they’d 
moved forward with education, what they’re actually doing is 
moving us backward. How can the minister look parents in the 
eye and promise new programming or new curriculum when all 
he has done is forced cuts through our kids’ classrooms, cuts to 
services for our kids, and the elimination of programs for 
children who need it most — children with autism, special 
needs, and those who’ve experienced trauma? 
 

Can the minister explain to students, teachers, and parents 
across this province, why is he so dead set on taking 
Saskatchewan education backwards? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, to the member opposite I 
would say this and I would say this to the families in the 
province: we are committed to children. We are committed to 
students. We are committed to the schools in our province. 
 
Last week one of the Regina school divisions indicated it was 
cutting some programs. Those programs were not within the 
funding envelope or ordinarily provided by the province. Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve indicated that we would not approve their 
budget if those things were not continued. Mr. Speaker, we 
have ongoing discussions with the school divisions, and we will 
work to ensure that those programs continue because we value 
those programs. Those programs were not funded under the 
NDP. They were not funded by this government, but we are for 
sure going to continue them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, with lines like that, I’m not sure 
who the minister is trying to convince, us or himself. Last week 
he was quick to say that there weren’t any cuts to classrooms in 
the Chinook School Division, but this minister knows that 
Chinook took an enormous hit in the budget. And he knows that 
there were cuts and more to come. 
 
Does the minister think that speech and language skills are not 
essential for a kid’s success in the classroom? Does he think 
that access to a counsellor for behavioural issues is not essential 
to the success of students in the classroom? And does he not 
understand why people are worried that he seems to think that 
he knows best? 
 
The president of the SSBA [Saskatchewan School Boards 
Association] said with the “. . . loss of our ability to make 
decisions in the best interest of our communities, it’s really easy 
to understand why folks are stressed.” It definitely is, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
With this minister’s track record, why should the people of 
Saskatchewan have any faith in his ability when it comes to our 
kids’ education? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite 
had read everything that come from Chinook, she would know 
that the services she’s referring to are in fact being continued. 
Mr. Speaker, she would also know this: that Chinook has 
chosen to move 25 administrators out of administration into the 
classroom. Mr. Speaker, all of us should be commending and 
thanking Chinook, and using Chinook as an example. 
 
I would say this to the other school divisions in the province: 
look to Chinook for what they’ve done. Are there things that 
Chinook has done that other divisions should do as well? Mr. 
Speaker, I would ask the members opposite to read carefully, 



2190 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2017 

understand what Chinook does. It has shown a great deal of 
leadership, and for that we thank them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Libraries 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, that minister has forgotten who he 
works for, but the people of Saskatchewan have not. Last week 
over 5,800 people came together across the province to rally 
against the Sask Party’s damaging cuts to our public libraries. 
There were read-ins held in front of MLAs’ [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] offices across the province from Estevan 
to Assiniboia, from Meadow Lake to Prince Albert, and 
everywhere in between. And all across the province, Mr. 
Speaker, the message was clear: Saskatchewan people are 
against the Sask Party’s damaging cuts to our libraries. 
 
Our libraries are so much more to their communities than books 
alone. They’re meeting spaces and they are community hubs, 
Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan people are worried about the 
devastating effects that these drastic cuts will have on their 
communities. So will the minister finally listen and reverse 
these damaging cuts? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, difficult decisions had to 
be made in order to meet the fiscal challenges that our province 
is facing. We’ve been clear that we want to work with our 
libraries to adjust how they deliver their services within the 
available funding levels. The reality is that we know the number 
of items checked out of public libraries has dropped by 1.6 
million items since 2007. During that time we’ve significantly 
increased municipal revenue. Between libraries, municipalities, 
and school divisions, we believe there are enough resources to 
meet the existing demand for library services. We are going to 
work with the libraries in our province and look for a solution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan, there’s one library for every 
4,000 people, 306 libraries for 1.2 million people. Manitoba, 
one library . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, if 
they don’t want to hear the answer, maybe they’d like to look it 
up on their own. Mr. Speaker, Manitoba, one library for every 
10,000 people, 128 libraries for 1.3 million people. In Alberta, 
one library for every 14,000 people, 307 libraries for 4.2 
million. 
 
Well if they don’t like the numbers, Mr. Speaker, they’re real. 
They’re actual numbers, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
would urge them to sit down, have a look at it, and think, are 
there better ways we can deliver service? Can we move libraries 
into schools? Are there economies to be had? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Carbon Capture and Storage Facility 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the fact is the Sask Party’s cuts 
are the results of billions they have thrown away through their 
own mismanagement, scandal, and waste. And CCS [carbon 

capture and storage] is just one example, and it’s still plagued 
by problems, Mr. Speaker. Average CO2 [carbon dioxide] 
collected in the last two months was the lowest it’s been in the 
last year. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what exactly was the Premier doing in 
Washington? He went to sell technology that we don’t own and 
that they haven’t gotten to work properly that is supposed to 
turn cheap energy into extremely expensive energy because it’s 
supposed to capture carbon, which is a pollutant that the 
American government has decided they no longer want to 
measure because they don’t want to monitor climate change, 
which is the whole point of this project in the first place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will they finally acknowledge that they have 
failed with CCS and that it has caused four power rate hikes in 
the past two years, and it’s really just a $1.5 billion carbon 
capture tax? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, we have the cleanest fossil fuel plant in Canada and 
we should be very proud of that, Mr. Speaker. Three hundred 
and fifty thousand cars off the road, given the amount of carbon 
that’s been captured as a result of what’s happening at BD3 
[Boundary dam 3], Mr. Speaker, and this technology is being 
embraced around the world, Mr. Speaker.  
 
Technology and research is one of the keys, Mr. Speaker, with 
respect to reducing our carbon footprint, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
going to continue to do that, Mr. Speaker. I can tell you this: 
there’s people all around the world, Mr. Speaker, a number of 
carbon capture plants are being built, Mr. Speaker. Our 
technology is important in terms of trying to reduce our carbon 
footprint, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But as far as the plant is concerned, Mr. Speaker, this plant will 
be down for regular scheduled maintenance from time to time, 
Mr. Speaker. We are on target, Mr. Speaker, for capturing 
250 000 tonnes of CO2, or 800 000 tonnes of CO2, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re going to continue on that, Mr. Speaker, but the plant 
does have to come down for maintenance from time to time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, they can brag all they want, but 
facts are facts and reality is reality, and the Sask Party seems to 
understand neither. Time and time again they’ve proven they 
can’t get this thing to work as it’s supposed to, Mr. Speaker. 
 
$1.5 billion and that doesn’t include the tens of millions that 
they’ve spent recently on amine, Mr. Speaker. It’s a solution 
that is essential to the process, but at Boundary dam 3, it’s been 
a problem from the start. First they built a hand-tiled special 
containment tank; it leaked. So they chiselled out a moat — yes, 
Mr. Speaker, a moat. It’s as ridiculous as it sounds. And now 
they’ve replaced the tank, but the problems persist. 
 
In the last two years, they’re spending $40 million to clean and 
replace the amine alone. Mr. Speaker, that’s double the cost of 
the Sask Party cut to libraries and STC combined. So why is the 



April 10, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2191 

Sask Party pretending it’s okay to keep making Saskatchewan 
people pay for this massive Sask Party failure? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, the cost of the amine 
solution is coming down, Mr. Speaker. It’s an integral part of 
the process, Mr. Speaker, and the member knows that. She’s 
toured the plant, Mr. Speaker, and she’s made some very 
positive comments with respect to the commitment. But, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re going to continue our commitment with respect 
to reducing carbon emissions at SaskPower, and carbon capture 
is just one of those, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Certainly it’s leading-edge technology, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
first-generation technology. But there’s many people around the 
world, including the Americans, Mr. Speaker, who have 
expressed a continuing interest in exploring this technology, 
Mr. Speaker. The know-how, the know-how and the technology 
that’s been developed at BD3, Mr. Speaker, will be very, very 
helpful to those people as they move forward to remove their 
carbon emissions, Mr. Speaker. And we’ll continue down this 
road, Mr. Speaker. It’s important to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and it’s important to the people of this country. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Provision of Hearing Services 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, it was a weekend of mobilizing 
and rallying against this government’s short-sighted budget 
cuts. On Friday families and concerned citizens rallied in 
Saskatoon against the cuts to the hearing aid plan. They 
expressed frustration about the lack of contact and information 
coming from the ministry. There was no consultation and no 
information about what these cuts mean. 
 
Mr. Speaker, wait-lists to see audiologists are already long, and 
there is no plan to help the remaining audiologists manage this 
workload. When asked about how many audiologists would be 
providing these services after these cuts, the minister could not 
provide an answer. So I’ll try again. Can the minister answer 
now how many publicly funded audiologists will be left after 
the hearing program is dismantled? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To clarify, 
ministry staff are right now working with the health regions to 
determine the exact amount of FTEs [full-time equivalent] that 
will be impacted. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the tone of the questions from the member 
opposite both last week and today talks about all the cuts in 
programs. She talked about cuts to children’s programs. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s not the case. Mr. Speaker, the only cut is to the 
hearing aid program itself. The cochlear implant, the bone 
device, the infant screening — all that remains unchanged, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard all through question period the 
members opposite keep talking about Sask Party cuts. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, yes, it’s the Sask Party government and we’ve been 
very open and transparent about where the cuts will be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if they want to talk about cuts . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Well again, Mr. Speaker, they don’t want to 
hear it. Mr. Speaker, if they want to talk about cuts, how about 
cuts in health care? How about 1,200 fewer long-term care 
beds, Mr. Speaker? How about 19 fewer long-term care 
facilities? How about 400 less hospital beds? How about 52 less 
hospitals, Mr. Speaker? Those were all NDP cuts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, under the Sask Party, how about ribbon cuttings to 
the hospital in Moose Jaw, ribbon cuttings to the 
soon-to-be-finished children’s hospital in Saskatoon? And how 
about, Mr. Speaker, ribbon cuttings to 13 long-term care 
facilities? Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:30] 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 

Saskatchewan Benefits From New Canadian 
Free Trade Agreement 

 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Just in time for Canada’s 150th birthday, I’m pleased to 
announce to the House that Saskatchewan has signed the new 
Canadian Free Trade Agreement. Trade between our nation’s 
10 provinces and three territories creates jobs and economic 
growth from coast to coast to coast. It amounts to over $400 
billion, representing close to one-fifth of Canada’s GDP [gross 
domestic product], also amounting to 40 per cent of provincial 
and territorial foreign exports. The Bank of Canada believes 
that the reduction of interprovincial trade barriers would have 
the similar economic benefit as CETA [Canada-European 
Union Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement] or TPP 
[Trans-Pacific Partnership], a forecasted benefit of 
approximately $25 billion for Canada’s economy. 
 
The Canadian Free Trade Agreement will introduce a number 
of changes to enhance the flow of goods and services and 
improve investment opportunities in Canada. The new 
agreement will lower procurement, regulatory, trade, and 
investment barriers across our economic sectors. 
 
Under CFTA [Canadian Free Trade Agreement], Saskatchewan 
companies will be able to bid on a much wider range of 
government contracts across Canada. Suppliers will also gain 
access to better dispute resolution if they have a complaint 
regarding specific procurement, which in our province will be 
similar to the bid protest mechanism available under the New 
West Partnership Trade Agreement, which we know the NDP 
opposed. The CFTA also includes an ambitious approach to 
address the burdens shouldered by business as a result of 
different regulatory regimes across the country. 
 
Provincial, territorial, or federal governments can submit an 
issue causing a regulatory barrier to the new Regulatory 
Reconciliation and Cooperation Table. A working group with 
representatives from all parties will then begin negotiating a 
regulatory reconciliation agreement to remove the barrier. 



2192 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2017 

The CFTA also commits to future improvements to trade in 
Canada. Negotiations will begin to determine the coverage of 
the financial services sector in the next two years, and a 
working group will begin an analysis of opportunities to 
improve trade in alcoholic beverages and report back to 
governments with their recommendations within a year. 
 
I’m pleased to say that Saskatchewan played a central role in 
the negotiations which spanned 21 rounds in two and a half 
years. The new CFTA will replace the Agreement on Internal 
Trade as a modernized trade agreement that will help business 
be more productive, create jobs, and grow the economy for the 
benefit of all Canadians by reducing internal trade barriers. I 
very much hope we’re going to have the support of the official 
opposition. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and first 
I’d like to say, you know, thank you very much to the minister 
for providing in advance a copy of the remarks to better inform 
the critique of the opposition the hour later. So we’re thankful 
for that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I guess I’d just start with one point to make, is that this of 
course replaces the Agreement on Internal Trade, the AIT, 
which has been in effect since 1995, Mr. Speaker. And I’d also 
point out that certainly that was in effect under the then 
Romanow government, which if memory serves, Mr. Speaker, 
was an NDP government. And, Mr. Speaker, if memory also 
serves in terms of the New West Partnership Agreement, in 
terms of the points that members opposite like to make and just 
recently, Mr. Speaker, just as recently as not three or four 
minutes ago, Mr. Speaker, the member talked about the 
opposition to the New West Partnership Agreement. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d say in that regard, one of the things that we wanted 
to see as a government was better work on the Agreement on 
Internal Trade and as such, Mr. Speaker, we’re glad to see the 
new Canadian Free Trade Agreement replacing that agreement 
coming forward. So we’re glad to see this agreement coming 
forward, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We of course will be looking to see what proof is precisely in 
the pudding as regards the way this automatically impacts. We 
also note with interest, Mr. Speaker, that despite all the time it’s 
taken to get to this stage, Mr. Speaker, that they’ve punted on 
alcoholic beverages for another day, Mr. Speaker. So despite 
the congratulations on, despite the congratulations to 
themselves on these measures, Mr. Speaker, we have yet to see 
what happens with alcoholic beverages. And the minister 
continues to yell from his chair, Mr. Speaker, you know, a study 
in dignity, I’m sure. 
 
Anyway what happens with this, Mr. Speaker, and how 
different measures like the free government office space that 
was put up as an incentive to try and bring companies to 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, how that was all square by the 
northwest partnership agreement, let alone the new Canadian 
Free Trade Agreement, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be looking at that 
with great interest, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But this is a good announcement and we shouldn’t take away 
from that, Mr. Speaker. And I’m sure that members will have 

plenty to shout about from their chairs in the days to come. But 
thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, a pleasure to join the 
debate. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 66 — The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 
2017/Loi modificative de 2017 sur les victimes d’actes 

criminels 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
request leave to introduce and consider all stages of Bill No. 66, 
The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 2017 later this day. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
has requested leave to introduce all and consider all stages of 
Bill 66, The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 2017 later this 
day. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Leave has been granted. I recognize 
the Minister of Justice and Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move that Bill No. 66, The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 
2017 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
and Attorney General that Bill No. 66, The Victims of Crime 
Amendment Act, 2017 be now introduced and read the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
may proceed to move second reading of this bill. I recognize the 
minister. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 66 — The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 
2017/Loi modificative de 2017 sur les victimes d’actes 

criminels 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise to move second reading of The Victims of Crime 
Amendment Act, 2017. This bill, Mr. Speaker, will expand 
access to victims compensation programs for family members 
of victims of violent crime. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Victims of Crime Act, 1995 establishes the 
victims compensation program to provide financial support to 
individuals who have suffered harm as a result of violent crime. 
Through the program, victims are eligible for reimbursement 
for numerous expenses including medical services, counselling 



April 10, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2193 

costs, or loss of earnings. Under the Act, financial support is 
also available to a category of individuals known as secondary 
victims, who can apply for compensation for counselling costs 
with respect to a victim’s death. Mr. Speaker, the current 
definition of secondary victims under the Act is limited to a 
spouse or a child of an adult victim and the parent or sibling of 
a child victim. Mr. Speaker, this bill will expand the definition 
of secondary victim to also include the parents, siblings, and 
adult children of adult victims, allowing those individuals to 
receive compensation for counselling costs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of Justice has received several 
requests from individuals as well as community organizations 
to expand the victims compensation program to include these 
family members of adult victims. This bill is a direct response 
to those requests. The proposed changes demonstrate the 
government’s commitment to supporting victims of violent 
crime, and complement other regulatory updates that have 
expanded supports available under the victims compensation 
program. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move 
second reading of The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
has moved second reading of Bill No. 66, The Victims of Crime 
Amendment Act, 2017. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
I recognize the member from Regina Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d first like to thank 
the minister and his officials for his work on this bill and their 
work on this bill, and providing us the opportunity to stand here 
today. We of the official opposition are pleased to see The 
Victims of Crime Act be expanded to allow for more individuals 
to access needed services like counselling and medical services. 
 
Although we do see this as a positive step forward, we can and 
must do more and it is incumbent on all of us to continue to 
challenge ourselves to ensure that we are helping all that we can 
for victims of crime. We should listen to the calls that we have 
heard to make this legislation retroactive. And when discussing 
this bill it’s important that we do not forget the victims of the 
La Loche shooting and push this government to do more in 
supporting those in the North. The opposition continues to be 
open to working with the government whenever we can work 
together to improve the lives of Saskatchewan people, and we 
are pleased to do so on this legislation today. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
that Bill No. 66, The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 2017 be 
now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I designate that Bill 66, The 
Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 2017 be committed to the 

Committee of the Whole on Bills and that the said bill be 
considered in the Committee of the Whole on Bills later this 
day. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Committee 
of the Whole on Bills. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 67 — The Victims of Interpersonal Violence 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
request leave to introduce and consider all stages of Bill No. 67, 
The Victims of Interpersonal Violence Amendment Act, 2017 
later this day. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
has requested leave to introduce and consider all stages of Bill 
No. 67, The Victims of Interpersonal Violence Amendment Act, 
2017 later this day. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Leave has been granted. I recognize 
the Minister of Justice and Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move that Bill No. 67, The Victims of Interpersonal Violence 
Amendment Act, 2017 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
and Attorney General that Bill No. 67, The Victims of 
Interpersonal Violence Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
introduced and read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
may proceed to move second reading of this bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, before second reading, I 
wish to announce to the Assembly that the receipt of a Royal 
Recommendation for this bill was not received in time to appear 
on the order paper. Therefore I beg to inform the Assembly that 
the Administrator, having been informed of the subject matter 
of Bill 67, The Victims of Interpersonal Violence Amendment 
Act, recommends it for consideration of the Assembly. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 67 — The Victims of Interpersonal Violence 
Amendment Act, 2017 

  
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 



2194 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2017 

reading of Bill No. 67, The Victims of Interpersonal Violence 
Amendment Act, 2017. This Act will amend The Victims of 
Interpersonal Violence Act and The Residential Tenancies Act, 
2006 to introduce a program that will allow tenants who are 
victims of interpersonal violence to end their tenancy agreement 
on 28 days notice without penalty. It will also create a 
regulation-making power that could be used to establish an 
electronic registry of protection orders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this bill will affect a victim of interpersonal 
violence who is a tenant in a fixed-term tenancy, which is a 
tenancy with a specific end date. Normally the tenancy cannot 
be ended until the end of the term; however, this bill gives the 
tenant new rights. If the tenant or a dependent child of the 
tenant living with the tenant or a dependant adult for whom the 
tenant is responsible is at risk of interpersonal violence by 
continuing to reside in a particular residential premises, the 
tenant may apply for a certificate from an authorized person that 
will allow that person to terminate the lease on 28 days notice. 
 
The certificate will be given by an authorized person from 
victim services based upon receipt of an application 
accompanied by one of: an emergency order, intervention order, 
a victim’s assistance order, a restraining order, peace bond, or 
other similar order. As well, a statement from a social worker, 
police officer, victims service worker, or a person employed in 
a transition house or shelter can be used to support the 
application. The certificate will be issued if the authorized 
person is satisfied that there is a safety risk to the tenant, the 
tenant’s child, or an adult dependent on the tenant if the tenancy 
continues. Mr. Speaker, if the victim serves the landlord with 
the certificate, the victim and the victim’s children and 
dependent adults can leave the residential premises and request 
the security deposit be applied against the rent owing for the 
notice period. The action will also end the lease for any 
cohabitant of the victim. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re confident that the landlords are supportive 
of efforts to enhance the safety of their tenants and we thank 
them for this important contribution to the support of victims. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Act will also provide the ability to establish an 
electronic registry of protection orders. Such a registry would 
assist police and other service providers in knowing instantly 
whether a particular person has been found to be at risk. When 
the registry is developed it will be done with the privacy of the 
victim as a primary consideration. This bill is an important step 
in demonstrating that Saskatchewan takes interpersonal 
violence seriously and is moving to reduce it and assist victims. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would note that this bill does not address the 
issue of leave for victims of interpersonal violence. We are 
looking at a number of options to address those outstanding 
concerns. One of these options may include an inter-ministerial 
working group which will look at the development of further 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the opposition for their 
cooperation on addressing this very important issue. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The Victims of 
Interpersonal Violence Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has moved second reading of Bill No. 67, The Victims of 
Interpersonal Violence Amendment Act, 2017. Is the Assembly 
ready for the question? I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I would like 
to thank the Minister of Justice and his officials for his work on 
this bill. Saskatchewan has the very dubious distinction of 
having the highest rate of domestic violence amongst all 
Canadian provinces. As legislators we know that we are not 
able to single-handedly solve this crisis. We alone cannot end 
this terrible reality. However there are many things we can and 
therefore must do. Starting a dialogue is one important step. 
The discussion around intimate partner violence is not a 
comfortable one, but it is one that cannot be pushed to the 
sidelines and it cannot be ignored. 
 
Another important step is ensuring that we are doing all we can 
to support survivors of domestic violence. As legislators we 
have a duty to act on this. Legislation most certainly does play a 
role. Mr. Speaker, survivors of interpersonal violence often 
have to flee their homes to escape a dangerous situation. All too 
often they feel re-victimized and trapped. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I am heartened to say that this bill will 
address those concerns. It provides help over that otherwise 
seemingly insurmountable obstacle that many face, and it is a 
positive step forward. Mr. Speaker, across Saskatchewan we 
have shelters that are full and wait-lists that are astronomical in 
numbers. Today was an important step that cannot be the final 
step. We need to continue to address interpersonal violence 
through legislative initiatives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would very much like to thank the stakeholders 
who’ve worked tirelessly to advocate for this and additional 
legislative changes. You are at the front lines of this crisis and, 
on a personal note, you have done so much to help me and my 
colleague, the member from Saskatoon Centre, in the 
development of our bill to address this and other obstacles. Our 
gratitude and admiration for your important work is boundless. 
You are a hero to so many women and children. 
 
We will continue to advocate for protections in the workplace 
related to interpersonal violence, two of those initiatives that 
make up the other two-thirds of our bill, Bill 603. We have 
heard from many during our consultations and through the 
petitions that I’ve been presenting daily that this is desperately 
needed. We look forward to the government initiating a 
domestic violence strategy and we hope to see it accompanied 
by a funded and concrete action plan. 
 
Again we applaud the government for taking this step and look 
forward to working with them in the future on more legislative 
changes needed to support survivors of intimate partner 
violence. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
that Bill No. 67, The Victims of Interpersonal Violence 
Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 



April 10, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2195 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I designate that Bill 67, The 
Victims of Interpersonal Violence Amendment Act, 2017 be 
committed to the Committee of the Whole on Bills and that the 
said bill be considered in Committee of the Whole on Bills later 
this day. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Committee 
of the Whole on Bills. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answers to questions 326 through 333. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered responses 
to questions 136 to 243. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
Principal Clerk: — Committee of the Whole on Bills. 
 
The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair of the Assembly to 
go into Committee of Whole on Bills. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ON BILLS 
 

Bill No. 66 — The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 
2017/Loi modificative de 2017 sur les victimes d’actes 

criminels 
 
The Chair: — The first item of business before the committee 
is Bill No. 66, The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 2017. I’d 
ask the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Chair, 
Darcy McGovern, Q.C. [Queen’s Counsel] from legislative 
services is here today. Neil Karkut from legislative services is 
also here. 
 
The Chair: — Okay. Seeing no members on their feet, we’ll 
proceed to clause 1, short title. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 
 [Clauses 1 to 5 inclusive agreed to.] 
 
The Chair: — Her Majesty, by and with the advice and consent 
of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, enacts as 

follows: Bill No. 66, The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 
2017. 
 
I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that the 
committee report the bill without amendment. 
 
The Chair: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice that 
Bill No. 66 be reported without amendment. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 67 — The Victims of Interpersonal Violence 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Chair: — The last item of business before the committee 
is Bill No. 67, The Victims of Interpersonal Violence 
Amendment Act, 2017. Clause 1, short title, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 
[Clauses 1 to 8 inclusive agreed to.] 
 
The Chair: — Her Majesty, by and with the advice and consent 
of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, enacts as 
follows: Bill No. 67, The Victims of Interpersonal Violence 
Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I move that the 
committee report the bill without amendment. 
 
The Chair: — The Minister of Justice has moved that the 
committee report Bill No. 67, The Victims of Interpersonal 
Violence Amendment Act, 2017 without amendment. Is that 
agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Chair, I move that the committee 
rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Chair: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice that 
the committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit 
again. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 
[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the committee to 



2196 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2017 

report Bill No. 66, The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 2017 
without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
may proceed to move third reading. I recognize the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 66 — The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 
2017/Loi modificative de 2017 sur les victimes d’actes 

criminels 
 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 
bill now be read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that Bill No. 66, The 
Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 2017 be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the committee to 
report Bill No. 67, The Victims of Interpersonal Violence 
Amendment Act, 2017 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
may proceed to move third reading. I recognize the minister. 
 

Bill No. 67 — The Victims of Interpersonal Violence 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I move that this 
bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that Bill No. 67, The 
Victims of Interpersonal Violence Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly 
ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
I recognize the member from Regina Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, pursuant to rule 15(3), I request 
unanimous consent to withdraw Bill No. 603, The Critical 
Support for Victims of Domestic Violence (Amendment) Act 
from the order paper. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Douglas Park has 
requested unanimous consent to withdraw Bill No. 603, the 
critical support for victims of domestic violence Act from the 
order paper. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Unanimous consent has been 
granted. The member for Douglas Park may proceed to move 
her motion. 
 

BILL WITHDRAWN 
 

Bill No. 603 — The Critical Support for Victims of Domestic 
Violence (Amendment) Act 

 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, I move to withdraw Bill No. 
603, The Critical Support for Victims of Domestic Violence 
(Amendment) Act from the order paper. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Douglas Park has moved to 
withdraw Bill No. 603, the critical support for victims of 
domestic violence Act from the order paper. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This bill is ordered to be withdrawn 
from the order paper. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 63 — The Education Amendment Act, 2017/Loi 
modificative de 2017 sur l’éducation 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of Bill No. 63, The Education Amendment 
Act, 2017. Several amendments are proposed to The Education 
Act, 1995 and are required to be in place by September 1, 2017. 
 
Other than housekeeping amendments, the purpose of this bill is 
to provide the minister with the authority to issue directives to 
the education sector related to school board governance and 
administration such as trustee compensation rates, expenditures 
of capital, and operating funds provided by government. Many 
of these amendments are as a result of public and education 
sector feedback received during the review consultations 
following Dan Perrins’s education governance review report. 
 
[15:00] 



April 10, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2197 

A significant number of sections pertaining to board of 
education powers, responsibilities, and administration, as well 
as other school division administration matters, have been 
repealed with the intention to move them to regulations, which 
will then be drafted with input from the education sector. It will 
result in changes which will enable and, where appropriate, 
require school divisions to implement a sector purchasing and 
services initiative to achieve efficiencies in areas such as 
transportation and bulk purchasing. It will also allow us to 
move forward on creating a common salary grid for school 
division management, standardizing board member costs, and 
reinforcing the value of school community councils as a vital 
part of school division governance. It will also provide the 
minister oversight on student success targets and financial 
decisions. 
 
The first amendment being proposed is to repeal section 4.1. 
Mr. Speaker, that section is related to the Education Scholarship 
Fund. A new provision will be added allowing the minister to 
provide bursaries, scholarships, or awards to students. This will 
streamline the government process and provide the authority to 
make scholarship payments directly from the ministry. 
 
The next amendment is in regard to the authority to approve 
designated schools in section 180. Removing the requirement 
from the Lieutenant Governor in Council to approve which 
schools offer French programming, and allowing the Ministry 
of Education’s authority will make the process less onerous for 
schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, next are two housekeeping amendments related to 
the conseil scolaire, repealing the requirement concerning loans 
for current expenditures in section 320, as it is no longer valid, 
and repealing the requirement for guarantee of loans for capital 
and operating costs obtained by the conseil scolaire in sections 
322 and 370. These provisions are no longer needed due to 
amendments in 2012, which reworded borrowing sections of the 
Act to include both school divisions and the conseil scolaire. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, there are amendments regarding 
school divisions in the conseil scolaire. The first amendment is 
to section 4, 4.01 and 4.02. This amendment is to provide 
clarity surrounding the Minister of Education’s authorization to 
issue directives to boards of education and the conseil scolaire, 
as required. The second is clarifying the requirements 
pertaining to the appointment of an auditor, the authority of the 
auditor concerning boards of education and the conseil scolaire, 
and the provision of records to the minister in sections 283.1 
and 283.2. And third, in sections 312 and 315, is placing further 
terms and conditions on the use of operating and capital 
funding. 
 
The next amendment pertains to mortgages for housing in 
section 329, proposing to update the cross-reference, and 
remove the “notwithstanding” phrase. Due to the wording of the 
current Act, this phrase is no longer needed. There is also an 
amendment to section 239 where we require both parties agree 
to binding arbitration rather than just one. This change is 
consistent with the approach that requires agreement of both 
parties in order to engage in binding interest arbitration. 
 
The final amendment proposed, Mr. Speaker, will correct the 
French language terminology in the French version of the Act. 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard some concern expressed about how 
these amendments will be implemented, and I can assure the 
divisions we are going to sit down with them and work through 
the details. We are always open and willing to listen. The 
school divisions are our partners in education, and we value the 
relationship we have and we want to work with them to ensure 
that we are all focused on achieving the goals laid out in the 
education sector strategic plan. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move that Bill No. 63, 
The Education Amendment Act, 2017 be read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Education has moved second 
reading of Bill No. 63, The Education Amendment Act, 2017. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
again pleased to rise in my place today to give the initial 
comments around Bill No. 63, The Education Amendment Act, 
2017. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to start off with my initial comments 
on this particular bill as, well, well, well. Here we go again. 
This is the government, Mr. Speaker, a year ago hid all the facts 
from the people of Saskatchewan and also hid a lot of the issues 
that surround the viability of our school divisions and their role, 
and the need to have local voices contribute in any way, shape, 
and form to the quality and the determination and, of course, the 
development of our young children’s education plans, now and 
certainly into the future. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I looked at the bill itself and I want to point 
out to the people of Saskatchewan . . . The first point I would 
make out is, where in all of the discussions prior to the last 
election did the minister talk to the people of Saskatchewan — 
and more particularly the school board trustees — about what 
they have planned as it pertains to the autonomy of the local 
school divisions? 
 
And as we look at what this bill is certainly saying to the people 
of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker . . . And I want to explain that in 
a few seconds here. But the bill that is before the House is a bill 
that nobody in Saskatchewan has seen for many, many years in 
terms of really eliminating a lot of the authority of the local 
school divisions, Mr. Speaker. I want to point out that the 
people of Saskatchewan had no idea that this particular bill was 
coming forward. 
 
And I want to summarize, Mr. Speaker, summarize for the 
people that are listening what this bill really does. This bill 
gives the Minister of Education the power to issue directives to 
school divisions — and I want to underline the word 
“directives” — to school divisions with respect to the number 
of approved trustees, their compensation levels, and the 
spending of capital and operating funding provided by the 
government. 
 
This bill also removes the following rules out of the Act and 
into the regulations: things like trustees’ conflict of interest, 
disqualification of trustees, board meetings, quorum for school 
division meetings, voting at school division meetings, 
remuneration for trustees, the general duties and powers of the 



2198 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2017 

school division board, school closures, special and annual 
meetings of electors, and the submission of school division 
budgets as well as changes to the school division boundaries 
and the establishment of new school divisions. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that as we look . . . as one 
of the northern members, we look at any impact it may have to 
our northern boards of education, whether it is the Creighton 
School Division or the Ile a la Crosse School Division or the 
Northern Lights School Division. There’s one part of the Act 
under subsection 194(4) in which this Act removes provision 
for room and board in that section, which may impact students 
from the far north who travel south to finish high school. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as we’ve indicated, one of the biggest things 
that people out there are asking after the fact as the minister 
unveils this particular board of education bill . . . I’m sorry, the 
bill that really challenges the authority of the local school 
boards, is the fact that the . . . you look at some of the 
sentences. Almost every single paragraph in this particular bill, 
in this particular Act, Mr. Speaker, and I quote, almost every 
single line in this Act starts off with the phrase, “The minister 
may by order declare the following . . .” Or the next heavily 
used phrase in this bill is, “The minister shall by order . . .” 
 
So every phrase in this particular bill, Mr. Speaker, really 
empowers the minister to make a lot of decisions on his own 
through rules and regulations. And the question the people of 
Saskatchewan have is, why did you go through the process of 
researching what school divisions should look like, and at the 
end of the day saying, we’re not going to touch the school 
divisions and their numbers? But what they do, Mr. Speaker, 
through rules and regulations, is they’re now stripping those 
school divisions of a lot of authority. 
 
Let us not forget that’s exactly what this bill is all about, Mr. 
Speaker. And those provisions are great, Mr. Speaker. All the 
rules and regulations that they’re putting in front of the school 
divisions that the minister now has in total control, Mr. Speaker, 
is the grand total of 178 pages where they have identified 
changes that they’re going to make that’ll give the minister 
more authority than a local school division. And certainly they 
have repealed parts of the Act, Mr. Speaker, positioning the 
minister to decide a lot of things, a lot of issues that impact and 
affect our school divisions throughout the province. 
 
So as we look at the bill itself, Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of 
issues out there that people have shared with, you know, with 
the minister on many fronts. They have explained to the 
minister the value of education. And while I’m more familiar 
with the northern aspect, Mr. Speaker, I certainly am aware that 
many southern school boards have expressed to the minister, or 
some of the backbench MLAs, their ambitions around why the 
school divisions and why these boards need to stay intact and 
need to stay in charge. And this bill really takes away a lot of 
the authority, Mr. Speaker, a lot of the authority from the local 
boards. 
 
Now as I look at some of the challenges over the years, Mr. 
Speaker, and I go back to my own hometown, the community of 
Ile-a-la-Crosse went through some very trying times in trying to 
assert ourselves as northern and Aboriginal people in trying to 
make decisions locally for our own school. And I can remember 

as a young man where they had the . . . The school was actually 
controlled by the church when we were quite young, and many 
local people wanted to have a local say as to what the school 
division can or would do to help our students become better 
students, of course, and of course learn at the same time. 
 
And the community was actually split, Mr. Speaker. There was 
a lot of hard feelings in those early years because a lot of . . . 
The community being split, you’d see some families going to 
the regular school and you’d see other families going to the 
mission school. And you can see how families themselves were 
. . . their lines were very clearly drawn. And there was a lot of 
trouble in those early years, Mr. Speaker. There was a lot of 
trouble in the battle to control education. 
 
And as a young man growing up in Ile-a-la-Crosse, you 
witnessed some of the issues. We attended a number of 
community, public meetings when I was a young guy still in 
school and we heard the debates from some of our leaders. And 
when I say that the community was split, Mr. Speaker, no 
question in my mind that there was a lot of hard feelings, and 
the community was evenly split over the notion of having a 
local school division and certainly having the control being 
exercised from outside of the community. 
 
To make a long story short, those differences really did spill 
over to a number of violent incidents, Mr. Speaker, and people 
were really, really frustrated with the whole process. They were 
angry at each other. And at the end of the day, at the end of the 
storm, Mr. Speaker — and it was quite a storm — at the end of 
the storm, people gathered together and we decided to assert 
ourselves and to make sure that local people’s voice to the 
school board would never, ever be silenced. And that was when 
they created the Ile-a-la-Crosse School Division, Mr. Speaker, 
and that certainly helped in many ways to calm the disturbance 
and to certainly calm a lot of the hard feelings that had resulted 
from a number of months in which the community was divided. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I can point out that there were sit-ins. There 
were demonstrations. There were high-level meetings. There 
was actual violence, you know, within the community. And I 
tell you again that families were split and the community was 
split in many ways, Mr. Speaker. A lot of frustration. 
 
So there’s a lot of history to why you have the Creighton 
School Division, a lot of history as to why you have the 
Ile-a-la-Crosse School Division, and a lot of history to why you 
have the Northern Lights School Division. And of course now 
La Loche is looking at various options in which they 
themselves can play a bigger and more crucial role on how the 
school is administered, and certainly how they would 
participate in the decision-making process as it affects the lives 
of the school going to Dene High or Ducharme Elementary 
School in La Loche. 
 
So as a result of that, Mr. Speaker, a lot of the history in the 
North of how these school divisions have matured, how they 
have developed, and some of the challenges that continue to 
haunt many a school division. And under-resourcing some of 
these school boards is one of the biggest challenges, as we all 
know, and we continue to struggle with that particular challenge 
on a daily basis. 
 



April 10, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2199 

That being said, Mr. Speaker, if you look at all the incorporated 
histories of all the regions of our North, there were a lot of 
struggles to make sure we accomplished one major objective, 
and that was to have as many local voices engaged when it 
came to the decision-making process that affects the schools 
and affects the students attending those schools. So I would 
point out that there is a lot of compelling arguments around how 
we can strengthen the education system by making sure that 
local boards were elected, that there was a place for local 
voices, and that really helped stop a lot of the challenges in that 
region at the time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve also, over time, I’ve heard some of the 
compelling arguments around the importance of Aboriginal 
engagement. We often sit back and notice that there are many 
stats coming our way. You know, as MLAs we get subjected to 
a lot of information, and we see that there are some challenging 
times to try and bring up the successful graduation rates of the 
First Nations and the Métis people. So we look at the role of the 
Aboriginal boards of education, and we begin to ascertain that 
they’re also an important player in how we educate our young 
people, which includes Aboriginal people overall. 
 
[15:15] 
 
So to make that point, Mr. Speaker, on many occasions, as you 
look at the growing and the historical trend, we need to have 
more voices in education, more voices from the various 
backgrounds of the people of Saskatchewan. And most recently 
a number of documents, a number of reports suggest that 
increasing Aboriginal participation, especially if it comes to 
Aboriginal students, is essential to have any kind of success as 
it pertains to the educational system of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So overall I think, Mr. Speaker, that we have to make sure that 
these issues and points are raised continually at the provincial 
level, and that every opportunity to explain that to the 
Saskatchewan Party government was undertaken by every 
board member. And many, many people participated in those 
hearings and certainly participated in presenting briefings as to 
how they could increase the amount of participation and success 
rate of certain sectors of the people and, certainly in my case, 
the Aboriginal community. 
 
That being said, Mr. Speaker, after all the discussions, after all 
the presentations, after all the heartfelt and very touching and 
warm stories of how local voices are needed when it comes to 
administration of education throughout our province, Mr. 
Speaker, and the history of how some of these school boards 
were established, not just in the North but from all throughout 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and then the government comes 
along and they say to the people of Saskatchewan that they’re 
not going to bother with changing any of the school divisions’ 
boundaries; we’re going to leave the school boards alone. And 
certainly a lot of people were quite pleased that that was the 
initial response.  
 
And, Mr. Speaker, a few days later we find out that many of the 
powers and responsibility and the traditional roles of these 
school boards are going to be curtailed immensely and scaled 
back tremendously, Mr. Speaker, by an Act that the 
government’s bringing forward. And this is the same Act that 

the Minister of Education has brought forward. 
 
So we on this side of the Assembly, we’re very, very 
disappointed. We’re disappointed that the many school 
divisions’ voices were not heard and that many presentations by 
very knowledgeable people were ignored, Mr. Speaker, and the 
fact that the current Saskatchewan Party played with people’s 
emotions, Mr. Speaker, on this particular issue. And then they’d 
turn around and say we’re not going to touch the school 
division boundaries, but they put this big Act all over the school 
divisions as a way to control what decision making is available 
to the local boards prior to this Act being brought forward. 
 
So the questions that the school divisions are asking: why is it 
so important for the minister to have all this authority? What is 
the purpose behind the minister having all of this authority? 
What is the whole role of the school divisions as you move on 
forward from this particular bill? And these are all the questions 
they have. They have many, many, many more questions than 
the government can answer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But as I indicated, every single paragraph, every single page has 
the phrase, the minister may, by order, do this, or the minister, 
by order, may do that. And it’s an amazing display of authority 
that the minister has afforded upon himself, Mr. Speaker. And 
when we talked about the amount of pages that are in this 
particular bill, they have 178 pages of changes to the Act, 178 
pages of areas that they have repealed, have taken completely 
out of the Act. And all the wording and all the changes and all 
the new rules and regulations are all about dispelling and 
disempowering the school divisions throughout our province. 
So at the end of the day, as opposition, we’re saying, well they 
left the school divisions alone, but they’ve neutered all the 
school divisions with all these changes under Bill No. 63. So 
what is the purpose of that?  
 
And I can tell you right now a lot of school divisions are 
extremely frustrated. They’re quite angry, Mr. Speaker, that 
they have put this bill forward. And here we go again, playing 
with the emotions of the people of Saskatchewan, saying one 
thing and doing exactly opposite through the committee process 
into some of these Acts, Mr. Speaker. And that’s the reason 
why I think the people of Saskatchewan are just tired. They 
simply have had enough of the Sask Party government, and it’s 
time that we get rid of them. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s really important is that, as I 
talked to a few school board members, a lot of them feel very 
discouraged. They are very discouraged, and they sit back and 
they say, all the submissions that we made, all the submissions 
that we made, all the arguments that we made fell on deaf ears. 
And all the government did and all the Sask Party government 
did, Mr. Speaker, all they did was simply say, we’re not going 
to touch the school divisions. And they turn around and they 
disempower in every way, shape, or form the authority and the 
participation and the input of local people as they have done 
traditionally in providing some valuable advice and insight to 
try and ensure that the communities in their area and the 
children that they serve are given a good quality education. 
And, Mr. Speaker, they were very, very disappointed. 
 
Now I would say to the current government that perhaps if they 
would have, Mr. Speaker, if they would have had provided 



2200 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2017 

more oversight to projects like the Regina bypass where we’re 
exceeding $2 billion, if they would have conferred the same 
powers to the Minister of Highways they have conferred to the 
Minister of Education on this bill, then I don’t think we’d be in 
the boondoggle that we are as it refers to the bypass, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And as well, if they would have had oversight, as much 
oversight as the Minister of Education wants over education, if 
they would have had oversight over the carbon capture storage 
project that cost $1.5 billion, perhaps we wouldn’t be in this 
predicament, Mr. Speaker. So why is it that certain projects, big 
projects don’t have the oversight, but the Minister of Education 
insists on controlling every bit of every education decision in 
the province of Saskatchewan? What is that about? What is all 
that about? People of Saskatchewan really want to know. Why 
does the minister want to have all this power and authority? 
What is up with that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And that’s one of the fundamental questions that many board 
members throughout the province have asked. And, Mr. 
Speaker, school divisions right across the province are angry. 
They are angry in every corner of the province, in every 
constituency, and they want answers. Why go through the 
motion of saying we’re not going to touch the school divisions’ 
boundaries, and yet they turn around and you put this Act in 
place to curtail and to neuter any decision making at the local 
level? 
 
And I think that’s a real shame for the Saskatchewan Party to 
do that to the people that have dedicated their lives to making 
sure that they’re able to improve the quality of education to 
their children and grandchildren and the people in their 
particular community that they serve. And it’s a shame, Mr. 
Speaker, that they’re doing this. 
 
So the question we would ask in the opposition and as we go 
through this particular bill: why do that? Why go through those 
motions of listening to the public? Why did they negotiate with 
SSBA and with the teachers and engage as many community 
groups as they possibly could? And then come the budget time, 
they say to people, we’re not touching the school boards’ 
authority. And, Mr. Speaker, the bill comes along, and they are 
really hampering the whole process of decision making.  
 
Now our school boards throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan are neutered thanks to the Saskatchewan Party 
government, Mr. Speaker, and more particularly, thanks to the 
Minister of Education, whom I believe also served as the 
chairman of the Saskatoon Public School Board association, 
Mr. Speaker. And it’s going to be very interesting as we dig up 
some old comments and lines and statements that he may have 
made as a trustee. So what changed between his role as a trustee 
prior to 1995 and now today, Mr. Speaker? What has changed 
for him? 
 
And all we can say to the people of Saskatchewan, it’s all about 
a power grab for them, Mr. Speaker. And the people of 
Saskatchewan did not vote for that. The people of 
Saskatchewan did not expect that, and the people of 
Saskatchewan did not know that this was going to happen under 
the Sask Party government. 
 

So we have a lot of questions as it pertains to this particular bill. 
We are going through section after section to make sure that we 
are able to articulate to the many school divisions that are out 
there that this is what’s being planned by the Sask Party 
government, Mr. Speaker, and that there’s 178 pages of changes 
to the authority of the school divisions, 178 pages that give the 
Minister of Education absolute authority over every decision 
that the school board makes. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, that that’s a crying shame for that to 
occur because the people of Saskatchewan have always 
maintained that local voices are pretty important, that local 
voices are pretty darn important, that they be maintained so 
they’re able to afford the school and its services to our young 
people, to afford them local insight in how we can make sure 
that everyone has access to quality education. So, Mr. Speaker, 
we have a lot of issues around Bill No. 63. We’re going to 
have . . .  
 
The Minister spoke very briefly about it, and you’ll notice even 
to explain the bill itself, the minister was very brief because 
what the minister doesn’t want to talk about in the bill is how he 
has conferred this great authority and great power upon himself. 
And, Mr. Speaker, that is a crying shame because that’s not 
what the Saskatchewan people thought they voted for. I think 
they got their rude awakening around this particular bill. And 
we would ask them to join us, to join us in speaking out against 
the particular bill and demanding that local voices not be 
silenced and that the rules and regulations around who has the 
final authority over their child’s educational opportunity must 
have a local component to it. 
 
It just can’t be the minister himself. There’s got to be other 
people that have participated in that process, and this bill does a 
great amount of injustice to that particular effort by the local 
people to participate. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot of issues on this particular bill. 
We’re going to have other members of our opposition speak out 
against this bill. I’m sure you’re going to have other 
organizations that will come out publicly and speak out against 
this bill. But the fundamental question that they ask: why did 
the minister afford himself so much authority over the school 
divisions under this particular Act where he has neutered school 
divisions? And yet he’s gone through all the countless hours of 
discussion with these school divisions only to confer more 
authority and more power onto himself. Why, Mr. Speaker? 
What was the purpose? Why would he do that? That’s the 
fundamental question that many school divisions have as it 
pertains to this Act and that minister, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So on that note, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 63, 
The Education Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 63, The Education 
Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 



April 10, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2201 

Bill No. 64 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (SaskPower and 
SaskEnergy) Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 
to move second reading for The Miscellaneous Statutes 
(SaskPower and SaskEnergy) Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
Saskatchewan has had a $1.2 billion revenue shortfall as we 
start 2017-18. To address this shortfall and bring the province 
back to a balanced budget, this government has made some very 
difficult decisions. We must change our way of thinking and 
move away from our dependence on resource revenues, a 
revenue source that has proven to be tumultuous and unreliable. 
Our resources are a great source of pride here in this province 
and at times have been very profitable for us. And there are 
times, such as we are experiencing now, where the market has 
not been profitable and is not treating us kindly. 
 
It’s time that we build our financial picture on a foundation that 
is more consistent and reliable. Our 2017 budget has put us on 
the path to doing just that. In the meantime we have a big hole 
to fill. It is for this reason that we made the decision to cancel 
the grants-in-lieu paid to municipalities by SaskPower and 
SaskEnergy. This program has been in place since the 1930s, 
’40s, and ’50s, and is not based on property tax assessments but 
rather consumption of electricity or gas. There are 109 cities 
and municipalities in Saskatchewan impacted by this decision. 
A total of 32 million will be redirected to the General Revenue 
Fund from SaskPower and SaskEnergy to help us meet our goal 
of balancing the provincial budget by 2019-20. 
 
This amendment will provide the authority for SaskPower and 
SaskEnergy to redirect to the General Revenue Fund those 
amounts currently paid to municipalities as grants or payments 
in lieu of taxes. The amending legislation was necessary to 
provide the government the option of redirecting the revenues 
to the General Revenue Fund and also to clarify potential legal 
situations that may have been raised by those impacted 
communities. 
 
I want to be clear today, Mr. Speaker, that we have not turned a 
blind eye to the cities and municipalities in Saskatchewan. The 
29 million in grants-in-lieu based on estimated property tax on 
provincially owned assets are still being paid to the 
municipalities by other Crowns and government ministries. 
SaskPower also collects a municipal surcharge on power bills 
which results in another 74 million for municipalities. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Municipalities will also receive 257 million in municipal 
revenue sharing this year, more than double the amount that 
they received in revenue sharing a decade ago. That is 
significantly more than the 95 million that they received under 
the previous government. As well, the government is providing 
nine cities with a cap on the grants-in-lieu reduction to ensure 
that no municipality sees a loss of more than 30 per cent of the 
revenue-sharing amount. Those cities include Estevan, 
Humboldt, Melfort, Melville, Moose Jaw, North Battleford, 
Prince Albert, Weyburn, and Yorkton. I should also note that 

although these are called grants-in-lieu of taxes, they are 
actually based on a flat percentage of utility sales within a 
municipality and are unrelated to the value of property. 
 
This patchwork of funding and the unfairness of it all is one of 
the reasons why we want to revamp the various streams of 
funding municipalities receive from the province, and we will 
be discussing that issue with SUMA and SARM. 
 
This government has also provided 134.2 million in support to 
municipal infrastructure projects. Despite a very challenging 
fiscal situation, we have been able to increase the investment by 
60 per cent over the last year. The change does not affect the 
grants-in-lieu paid by Crowns or government for provincial 
property tax based on assessment times mill rate. Thus 
government is still paying its share respecting municipal 
services that support these properties. 
 
Also it does not affect SaskPower’s collection of a municipal 
surcharge on electricity which will provide an estimated 74 
million to the municipalities that receive it. This legislation is 
just one part of the solution for this province and will ensure 
that the government has the means needed to continue towards 
balancing the budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (SaskPower and SaskEnergy) 
Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Government 
Relations has moved that Bill No. 64, The Miscellaneous 
Statutes (SaskPower and SaskEnergy) Amendment Act, 2017 be 
now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? I recognize the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
I’m pleased to rise today to provide some initial comments in 
response to the minister’s second reading speech, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Certainly this bill was a bit of a surprise I think for pretty much 
everyone in the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I was looking 
through the promises that were made in the last Sask Party 
platform and I couldn’t find any reference to this anywhere in 
that platform, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Certainly we know the 
Premier keeps referring to the fact that he gave SUMA ample 
warning by telling them that everything was on the table, 
including grants-in-lieu, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But clearly that was not something that SUMA interpreted, to 
read what we see in this bill here today and what this 
government is doing to urban municipalities in a way that was 
definitely not discussed in the platform. And I think the people 
of the province, if they had known this was coming, back when 
they voted, some different decisions may have been made, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
So I think the most important thing to do when we talk about 
this bill . . . Well we could take a quick look at it. And it’s not a 
long bill, but we have to sort through some of the code language 
that the ministry uses and say, what does that really mean? I 
think one of the big concerns we see in this bill, and in other 
bills that the government is bringing forward, she said just now 



2202 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2017 

that the idea was to clarify potential legal situations. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s take a look at clause 6, and I believe 
that’s the clause the minister is referring to. Here’s what this 
clause says, and we should read this into the record and maybe 
decipher a little bit exactly what the minister’s talking about 
here. So clause no. 6 reads as follows: 
 

No action or proceeding based on any claim for loss or 
damage as a result of the enactment or application of this 
Act lies or shall be commenced against: 
 

(a) the Crown in right of Saskatchewan; 
 
(b) a member or former member of the Executive 
Council; 
 
(c) Saskatchewan Power Corporation; 
 
(d) SaskEnergy Incorporated; 
 
(e) TransGas Limited; or 
 
(f) any officer, director, employee or agent or former 
officer, director, employee or agent of the Crown or of 
the corporations mentioned in clauses (c) to (e). 

 
And then the second subclause reads: 
 

Every claim for loss or damage resulting from the 
enactment or application of this Act is extinguished. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the way I’m reading this, this goes a whole 
lot further than clarifying potential legal situations, as the 
minister said. This section shuts down the ability of any 
municipal corporation or organization to bring any kind of 
lawsuit against anyone in the government. 
 
So this is a huge bat, Mr. Speaker, that this government is 
employing. And we know that SUMA is exploring legal options 
to deal with the impact of what’s happening here. And we have 
a government that says, well they can’t sue us because we have 
this big majority and we’re just not going to let them sue us. 
We’re going to pass a law that won’t let them sue us. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, that is really concerning when we see the might of a 
government like this bearing down on the municipal 
organizations that have been trying to support this government 
through the years. So I think, you know, SUMA’s beginning to 
realize the total impact now that we’ve actually seen the bill 
itself. We weren’t too sure on budget day exactly what all this 
meant, but we see now where this government is headed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the city of Yorkton signed a contract with 
SaskPower Corporation. Now normally when you sign a 
contract and you put your signature on it, the common man 
would understand that that means you will honour your word, 
and when your signature’s on a contract, you will honour that 
contract, Mr. Speaker. That is the decency of the legal system 
we have here before us in Canada right now, is that when you 
put your name on a contract, you don’t expect that the other 
person’s going to renege. Well the city of Yorkton signed a 
contract with SaskPower back in 1959, Mr. Speaker, and in 
those days we know that local communities had their own 

power corporations. I know in my hometown of Lafleche there 
was an old diesel power plant. That’s how people got their 
power was locally, through the local municipalities that would 
provide power to people.  
 
When SaskPower was formed as a provincial Crown, they 
recognized the ability of communities to be able to raise funds 
that way and have a business. It was a legitimate business 
enterprise that communities were undertaking. They were 
making money off of these power plants. Well they said, okay, 
on our word, we will tell you that we will be able to . . . We will 
take over your business opportunity to sell power to your 
citizens, but we’ll reflect that in a contract where we will make 
payments to you in lieu of the profits you would have made. We 
will honour that because SaskPower got a huge advantage by 
being able to take over these power plants. The same goes for 
transportation and distribution of natural gas, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. As you know, originally natural gas was distributed 
under the SaskPower Act, and then when SaskEnergy was 
created as a separate Crown, those responsibilities then moved 
over to SaskEnergy. 
 
So the city of Yorkton put their signature on that contract. I’ve 
read the contract. There’s no expiry date. This is seen as an 
ongoing obligation based on, I guess, the opportunity that 
SaskPower is afforded by being able to provide power to the 
citizens of Yorkton. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatoon I pay my power bill to 
the city of Saskatoon because in my case, certain parts of the 
city of Saskatoon, they still sell power to their citizens. And 
that’s just an anomaly, a historical situation that came about and 
still exists in the city of Saskatoon. Many people in Saskatoon 
pay their power directly to SaskPower, but that’s outside . . . I 
live in an older part of the city, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So when you see a Crown corporation signing this document, 
putting its name on it, I think the municipalities assume that 
their word is good for it unless there’s interference by a massive 
government majority that decides that no longer can 
municipalities count on the word of the Crown corporations, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. So this has really been a severe hit, as we 
know, for the municipalities as the information comes forward, 
as we begin to understand what exactly the government and the 
Sask Party are going after here. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we had meetings last week with people from 
the city of Moose Jaw, for example. And in the discussion about 
this particular move on the part of the Sask Party government, it 
became clear that the whole municipal revenue-sharing formula 
was predicated on the knowledge and the existence of these 
types of agreements which form part of the negotiations, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So there was not sort of a one-day negotiation where the Sask 
Party signed an agreement for municipal revenue sharing. 
Certainly that was something that took many, many years. And 
what it did do is reflect the offloading of responsibilities onto 
municipal governments, particularly in this case, urban 
municipal governments. So there was an offloading onto urban 
municipal governments and a corresponding recognition 
through revenue sharing that they would take on those 
obligations, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 



April 10, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2203 

Well these agreements with the Power Corporation and with 
SaskEnergy formed part of those negotiations, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And now we see a government yanking that out 
without any forewarning or any possible planning on the part of 
the urban municipalities. Now you see the press releases that 
are coming out from SUMA, and the language is changing quite 
a bit since March 22nd, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There was an 
immediate release on budget day that said that SUMA was 
relieved that the municipal sharing was maintained, but they are 
disappointed by continued downloading. So that was the first 
press release that we saw from SUMA on March 22nd. 
 
Then we move forward to March 28th. SUMA started realizing 
what was happening here, and the impact on the fact . . . they 
realized budget day how devastating this cut would be to them. 
So the next headline on their next press release, which was only 
six days later, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is this: “Provincial 
government punishing hometowns.” “SUMA calls on province 
to reverse cuts to municipal funding.” And I’ll just share you 
the first paragraph: 
 

Saskatchewan hometowns are reeling this week as the 
reality of the provincial budget continues to sink in. The 
2017 provincial budget stripped $36 million of payments in 
lieu from Saskatchewan’s urban municipalities — a move 
that the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association is 
calling on the provincial government to reverse. 

 
So I think they were still hopeful, even a week later, that 
perhaps this government would hear them and would listen to 
their concerns, recognizing the severe and drastic impact that 
this bill was going to have on these people. They used language 
like, the president of SUMA, Gordon Barnhart, said, “We 
expected last week’s provincial budget to be tough, but nothing 
prepared us for the crisis some of our members now face.” He 
went on to say, “This shortsighted decision has left many 
hometowns facing a dire financial situation.” 
 
And this government says, well they just need to deal with it. 
That’s sort of the response we get from this government. 
They’re not even willing to sit down and talk with 
municipalities and give them the time they need to react. The 
Premier’s saying, well use your reserve funds. Well, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we all know that municipal governments are 
required to balance their budget, and that they need those 
reserve funds for those infrastructure issues. That’s what they’re 
set aside for. It’s not for operational funds. It’s for when those 
infrastructure situations arise and those funds are needed. 
 
So I think it’s rich that the Premier can tell these governments 
to use up their funds, their reserve funds, when this government 
blew through the best years that this province has ever seen in 
terms of resource revenues and never saved a single darn penny, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. Like what kind of gall does the 
government have to suggest to RMs [rural municipality] to use 
up their reserve funds that they very carefully planned for, and 
this government couldn’t save a single nickel? Like how does 
that work, Mr. Deputy Speaker? It’s completely unacceptable. 
 
Let’s fast-forward now to April 10th, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
which is today. SUMA has spoken out once again, and this time 
they have called . . . The headline in this release is this: “SUMA 
Calls for Meaningful Consultation as Hometowns Reopen 

Budgets.” And I’ll just read you a little bit out of this press 
release, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 

The Executive Committee from the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association showcased a united front today, 
as they continued to push the provincial government to 
engage in meaningful consultation while the province’s 
more than 440 hometowns left reeling by the significant 
cuts and downloading delivered in the provincial budget. 
 
. . . In addition to stripping $36 million of payments in lieu 
from 109 hometowns, the provincial budget shuttered the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company, suspended the 
Community Rink Affordability Grant, further reduced 
funding to urban parks, suspended the Main Street 
Saskatchewan Program, further cut funding to the Urban 
Highway Connector Program — which also funds the 
Town Urban Highway Program — and slashed funding to 
libraries. 

 
Then we have a quote: 
 

“We were hopeful the meeting with four cabinet ministers 
on March 29 was a first step in meaningful consultation 
and further discussion with the provincial government,” 
said SUMA Vice-President of Villages, Resort Villages 
and Northern Municipalities Mike Strachan. “But less than 
two days later, before we could bring forward any 
suggestions, Minister Harpauer issued a press release. The 
decision to cap the payments in lieu cuts — but only for 
nine out of 109 hometowns and only at 30 per cent of their 
revenue sharing amount — came out of nowhere for us.” 

 
[15:45] 
 
And they actually compared it to when the provincial 
Environment minister was in Montreal meeting with his 
counterparts to discuss a Canadian-made solution of climate 
change and saying that, you know, they were upset because the 
federal government was unilateral. Well this is what SUMA’s 
feeling right now, Mr. Speaker. They’re feeling the same way 
as the Minister of the Environment was then, when they say, we 
thought we were partners in building Saskatchewan. 
 
They go on to say: 
 

To add insult to injury, within a week [within a week] of 
agreeing to work with and listen to Saskatchewan’s 
hometowns to find a better solution, the government 
introduced Bill 64 . . . [That’s this bill, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker]. The bill would cancel all municipal services 
agreements — payments in lieu — and take away 
municipalities’ right to legal action against the government 
or the Crowns in question. 

 
And what do they say about this bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker? I’m 
not making this up. This is SUMA that is speaking, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. SUMA said: 
 

Introducing this bill was a clear sign to hometowns that the 
provincial government is not interested in meaningful 
consultation with the order of government that spent the 
last decade on the frontlines of growth. We were doing our 



2204 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2017 

fair share during the boom — providing critical services 
and creating the quality of life we all expect in 
Saskatchewan. We were paying, not profiting [Mr. Deputy 
Speaker]. 

 
So the article goes on, and I know other of my colleagues are 
going to want to take some opportunity to comment on that as 
well because I think it’s just shocking and shameful that this 
government can just off-load the way it has on our urban 
municipalities. 
 
Eighty per cent of Saskatchewan people live in urban 
municipalities. The brunt of the boom has been faced by many 
of these urban municipalities, Mr. Speaker. And when they say, 
you know, that they’ve been more than generous, Mr. Speaker, 
we know that urban municipalities have barely been able to 
keep up because of the off-loading that this government has 
foisted upon them. 
 
So there’s a real disconnect here, Mr. Speaker. Now I’m not 
sure if it’s just from the arrogance of a large majority, or is it a 
government that’s tired and doesn’t want to listen to people 
anymore, to listen to his own municipal partners, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? This is a shock when we hear them brag in the past 
about how great they were to urban municipal governments, 
and now we see them basically throwing them under the bus. 
 
The other thing I think that’s really interesting here is we know 
SaskPower is in a desperate financial situation right now. Its 
debt-to-equity ratio is over 75 per cent which is bordering on, 
you know, time to get really nervous, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
That’s a really high debt-to-equity ratio. Usually the safety limit 
is as high as 75 per cent. They’re now over it. 
 
So you would think if the government was going to say, well 
this municipal grants-in-lieu program isn’t working, that 
somehow, well maybe we should give SaskTel and . . . or sorry, 
SaskPower and SaskEnergy the opportunity to retain those 
revenues within their own bottom line, Mr. Speaker. And of 
course it would show up in terms of the revenues to the Crowns. 
 
Well that’s not what the Minister of Finance told me the other 
night in committee, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We had a little 
discussion about these particular cuts to the municipalities and I 
said, well you know, is SaskPower going to now keep the 
money? Is that what’s going to happen? Or I said, are the 
Crowns now required to pay this amount to the provincial GRF 
[General Revenue Fund]? And after some confusion . . . 
Actually the minister didn’t even know the file at this point; he 
was corrected by his officials. But he said, no, this money isn’t 
staying with SaskPower or SaskEnergy; it’s actually going to 
the GRF. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, last time I checked, I thought Crown 
Investments Corporation was responsible for getting dividends 
from the Crown corporations to provide to the GRF. So this is a 
complete end run on the Crown Investments Corporation, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. So I don’t understand what’s going on. Why 
would this government do a complete end run on CIC [Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] and the way 
dividends have been handled for the last many decades, Mr. 
Speaker? So when I asked the minister, well why are you doing 
this, and why do you think that this money is going to the GRF, 

and he said . . . I’m just going to find the quote, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. It’s page 2 . . . Oh, I know it’s in here somewhere. But 
the minister said basically, this money is going to help with 
programs, government programs. 
 
So typically we would use dividends to do that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And I know we’re going to have a lot of questions for 
the minister when this bill goes to committee in terms of what 
the heck is going on. Are they getting rid of CIC? I mean that’s 
a rumour that’s going around, but is it really happening? Is the 
government now just taking over all the Crown dividends 
through a direct payment to the GRF? Because that’s exactly 
what this bill does. If you look at section 3 for the SaskPower 
Corporation Act, they’re saying . . . Here’s how it reads: 
 

In accordance with the regulations, the corporation shall, in 
each of its financial years, pay to the following the amount 
prescribed in the regulations based on its revenues from the 
supply of energy in the financial year: 
 
a) the Minister of Finance for deposit in the general 
revenue fund; 
 
b) municipalities designated in the regulations. 

 
So we don’t know. We don’t know what this is going to look 
like because obviously we’ve got to see the regulations, which 
come long after the bill is passed, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There 
will be no opportunity for comment in this House. There will be 
no opportunity for comment in the committees. And those 
regulations will just show up. Then we’ll finally know what 
they’re up to, and we’ll maybe try and figure it out at that point 
in time. 
 
But in the meantime, we have a government that’s breaking 
contracts. Like what kind of message is that sending to anybody 
we do business with? We don’t see them breaking contracts 
with Deveraux Homes when Deveraux Homes can’t provide . . . 
Oh well they do, but it’s to Deveraux Homes’ advantage, in this 
case, a private company. We do see them breaking contracts 
with teachers. We have seen them break contracts, promises 
made to the universities and other government bodies when it 
came to the refund of the WCB [Workers’ Compensation 
Board] payments. 
 
I mean so maybe, maybe these guys are totally comfortable 
with breaking contracts right, left, and centre. They don’t really 
care. They don’t really care anymore, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
we see with a massive majority like this, the complete disdain 
and the hubris that creeps in when you’re just willing to break 
contracts because you don’t feel like honouring them anymore. 
Is that how this works, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
We’re better than that in Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
We are better than that. And we need a government that reflects 
who we are as Saskatchewan people. We don’t go back on our 
word. And yet we see them doing that right, left, and centre. 
And this bill is a classic example of not being able to count on 
the Sask Party government. 
 
I really like that the minister describes as “clarify potential legal 
situations,” when really what she’s telling urban municipalities 
and SaskPower and SaskEnergy in this context: you can’t sue 



April 10, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2205 

us. No matter what we do, you can’t sue us. No legal actions 
can come out of this. And we know that SUMA needs that kind 
of leverage to be able to deal fairly with these guys, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. You can’t count on them, and now you can’t sue them 
either. Even when they break contracts, you can’t sue them. 
Isn’t that a convenient way of dealing with your partners, 
building trust, building trust with the urban municipalities? 
 
And I’m sure the member from Arm River would like to, you 
know, talk to his own municipal governments about this bill. 
And I’m wondering if he’s having that conversation with his 
municipal leadership because we know that SUMA is not 
happy. And I would like him to share with us exactly what he is 
hearing about it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because this government 
is breaking their contracts. They’re breaking their contracts and 
it’s unacceptable, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this minister is trying to tell us this is all 
apples to apples, that everything’s fine. You know, move on. 
Don’t worry. Everything’s good. We are looking out for the 
best interests of these people and, you know, don’t worry about 
it. Well I think what we have to do is count on our municipal 
leadership in this case, and our municipal leadership is clearly 
telling us that this is not apples to apples. This is apples to 
oranges, that this is the breaking of the word of a government 
that has no regard for its own contracts, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
know others of my colleagues will want to speak about this as 
well. 
 
I also found it rich that the minister tried to explain to us again 
why they’re clawing this money back from municipalities and 
why they’re putting it in their GRF, you know, and this, they’ve 
learned their lesson about, you know, we need to stop our 
dependence on resource revenues. Mr. Speaker, where the heck 
were they in 2007 and 2008 when they should have been 
putting that money away? Resource revenues weren’t volatile 
when oil was at $140 a barrel? Like come on, Mr. Speaker. 
Anyone could have realized that that was a sign of volatility and 
that you don’t expect oil to stay at $140 a barrel forever. 
 
But no, they only see the light after they spent it all. Plus they 
didn’t only just spend that, they also spent all the money that 
they had received in the rainy day fund, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
So on top of blowing everything they got, they also blew any 
resources they had. And then all of a sudden in 2017 they go, oh 
gee, I guess resource revenues are volatile. 
 
Like that is so disrespectful to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. It is disrespectful to the people of 
Saskatchewan to suggest that they only now realize that 
resource revenues were volatile. Well hello, Mr. Speaker. They 
should have known better, and they’re putting the people of 
Saskatchewan in a terrible situation because of their 
mismanagement, their scandal, and their waste. 
 
So I know other of my colleagues are going to have more to say 
about this bill. At this point, I would like to move that we 
adjourn the debate on Bill No. 64, The Miscellaneous Statutes 
(SaskPower and SaskEnergy) Amendment Act, 2017.  
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 64. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 
SECOND READINGS 

 
Bill No. 50 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Tell that Bill No. 50 — The Provincial 
Capital Commission Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is my 
pleasure this afternoon to rise to enter into debate on Bill 50, 
The Provincial Capital Commission Act. Being the member for 
Regina Lakeview, Mr. Deputy Speaker, any time we talk about 
Wascana Centre, it gets the attention of people in my 
constituency for sure. This is an iconic park within the centre 
and really is the jewel in the Queen City’s crown, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And it is something that is not only deeply valued and 
kept with great interest of people in Regina Lakeview, but 
really all across the city and across the province, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
This is an iconic place, that when people think of 
Saskatchewan, they think of wheat fields. They think of boreal 
forests. And they think of this park with the big dome that used 
to be sort of a dark colour; these days it’s copper clad. But this 
is what they think of when they think of Saskatchewan, this 
centre that really is in some ways a built testament and tells the 
story of this place and people here, a gathering place for many 
years pre-contact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and a gathering place 
for many years. 
 
Since 1905, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have seen this park go 
from a barren place, a pasture without trees to what it is today, 
and that is a complex and beautiful space that really remains a 
gathering space. 
 
The trees, if you see pictures of this place back at the time that 
the province was . . . Back in 1905 when our province came 
into being, there wasn’t a tree to be seen, and now it is the 
largest urban park in North America, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
that really is a testament to the vision and the maintenance and 
hard work of many people. And it is not something to be 
entered into lightly when we talk about how we protect and how 
we govern, how we invest in and we maintain this beautiful 
park. 
 
What is being proposed here with this bill really does 
fundamentally change how the centre has been administered 
since the ’60s, 1962, when The Wascana Centre Act first came 
into force, Mr. Deputy Speaker. At that time it was decided that 
this park should not ever be under the governance of or at the 
will of any governing political party or government. 
 
This is a park that should be held in the interests of all people in 
Saskatchewan, and so at that time it was decided that the 



2206 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2017 

makeup of the board would be five members as appointed by 
government, and then three appointed by the University of 
Regina, and three from the city of Regina, so the 
non-government votes being the majority on that board, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
[16:00] 
 
What is proposed with this legislation is repealing that Act and 
replacing it with this new Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And again 
I’ve spoken about the need to look at any proposed changes in 
the context of what’s going on and in a broader context. I’m just 
going to look to some of the remarks in both the news release 
and the minister’s second reading comments about the reasons 
for this change, which really is a fundamental change with 
regard to Wascana Centre Authority and how the park is 
governed. 
 
So this news release, going back to March 22nd, announcing 
the changes here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, acknowledges: 
 

“We know how passionate Saskatchewan citizens are 
about the park and how deeply they care it remains as an 
outdoor oasis for families and visitors.” 
 
The province will continue to update and adhere to the 
Master Plan . . . 

 
But it talks about the need to streamline governance, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And that’s one of those words that I’ve learned 
in my short time here to pay attention to and be a little bit 
nervous about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we talk about 
streamlining things. It often, in my experience to this point, 
streamline often comes with finding — another word that is 
used — finding efficiencies, which I’ve taken to mean often 
cuts. And streamlining governance often means more control in 
the hands of government. And I certainly see that here with this 
proposed legislation. 
 
I’m going to go right to the second reading comments from the 
minister. “Once passed, this legislation will move responsibility 
for the Wascana Centre and all of its assets to the Provincial 
Capital Commission . . .” Again it talks about efficiencies being 
found. And of course we should always look for efficiencies, 
but I hope that that doesn’t mean a cut to services within the 
park. And certainly the track record on, you know, finding those 
efficiencies — I think of within education or within health care 
— that that has been a bit of a synonym for cuts and 
underfunding I’m afraid, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I hope that 
that’s not what is being proposed here. 
 
It also talks, as I said, about new streamlined governance board 
composition, Mr. Speaker. Streamlined board composition, I 
suppose, might refer to having decisions made more quickly. 
But I’m not sure that . . . But that is always in the long-term 
interests of, certainly of something like our Wascana Centre. I 
think it is good that you have the input, as you see now, from a 
number of bodies — again the majority of those on the board. 
And with those, the power of the vote would be those not 
appointed by the government, the three from the city of Regina 
and the three from the University of Regina, who certainly are 
big stakeholders in Wascana Centre. 
 

This would . . . I mean there are some concerns. And I should, 
I’m going to refer to a news article from Global dated March 
the 31st. At that time, Ward 2 city councillor, Bob Hawkins, 
had some concerns that he noted about the process with regard 
to this legislation, this proposed bill, Mr. Speaker, that “This 
was done without consultation and suddenly in the provincial 
budget document . . . [and without] approach to consultations 
with the city whatsoever.” 
 
And certainly that’s a story that we’re becoming very familiar 
with, Mr. Speaker. Major changes made to the authority of 
other bodies like the Wascana Centre Authority, the school 
boards, the municipalities, without consultation and coming as 
really sort of a, quite a surprise, and I think that that’s what’s 
being expressed in this article. 
 
One of the interesting things about the preamble and the 
reasoning provided for presenting this bill was that it points 
back to a report that was undertaken in 2012, Mr. Speaker, so 
that’s a bit of a lag. We’re looking at five years on, and all of a 
sudden this became a priority this year. So that makes me a bit 
curious about what the reasons are for that, Mr. Speaker, why 
this report was basically shelved for five years and now it’s 
come to the light of day at a time when we have some 
controversy in the park about development. 
 
And so I’m very curious about that, and I think that that needs 
to be scrutinized in committee and that the people who will be 
impacted — and that really is the people of Saskatchewan — 
what their views are and what their potential concerns are 
before this decision is taken out of their hands essentially and 
put under the purview of the provincial government who would 
have a majority share of board members once this legislation is 
passed. 
 
Another theme that we’ve seen with this budget, you know, 
taking over power, pointing to assets and reserves held by 
others, as we find this government in really a difficult financial 
position having spent all of their own reserves and now looking 
under the couch cushions or beating the bushes, as it were, 
within Wascana Park for any other potential assets. So I think 
that that really has to be looked at in terms of why this change 
and why now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are some assurances that the master plan, the Wascana 
Centre master plan, would be continued to be followed and 
would continue to govern the park, which I think is good news, 
Mr. Speaker. This is a very hefty document. It takes some 
long-term planning and really is a good approach, I would 
think, to any time that you are charged with overseeing 
something as important as Wascana Centre, that you would take 
a long-term view of it. 
 
And I would hope that that would continue and we wouldn’t 
look at making any short-term decisions ahead of a budget 
crisis or a downturn in oil or, you know, a grab to sell off 
valuable real estate or anything like that, Mr. Speaker, because 
that really would contravene what most people believe is the 
purpose of the park. And that is a public space, a 
non-commercial space for the most part, Mr. Speaker, a space 
that is an ecological preserve that affords people from around 
the city and really around the province with a safe and 
accessible recreational outlet. You know, there’s the Devonian 



April 10, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2207 

path. You see canoers and kayakers on the lake, families out 
picnicking. 
 
And really another theme in this budget has sort of been a 
retreat of the commons, you know, a commercialization and a 
privatization of those common spaces. And I’m afraid that the 
potential is for that here with this bill as well, were it to be 
passed. You know, these are spaces that we hold collectively, 
that are here for the benefit of all people in this province 
regardless of, you know, their ability to pay or regardless of a 
lot of factors that prohibit them from occupying other spaces in 
our province, Mr. Speaker. And it really is a shame to see such 
a retreat of these public spaces, because I think that, well it’s 
part of the character of who we are in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. And I think it really ought to be quite carefully 
scrutinized with regard to the intent of this bill and why now. 
 
I know that there are a lot of people, some with differing views, 
even within my own constituency, about the project, the 
revitalization of the old campus, and certainly some strongly 
held views about any further commercialization of the park or 
any retreat of . . . increase of the office space footprint within 
the park. And I think that those voices ought to be listened to. 
And I know that there are others of my caucus who would like 
to speak to this, Mr. Speaker. But I think that I will give them 
the opportunity to it another time. And with that I think I will 
conclude my remarks and move to adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview has 
adjourned debate on Bill No. 50, The Provincial Capital 
Commission Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 61 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Harrison that Bill No. 61 — The 
Saskatchewan Commercial Innovation Incentive (Patent Box) 
Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
always, it’s an honour to be able to rise in the House and 
address some of the bills that this government is bringing 
forward. 
 
This is an interesting bill. When you talk about the idea of 
commercial innovation, certainly it’s not a new concept. And I 
know the minister has said that it’s the first in Canada, but as 
far as I understand, Quebec introduced one that was effective 
January 1st, 2017. So really, I believe it is the second one in 
Canada. 
 
We know that people who are interested in intellectual property 
certainly would like to see more of these types of income tax 
. . . They call it a patent box because it’s the box you would 
check off on your income tax return. They call it innovation box 

or patent box, and it’s just an idea that it’s a special tax credit 
for companies that can demonstrate a number of things to prove 
that they are introducing a new, innovative, intellectual 
property-based ideas. And in most cases, if you read any of the 
literature around it, it’s to support small to medium-sized 
businesses in terms of bringing in innovation and new ideas. 
 
Now I guess, you know, in theory, this is something that people 
have been calling for. Certainly people are calling for it on a 
national level. And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know whether this 
minister has actually pushed the previous government or this 
government federally to bring this in on a national level because 
I think that’s where I think the true benefit seems to lie. 
 
But I’ll just read a little bit from . . . This is a legal, an article 
from a law firm called Hull and Hull LLP. And this is what they 
describe these patent boxes as. So I’ll just read from here: 
 

A Canadian “patent box” system could boost innovation in 
the country, says Toronto patent lawyer Aaron Edgar. 
 
Patent boxes, sometimes known as “innovation boxes” or 
“IP boxes,” provide special lower tax rates on income 
related to businesses’ intellectual property, with the aim of 
incentivizing the commercialization of research inside the 
country. 
 
They get their name from the extra checkbox added to tax 
returns in countries that have adopted the reduced rate to 
delineate eligible revenue from companies’ regular 
income. 
 
The Irish government pioneered the patent box in the 
1970s, but the idea failed to catch on elsewhere until the 
dawn of the 21st Century. In recent years, a number of 
nations have jumped on the innovation box bandwagon by 
enacting their own versions. They include China, the 
United Kingdom, Belgium, Luxembourg, France, Spain 
and Switzerland. 
 
And now the clamour is growing for Canada to catch up, 
with several groups pushing for the federal government to 
develop its own scheme. 

 
I’ll go on a little bit further in the article. They say: 
 

The Canadian Chamber of Commerce is among those 
calling for a patent box to make sure Canada remains 
competitive with other developing countries, predicting 
that the resulting boost in economic activity would easily 
cover the costs of offering the tax break. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen this movie before in 
Saskatchewan, and it’s something called the film employment 
tax credit. And when you look at the aims and goals of this 
particular idea coming from this government in relation to 
innovation with small to medium-sized businesses, it’s the exact 
same rationale that was behind the film employment tax credit 
that was very suddenly cut by this government a few years ago. 
And I recall the Premier telling us that he really didn’t like the 
idea of refundable tax credits. He didn’t like the idea of it at all. 
And yet in this budget we see a new refundable tax credit being 
brought in for research and development, for example. And then 



2208 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2017 

we see this kind of tax break for companies that will bring in 
employees due to the innovation, the idea that they’re patenting, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So okay, that’s what they’re doing here. But why the logic of 
removing the film employment tax credit which employed 
people in Saskatchewan? It was a boost for the local economies. 
It was a boost for many numbers of small to medium-sized 
businesses here in the province. And I just don’t get why this 
government would say, we don’t like refundable tax credits; 
now we like refundable tax credits. And you know, it’s kind of 
like saying, you know, we don’t want municipalities to succeed; 
we’re going to cut their funding. I mean, there’s so many 
inconsistencies. But what we see, Mr. Speaker, was the minister 
referred to this as keeping one of their promises in the last 
election in their platform. 
 
[16:15] 
 
Now I just want to look at some of the other promises that were 
made in that platform, Mr. Speaker. We’re looking at page 30 
of the Saskatchewan Party platform document 2016, and in 
there they talk about new platform commitments. And they say, 
they talk about platform items. And there’s six items in there, 
and they’ve already axed three of them, Mr. Speaker. So, so far, 
of the six promises they made on page 30, they’ve already 
cancelled three. So it’s funny how this minister’s talking about 
upholding their promises in their platform, and yet we see them 
walking away from them on a regular basis as we move along. 
 
For example, the graduate retention first home option was 
introduced last year, and all of a sudden, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
for the three years . . . They said in their platform they would 
give 1.8 million this year, in ’17-18; 2.7 million in ’18-19; an 
additional 3.6 million in ’19-20. This is what they campaigned 
on. This is what they promised the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. But guess what? This is a broken promise. 
They can’t keep their promises except for, of course, the one 
that the minister was talking about in this bill. 
 
But let’s look at another one. The seniors’ education property 
tax deferral was supposed to be $3.5 million this year, $3.5 
million next year, $3.5 million in ’19-20. Do we see that 
anywhere in the budget this year? I don’t think so, Mr. . . . 
Maybe somebody could point it out to me. I may have missed it 
but, as far as I know, that that promise has also been broken by 
this government. 
 
Oh, and here’s another one, individualized funding for children 
with ASD, autism spectrum disorder. They promised in 
2017-18 they would provide $2.8 million for those families who 
are struggling with those issues. They promised those families, 
Mr. Speaker. They made a promise, and now they’ve broken it. 
They’re deferring it. They’re not able to meet their 
commitments. 
 
So what the heck were people voting on, Mr. Speaker, when we 
see these kinds of broken promises in this platform? I mean, 
again, we see them breaking contracts with teachers, threatening 
to break employment contracts with our public servants. So 
again, I think when you’re as mired in your magnificent 
majority, Mr. Speaker, as these folks are, they lose sight of what 
they actually promised the people. 

You know, and I think another thing we need to look at is, did 
we see a promise for an increase in the education property tax? 
No. How about reducing municipal revenue sharing through the 
cuts we see in the grants-in-lieu? No, I don’t think we saw that. 
Did we see Meewasin Valley Authority statutory funding being 
removed in the platform? I didn’t see it. My colleague hasn’t 
seen that. Maybe we need new glasses or something. I’m not 
sure. 
 
Did we see a 5 per cent reduction to operational funding for 
Advanced Education? I don’t recall seeing that in the platform 
anywhere. How about ending the provincial pastures program? I 
don’t recall the Minister of Agriculture speaking about that 
during the platform last year. Oh yes, school division operating 
funding cut by $22 million. I missed that somewhere in the 
platform. 
 
A $3.5 million reduction to operating funding for libraries, now 
you’d think I would have seen that in the platform if it was 
there, but that’s a pretty important thing that . . . I guess maybe 
there might have been a few pages missing from their platform, 
Mr. Speaker, and they just didn’t bother telling the people of 
Saskatchewan what it was they were intending to do. 
 
Did small businesses know that they were going to lose their 
commissions when they collect taxes for this government? Did 
they know that they were going to have to do it for free on their 
own time without any compensation from this government? I 
don’t think that was in there. 
 
In fact I don’t recall NORTEP [northern teacher education 
program] being mentioned at all in the platform, you know. So 
it’s kind of funny, it’s just a year ago that we were actually 
going to the people for voting. Did we hear any sign that there 
was going to be a $1.3 billion deficit this year alone or the 
previous calendar year or fiscal year, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And you know, I seem to recall the idea here was . . . Oh yes, 
on page 31 of their platform, this is what they did say, “The 
current four-year financial outlook projects a deficit of $259 
million in ’16-17.” So $259 million to 1.3 and counting — 
billion, 1.3 billion and counting — is a significant change from 
what this government promised to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Oh, but what else did they say? “The budget becomes balanced 
with a small surplus in 2017-18.” This is what they promised 
the people of Saskatchewan. A balanced budget in 2017-18, 
maybe a small surplus. Well that sounds really good, Mr. 
Speaker, sounds great. But you know what? It wasn’t there. It 
never was there. And they had no way to even get there. Now 
we’re looking at over $650 million deficit when we had them 
say in their platform the budget becomes balanced with a small 
surplus in 2017-18. 
 
So I’m just really confused by what isn’t in this platform, and 
then everything that’s in there that they’ve already either broken 
promises or were clearly unable to make those commitments 
work, Mr. Speaker. So I mean when we look at this idea of a 
patent box, I mean it’s one that is catching on. I guess what 
happens though is that every province has one, then what’s the 
advantage for Saskatchewan? 
 
We see Quebec is already doing it. We know other provinces 



April 10, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2209 

are looking at it. We may be second out of the box — literally 
— this time around, Mr. Speaker, but we know that this is 
something that many provinces are looking at, and obviously 
the Canadian government is as well. So they might be a little bit 
ahead of the game here right now, but you know, when you’re 
talking about helping out small and medium-sized businesses, 
how about taking away the exemption on children’s clothing? 
This comes out of the pockets of small- and 
medium-sized-business owners, Mr. Speaker. 
 
How about hearing aids and eliminating hearing aid plans for 
people? How about reducing $13 million in the labour market 
development? How is that helping small to medium-sized 
businesses? Well of course the elimination of the commission, 
that’s $9 million out of businesses’ pockets, Mr. Speaker. PST 
[provincial sales tax] on restaurants, PST on construction, how 
is that helping small to medium-sized businesses, Mr. Speaker? 
And yet this is the justification for introducing this patent box. 
 
This patent box, Mr. Speaker, is for a very, very small group of 
people. And unfortunately we don’t know exactly what it’s 
going to look like, and that’s part of the problem with this bill. 
 
One of the things they talk about is the ideas that will be subject 
to this tax. The corporate income tax is only going to be 6 per 
cent for these new ideas. The definition they need to meet, a 
scientific test, says it has to be an exceptional innovation. But, 
Mr. Speaker, we have no idea what that means. There’s no 
definition of what an exceptional innovation is. 
 
You know, I saw a tweet today, and I thought, well this is pretty 
exceptional. A young fellow came up with the idea of you take 
your empty Kleenex box and you duct tape it to the full 
Kleenex box, so that when you need somewhere to put your 
used Kleenex, you can just put it in the old Kleenex box. Now 
that’s an exceptional innovation, Mr. Speaker, and I think 
maybe that young fellow should be entitled to a 6 per cent 
corporate income tax rate for that intellectual property idea. 
Like what does this mean? We have no idea, and there’s no 
explanation in the bill. So, as always, we’re going to have a 
whole lot more questions for this government as they move 
along. 
 
But I think the inconsistencies we see in . . . you know, and the 
minister bragging about meeting his promise, when we see 
promise after promise after promise broken from the last year’s 
. . . their platform, and also when we now understand that much 
of what they intended to do wasn’t in the platform because 
people aren’t going to be happy with it. And saying that there 
was going to be a budget balance this year, when 12 months 
later we see a complete miss on last year’s finances, and now 
we’re looking at an over $650 million deficit. Deficit after 
deficit after deficit — that’s the promise of this government, 
Mr. Speaker, and it’s the only one that they’ve been keeping. 
But they haven’t made that promise; we just know that that’s 
where they’re headed. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know others of my colleagues are going to 
want to speak to this bill as well, and I think that’s the extent of 
my comments for today. We have a lot of questions. What are 
these regulations going to look like? What the heck does an 
exceptional innovation actually mean? And maybe our Kleenex 
box boy might be the one that could sort us out and let us know 

whether he’s on track or not. But at any rate, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s the extent of my comments, so I would like to move to 
adjourn the debate on Bill No. 61, The Saskatchewan 
Commercial Innovation Incentive (Patent Box) Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana has 
adjourned debate on Bill No. 61, The Saskatchewan 
Commercial Innovation Incentive (Patent Box) Act. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 62 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Harrison that Bill No. 62 — The 
Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment 
Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Me again; 
I’m just rising now to speak to Bill No. 62. We know the role 
that labour-sponsored venture capital funds have played in 
Saskatchewan. And certainly I think the income tax incentives 
that have been afforded to taxpayers to invest in these local 
companies is always one that has been appreciated. I haven’t 
done so well in my own labour-sponsored capital investments, 
Mr. Speaker, but that’s another story for another day. 
 
I guess what’s really interesting about this bill is, again the 
government didn’t quite get it right when they introduced the 
budget. So when the budget came out, they made an 
announcement they were reducing the allowable amount. It’s 
clause 12(4)(d) of the existing bill. They’re going to reduce it 
from 20 per cent to 15 per cent. But I understand from the 
Minister of Finance that there is some folks that made a couple 
of phone calls after the budget came out, and the minister 
brought forward their concerns to cabinet and indicated that you 
know, really the results could be achieved in a similar way by 
reducing it to 17.5 per cent. Which is what we now see in this 
bill instead of 15 per cent. And then there was some caps and 
some limitations that would be implied elsewhere. So it nets out 
to the same change if I understand correctly in that context. 
 
But you know, it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, when those two 
companies got the ear of the minister and asked him to make 
the change, he did. But we see SUMA struggling with 
significant impacts on their operations, and the 80 per cent of 
Saskatchewan people that live in urban municipalities, and yet 
this government just keeps on announcing without consulting. 
 
So I’m not sure why they would pick winners and losers in this 
way, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s a habit that they’ve gotten into 
since they got into power. And we saw it with SkipTheDishes 
last year, although they actually didn’t even use that money. So 
that’s an interesting story that we haven’t really heard all the 
details on either. But you know, it’s just the inconsistency that 
we see this government applying across the board. But these 
two companies had the ear of the minister, and he was able to 



2210 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2017 

swiftly react and get cabinet assent after the budget was 
introduced and before we see this bill. So it’s pretty agile and 
nimble ability on the part of cabinet to be able to do that. 
 
And I think maybe the people, the 5,800 people that were out 
last weekend calling on the government to rethink the library 
cuts, that’s 5,800 people and they’re not getting any audience, 
Mr. Speaker. They have to do it through petitions and they have 
to do it through letters. But I don’t think they’re actually getting 
audience with the minister who is honestly and seriously 
listening to the concerns and thinking about the impacts that 
that particular cut is going to have on communities across the 
province.  
 
I mean, these . . . The backbenchers know. They were in their 
offices and they saw who came out, Mr. Speaker. I was in 
Estevan and I saw over 100 people in front of the member from 
Estevan’s office saying, this is really important to us. And I 
know she came out and spoke to them. But I’m hoping she’s 
doing the same to the minister, Mr. Speaker, because it’s the 
Minister of Education that is responsible for this decision, and 
this cabinet. So I hope all the backbenchers are taking these 
concerns seriously and being that voice that obviously these two 
labour venture capital fund companies have directly with the 
Minister of the Economy. So it’s a question of access, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m not sure how libraries are supposed to get access 
to the Minister of Education and the minister responsible for 
this cut. But it’s just that inconsistency that we see throughout. 
 
So I don’t think that the changes to this will amount to a lot of 
financial changes. It’s a fairly insignificant bill in that sense, 
Mr. Speaker. If I recall correctly, I think it’s around $200,000 
and it doesn’t take effect until next year. So there still is . . . 
And I may not be quite right on that, Mr. Speaker, but that’s my 
recollection. So I think there will be time for us to review this 
more carefully in committee when it’s ready to go there. And 
we’ll have a few more questions for the minister at that time. 
 
But I think this is just an example of the agile nimbleness that 
we saw from this minister being able to respond that quickly 
after budget, to make some changes before the bill was 
introduced, and yet we see nothing on the side of libraries. We 
see nothing on the side of hearing aids. We see nothing on the 
side of autism. And the list, as you know, Mr. Speaker, goes on 
and on and on. So I think at this point in time, I would like to 
say that concludes our comments at this point, and we’ll look 
forward to the discussion in committee on Bill No. 62. 
 
[16:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the minister that Bill No. 62, The Labour-sponsored 
Venture Capital Corporations Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill stand 

committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I designate 
that Bill No. 62, The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital 
Corporations Amendment Act, 2017 be committed to the 
Standing Committee on Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that this Assembly do now 
adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly now stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:32.] 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2181 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2181 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2181 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2181 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2181 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 2181 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2182 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2182 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2182 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2182 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2182 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2183 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2183 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2183 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2184 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2184 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2184 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 National Oral Health Month and National Dental Hygienist Week 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2185 
 Balcarres Remembers the Battle of Vimy Ridge 
  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2185 
 First Nations University of Canada 39th Annual Powwow 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2185 
 Special Olympics Saskatchewan Celebration of Champions 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2185 
 SaskTel Completes Cellular Network Expansion 
  Steele ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2186 
 New Passenger Bus Service Between Martensville, Warman, and Saskatoon 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2186 
 New Schools for Saskatoon 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2186 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Details of Land Transactions 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2187 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2187 
 Financial Support for Municipalities 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2187 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2187 
 Funding for Education 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2188 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2188 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2189 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2189 
 Government’s Fiscal Management 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2188 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2189 
 Funding for Libraries 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2190 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2190 
 Carbon Capture and Storage Facility 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2190 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2190 
 Provision of Hearing Services 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2191 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2191 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Saskatchewan Benefits From New Canadian Free Trade Agreement 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2191 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2192 



 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 66 — The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 2017 
 Loi modificative de 2017 sur les victimes d’actes criminels 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2192 
 Bill No. 67 — The Victims of Interpersonal Violence Amendment Act, 2017 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2193 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 66 — The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 2017 
 Loi modificative de 2017 sur les victimes d’actes criminels 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2192 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2193 
 Bill No. 67 — The Victims of Interpersonal Violence Amendment Act, 2017 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2193 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2194 
 Bill No. 63 — The Education Amendment Act, 2017/Loi modificative de 2017 sur l’éducation 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2196 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2197 
 Bill No. 64 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (SaskPower and SaskEnergy) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2201 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2201 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2195 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ON BILLS 
 Bill No. 66 — The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 2017 
 Loi modificative de 2017 sur les victimes d’actes criminels 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2195 
 Bill No. 67 — The Victims of Interpersonal Violence Amendment Act, 2017 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2195 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 66 — The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 2017 
 Loi modificative de 2017 sur les victimes d’actes criminels 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2196 
 Bill No. 67 — The Victims of Interpersonal Violence Amendment Act, 2017 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2196 
BILL WITHDRAWN 
 Bill No. 603 — The Critical Support for Victims of Domestic Violence (Amendment) Act 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2196 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 50 — The Provincial Capital Commission Act  
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2205 
 Bill No. 61 — The Saskatchewan Commercial Innovation Incentive (Patent Box) Act  
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2207 
 Bill No. 62 — The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment Act, 2017  
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2209 
  Merriman (referral to Economy Committee) ....................................................................................................................... 2210 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


