


















































Hansard: May 08, 2017


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 84A  MONDAY, MAY 8, 2017, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 

 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 

Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 

 

 

 
 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 

Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 

Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 

Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 

Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 

Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 

Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 

Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 

Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 

Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 

Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 

Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 

Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 

D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 

Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 

Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 

Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 

Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 

Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 

Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 

Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 

Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 

Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 

Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 

Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 

Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 

Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 

Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 

Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 

Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 

Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 

McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 

Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 

Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 

Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 

Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 

Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 

Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 

Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 

Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 

Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 

Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 

Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 

Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 

Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 

Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 

Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 

Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 

Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 

Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 

Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 

Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 

Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 

Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 

Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 

Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 

Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 

Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 

 

 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 11 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2419 
 May 8, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would seek leave from the House for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s an 
honour today to introduce to you and through you to all 
members of this Assembly, some very distinguished guests 
who’ve joined us in your gallery. With us today, on his first 
official visit to the province of Saskatchewan, is Mr. Gunn Kim, 
the consul general of the Republic of Korea. He’s based in 
Vancouver. And he’s joined by Consul Kangjun Lee as well as 
Mr. Hyungshik Jung, the director general of the Korea 
Trade-Investment Promotion Agency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the consul general arrived in our province 
yesterday. He’s going to spend a couple of days here in Regina 
and also later in Saskatoon as well, meeting with officials from 
government as well as our universities, with the representatives 
of our own Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership or 
STEP. And while he’s here, the consul general will have a 
chance to meet with members of the province’s growing Korean 
community, a community that has made this province a much 
better place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the timing of this particular visit is fortuitous. It comes 
only months after Saskatchewan’s first-ever trade mission to 
Korea, something I had the honour of leading, Mr. Speaker, just 
as I’ve mentioned, a few months ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it also, this visit also comes just a few years after 
the signing of the Canada-South Korea free trade agreement, 
which I think is a very, very important instrument executed by 
the former federal government, supported by the current federal 
government as well. We have a tremendous opportunity to work 
with Korea, to strengthen an already strong relationship with a 
country that has been referenced as the miracle of our times, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it’s easy to see why people would refer to Korea and its 
history as a miracle, as an economic miracle. In just 50 years, 
South Korea has seen its GDP [gross domestic product] double 
nine times and the value of its exports grow by more than 
300,000 per cent. That’s just in 50 years. The progress has been 
astonishing and is a credit to the economy and the people of 
South Korea. 
 
The good news for our province is that over the last four years 

our exports have, Mr. Speaker, increased by 200 per cent. Our 
exports to Korea, South Korea, have increased by 200 per cent. 
And so may I just say, on behalf of a grateful province, thank 
you. Mr. Speaker, we are very grateful for the relationship that 
sees Saskatchewan shipping potash and canola oil and wheat 
and malt for some very, very good Korean beer, and flaxseed to 
their country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on our trade mission we met with buyers for those 
products, as well as other customers on our mission, and food 
processors. And may I just say in the company of our 
delegation, we had the chance to meet with the CEO [chief 
executive officer] of Emart, which is sort of the Wal-Mart of 
Korea — their largest retailer, 160 stores. And they’re keenly 
interested in what we might have to offer them from our 
province in the way of sustainable foods, Mr. Speaker, healthy 
alternatives from a food perspective, and shelf-ready products. 
And I know that relationship continues. 
 
Korea has invested directly in our uranium industry as well, 
something we welcome. And there’s also an interest in our 
enhanced oil recovery technology we have here, and carbon 
capture and sequestration, clean coal technology that we have as 
well. Mr. Speaker, we have 12 academic agreements with 
post-secondary institutions in Korea. 
 
And there are other things that bind us, Mr. Speaker, powerful 
bonds indeed, like those that were forged at Kapyong, for 
example, from April 22 to 25, Mr. Speaker, of 1951. That battle 
was very, very important and that is where, Mr. Speaker, Allied 
forces, but Canadians and Koreans, stood shoulder to shoulder 
in the defence of liberty. Mr. Speaker, indeed our relationship is 
founded on the appreciation of those basic values as well. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say to our delegation, I want to 
welcome them here to the Legislative Assembly. I want to 
thank them for coming on this mission. Mr. Speaker, we want 
to thank, through them, the people of Korea, with whom we 
have this dynamic partnership that’s responsible for a lot of 
well-being on both sides of the trade relationship. And I would 
just ask all members of the House to join me in welcoming 
them to their Legislative Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s truly a 
pleasure to join with the Premier and welcome this very 
important delegation from South Korea to the Saskatchewan 
legislature. Thank you so very much for your presence here 
today. I’d like to welcome Mr. Gunn Kim, consul general of the 
Republic of Korea in Vancouver; Mr. Kangjun Lee, consul of 
the Republic of Korea in Vancouver; and Mr. Hyungshik Jung, 
director general for Korea Trade-Investment Promotion 
Agency. It’s a pleasure to have you in Saskatchewan. 
 
As the Premier identified, we have a very strong and important 
relationship with South Korea, and certainly your presence here 
today strengthens that. That relationship exists on many fronts, 
from education through to democracy through to economic ties. 
 
Certainly our exports to your country, from potash through to 
the world’s finest agricultural exports, Mr. Speaker, is 



2420 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2017 

something that we value. And certainly the trade agreement, the 
Canada-Korea Free Trade Agreement offers really so much 
opportunity for both our countries and certainly for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
A relationship like this is one that you need to nourish and 
continue to grow, which is why I’m glad that you’re here today. 
And it’s important to note that Koreans, Canadian-Koreans 
have made enormous contributions to our province, to our 
country, and will continue to shape and build our province and 
our country. 
 
And just noting the ties that bind, the deep ties that bind, it’s 
just worthy to note that we’re proud to stand together as allies 
for democracy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So on behalf of a grateful opposition, a grateful province, it’s 
my pleasure to welcome the fine delegation from South Korea 
to the Saskatchewan Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of this Assembly, I would like to 
introduce, Mr. Speaker, in your gallery, some guests from the 
MS [multiple sclerosis] Society. Mr. Speaker, we have Erin 
Kuan, who is president of Saskatchewan and Manitoba 
divisions — we just ask each delegate to give us a wave as 
they’re introduced; Bonnie Gleim, who is Chair of the 
Saskatchewan board; and Eugene Paquin, who is Chair of the 
Saskatchewan government relations committee and member of 
the Saskatchewan board. We want to thank them for all the 
good work that they do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s almost no one in this province who’s been untouched 
by this insidious disease. Canada has the highest rates in the 
world, Mr. Speaker. And again, we want to thank them for all 
the good work they do. 
 
Later today they’re hosting a reception for members on both 
sides of the House. I know there’ll be a very good turnout and I 
look forward to speaking with them there. So, Mr. Speaker, I 
ask all members of this legislature to please give them a warm 
welcome to their Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege to 
join with the minister in welcoming the folks from the MS 
Society today. Bonnie Gleim, Erin Kuan, Eugene Paquin, it’s 
always good to see you. I know that we’ll have an opportunity 
to chat later, but I always appreciate the information they bring 
to us about research that’s being done, about support that needs 
to happen. 
 
I know a particular conversation this summer touched on an 
area of passion and interest for me, and that’s supporting 
caregivers, Mr. Speaker. That’s a very important part of the 
puzzle, and I really appreciated the opportunity to have that 
discussion with them this past summer, Mr. Speaker. So with 
that, I’d like to ask my colleagues to join in welcoming these 
folks to their legislature. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 
and through you to all members of this Legislative Assembly, I 
want to introduce a number of ovarian cancer survivors that 
have joined us here today, Mr. Speaker, and I’d just ask them to 
maybe give a little wave as I read their name. First of all we 
have Anne Chase; we have Coralee Found; we have Cindy 
Rottenbucher; we have Janice Lebell; Lynn Baumann; Rosann 
Schaeffer; Rita Grant; and Rosemarie Strother-Stewart, and 
she’s joined by John Strother-Stewart. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these individuals, these ovarian cancer survivors 
are here to join with us today as May 8 is World Ovarian 
Cancer Day, Mr. Speaker, and they’re joining us to raise 
awareness for the early detection of ovarian cancer. And I 
understand that there will be a member’s statement coming 
shortly, Mr. Speaker. But I ask all members of this Legislative 
Assembly to join me in welcoming these very special people to 
their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
again to join with the minister opposite in welcoming these 
guests, survivors, ovarian cancer survivors, here today on 
World Ovarian Cancer Day. I know it’s an important day to talk 
about more research funding and improved access to treatment 
and early detection. 
 
I know that in terms of relative funding, ovarian cancer actually 
falls a little further down in the queue than it probably should, 
Mr. Speaker, and that survival rates for women living with 
ovarian cancer haven’t improved in 50 years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s lots of work that we need to do in that regard, so with 
that I’d like to thank the women here today for your continued 
advocacy to make sure that your elected representatives have a 
good understanding of the issues, and I just want to mark World 
Ovarian Cancer Day today and welcome these guests to their 
legislature too. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s always 
an honour each year to welcome the grade 12 students from the 
Humboldt Collegiate Institute, and they’re accompanied — and 
it will be no surprise — by their teacher, Mr. David Millette, as 
well as a teacher, Mr. Tom Schwinghamer. It is truly something 
that this group comes each and every year to the legislature, and 
I enjoy meeting with them and answering their questions. And 
they’re pretty creative, Mr. Speaker, on the questions they have 
to ask. So I want to ask everyone to please join me in 
welcoming these students to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, seated in the east gallery is a friend to many in this 
Assembly, and that’s a young leader within our province, Nigel 
Detbrenner-Rempel, who serves as the president of the 



May 8, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2421 

Saskatchewan Young New Democrats, Mr. Speaker. He’s an 
all-round good guy. He hails from Nipawin, although he’s lived 
in different parts of the province. He’s studying up at the 
University of Saskatchewan. He’s a goaltender, a hockey 
player, and he’s somebody that certainly I greatly value his 
involvement in the affairs of our province, Mr. Speaker. So to 
you and through you, I ask you to join with me in welcoming 
Nigel Detbrenner-Rempel to his Assembly. 
 
And he’s joined with somebody’s who’s been introduced here 
before, but that would be Zach Nelson from Prince Albert, 
again a brilliant, bright young person, an incredible baker and 
chef as well, Mr. Speaker. And it’s having young people like 
this engaged in our province that gives me significant hope for 
the future. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition opposing the Sask Party’s cuts 
to spiritual care. Mr. Speaker, just a couple of short weeks ago 
the minister told me that there was some inequity, that spiritual 
care wasn’t a program that was offered all throughout the 
province. So instead of enhancing this important program, Mr. 
Speaker, this government has chosen to cut it, completely 
eliminating spiritual care within Saskatchewan health facilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that Saskatchewan will be 
the only province within Canada to not fund this support for 
patients, residents, and their families seeking wellness. The 
petitioners point out that the Sask Party hid their plan to scrap 
funding for spiritual care within health region facilities during 
last year’s election. Not a word did they mention this in their 
platform, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The petitioners point out that spiritual care responds to the 
spiritual and emotional needs of patients and residents and 
provides a compassionate listening presence in times of crisis. 
They point out that spiritual care supports families, patients, and 
residents in making difficult decisions and that spiritual care 
can provide support for all families, patients, and residents in 
obtaining comfort and support, regardless of faith or belief, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
immediately reinstate the funding for spiritual care services 
in this province’s health region facilities. 

 
[13:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, today this petition is signed by citizens from 
Elbow, Strongfield, Loreburn, Saskatoon, Prince Albert. And I 
so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to rise today to present a petition from citizens all 
across the province who are opposed to the federal 

government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the province 
of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitioners come from all across 
Saskatchewan. I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 
again I stand in my place to support the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote who’s asking anybody in the Assembly, 
anybody at all, to help her in her fight for a second bridge for 
Prince Albert. So this petition is from the city of bridge, in 
which the people in Prince Albert and area know that the need 
for a second bridge for that region has never been clearer than it 
is today. Prince Albert and all the communities north of Prince 
Albert and the businesses that send people and products through 
this gateway to the North require a final solution. 
 
And the prayer basically says to the Saskatchewan Party 
government that they have got to: 
 

Stop stalling, hiding behind rhetoric, and refusing to listen 
to the people calling for action, and begin immediately to 
plan and then quickly commence the construction of a 
second bridge for Prince Albert using federal and 
provincial dollars. 

 
And the people that have signed this petition, as I do every day 
and every week and every month, Mr. Speaker, are from all 
throughout Saskatchewan. On this particular page they’re 
primarily from Birch Hills and Prince Albert. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition concerning pay equity here in Saskatchewan. And the 
undersigned residents of the province would like to bring to our 
attention the following: that the citizens of this province believe 
in an economy powered by transparency, accountability, 
security, and equity, and that all women should be paid 
equitably, and that women are powerful drivers of economic 
growth and their economic empowerment benefits us all. 
 
And we know that the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives 
found that in Saskatoon in 2016, women earned on average 63 
cents for every dollar that a man makes, and in Regina women 
earned on average 73 cents for every dollar that a man makes. 
According to the most recent StatsCan data, the national gender 
wage gap for full-time workers is 72 cents for every dollar a 
man makes. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan eliminate 
the wage gap between women and men across all sectors 



2422 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2017 

where the Government of Saskatchewan has jurisdiction, 
provide a framework under which this can be done within 
this term of the Assembly, and that the Saskatchewan 
government call upon workplaces within Saskatchewan 
within the private sector to eliminate the wage gap between 
women and men. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
the city of Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to stand 
in my place today to present a petition to increase the funding to 
Prince Albert mobile crisis. Due to funding cuts, Prince Albert 
mobile crisis unit has had to close its door during daytime 
hours, resulting in a loss of resource to people in distress. The 
daytime closure of Prince Albert mobile has put stress on Prince 
Albert Police Service, Victoria Hospital, and other agencies 
who may not be trained and/or qualified to provide counselling 
and intervention services to clients. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to increase funding to 
Prince Albert mobile crisis unit so they may once again 
offer a 24-hour emergency crisis service. 

 
Mr. Speaker, individuals across the province are concerned that 
the third-largest city in our province does not have a crisis 
service available to the citizens at all times, but in particular, 
mobile crisis provides services to individuals outside of Prince 
Albert as well. And this particular petition was signed by 
individuals from Birch Hills and Prince Albert. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition in support of sexual abuse prevention curriculum in 
Saskatchewan. Those who have signed this petition wish to 
draw our attention to the following: that Stats Canada data 
shows that 55 per cent of all victims of sexual offences were 
children under the age of 18; that child sexual abuse has lasting 
impacts throughout a child’s lifetime, and these effects include 
mental health impacts such as PTSD [post-traumatic stress 
disorder], depression, anxiety, panic attacks, and low 
self-esteem; that impacts also include decreased school 
attendance and achievement and decreased productivity 
throughout the lifespan; that victims of childhood sexual abuse 
are four times more likely to commit suicide; and that there is 
currently no comprehensive elementary or secondary 
curriculum regarding the prevention and reporting of child 
sexual abuse in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan take immediate and 
concrete action to develop and implement Erin’s law; and 
that such legislation would ensure that a comprehensive 
health education program be developed and implemented 

in grades pre-K through 12, along with training for school 
staff on the prevention of sexual child abuse. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those who have signed this petition today reside in 
Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition to ensure job security for victims of domestic 
violence. Saskatchewan has the very dubious distinction, Mr. 
Speaker, of having the highest rates of domestic violence 
amongst all provinces in Canada. 
 
And one in three Canadian workers have experienced domestic 
violence, and for many of them the violence follows them to 
their workplace. Employers lose $77.9 million annually due to 
the direct and indirect impacts of domestic violence. Manitoba 
has already enacted legislation and Ontario is on its way to 
enacting legislation that ensures job security for victims of 
domestic violence. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan enact 
legislation that requires all employers to provide a 
minimum of five paid workdays and a minimum of 17 
weeks unpaid work leave with the assurance of job security 
upon return for all survivors of domestic violence in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing the petition today come 
from Saskatoon and Regina. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition calling on 
the government to restore funding to post-secondary 
institutions. With cuts of over 5 per cent to colleges and 
universities around the province, Mr. Speaker, this budget is 
resulting in layoffs and job losses at the University of Regina, 
the University of Saskatchewan, and Sask Polytechnic. We’re 
seeing increases in tuition at the University of Regina. And 
education is becoming less affordable in a context where we’re 
also seeing the cuts to the tax rebate for tuition and books and 
cuts to student scholarships and other supports. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately restore 
funding to Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions and 
stop the damaging cuts to our students. 

 
The petition today is signed by individuals from Regina and 
Rouleau. I do so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 



May 8, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2423 

National Mining Week 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 
week marks National Mining Week throughout Canada. It is a 
week to celebrate the important role that mining plays in the 
lives of Canadian people. 
 
It’s difficult to imagine a life without minerals or metals. We 
use them and rely on them every day from everything to mobile 
devices, computers, TVs, to musical instruments and vehicles. 
That’s why the theme of this year’s mining week is 
Highlighting Canada’s Global Leadership in Exploration and 
Mining. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Canada has long been recognized as a global 
mining leader. Our country produces some 60 minerals and 
metals, leading in the production of potash and ranking among 
the top five global producers for primary aluminium, cobalt, 
diamonds, uranium, gold, nickel, platinum group metals, 
tungsten, and the list goes on. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, our province holds the distinction and 
continues to hold the distinction of being the biggest mining 
leader within our country. According to the annual survey of 
mining companies, Saskatchewan has and is now the world’s 
most attractive jurisdiction for the world of mining. 
Saskatchewan ranked number one out of more than 100 
jurisdictions on the investment attraction index, up from second 
place in 2015. Our province is the world’s largest producer and 
exporter of potash, and we’re also the second-leading uranium 
producer in the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like all members to join me in recognizing 
National Mining Week and in celebrating our province’s 
contribution to making our country a global leader in mining. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 

World Ovarian Cancer Day 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May 8th has 
been proclaimed as World Ovarian Cancer Day. An estimated 
2,800 Canadian women will be newly diagnosed with ovarian 
cancer this year alone. Every day in Canada, approximately five 
women lose their battle with this terrible disease. 
 
Ovarian cancer is the fifth most common cancer among women. 
It’s also the deadliest, with a five-year survival rate of just 45 
per cent. Mr. Speaker, ovarian cancer often goes undetected 
until it has progressed to an advanced stage, as early symptoms 
are subtle and often confused with less serious conditions. In 
some cases, symptoms only appear when it is too late. Unlike 
many other cancers, there’s no effective screening test for the 
early detection of ovarian cancer. 
 
We encourage women to be very proactive in your physical 
health and well-being. We must take care of those who we love 
the most — our sisters, our mothers, daughters, and friends — 
educating and raising awareness on the most serious of cancers. 
We are all affected by this devastating disease as it can take a 
loved one so quickly from our homes and our communities. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in supporting those 
who have defeated ovarian cancer and encouraging all those 
who are currently fighting this awful disease. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Launch Youth Performance Festival 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. During the last week of 
April, I was pleased to attend the first-ever Launch Youth 
Performance Festival here in Regina. 
 
Founded by the Globe Theatre, FadaDance, Saskatchewan 
Filmpool, and the Artesian Presents, Launch is a brand new 
festival that shares original new works created by and featuring 
youth artists in a local context. The festival creates 
opportunities for Saskatchewan’s arts organizations to work 
with our youth and functions as a place where young artists can 
demonstrate their creative potential to their communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my daughter, Hannah, was amongst the 
performers that participated in the festival. She’s part of the 
Fada Youth Company, and they choreographed and performed 
Lo-Fi/Hi-Fi, Mr. Speaker.  
 
I’m also pleased to note that one of our very own Pages had a 
starring role. Emma Walter performed the role of Diantha in the 
Globe youth company’s production of Folk-Lore, a work that 
young artists of the Globe Theatre School constructed, created, 
and performed themselves, based on memorable childhood 
experiences and stories. And she did a great job, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Launch not only demonstrates the impressive talent found in 
our province but also the hard work and dedication that young 
people are investing in the arts and in our communities. Mr. 
Speaker, I would like all members to join me today to 
congratulate the Launch Performance Festival and the young 
performers who worked so hard to create and perform their 
original works. And let’s all make sure to send out special 
congratulations to our Page, the talented Emma Walter. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 

Family First Radiothon Fundraiser 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past 
Thursday and Friday, 800 CHAB radio held their annual Family 
First Radiothon at the Dr. F.H. Wigmore Regional Hospital in 
Moose Jaw. Throughout the 36-hour period, I’m proud to 
announce that the 2017 radiothon raised a whopping $159,383, 
exceeding their goal of $150,000. 
 
For a number of years, volunteers, families, and 800 CHAB 
staff have held the Family First Radiothon to raise money to 
help improve and save the lives of patients at Dr. F.H. Wigmore 
Hospital. The generous donations are used to purchase a variety 
of new equipment and tools for the intensive unit, surgical unit, 
and the emergency room. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our current health care system requires a high 
degree of specialized professionals, technology, and innovation 



2424 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2017 

to care for patients with a range of medical needs. Therefore in 
order for the city of Moose Jaw and surrounding communities 
to provide these crucial services for patients, donors and 
community support is needed. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I would like to send my sincere gratitude 
to the volunteers and donors of the 800 CHAB Family First 
Radiothon. With these big-hearted donations from people 
across the province, the staff of the Dr. F.H. Wigmore Hospital 
have the resources to work towards improving existing medical 
technologies and delivering of care services. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
University. 
 

Groundbreaking Ceremony for New Sports Facility 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On April 28th I had 
the honour of attending the Merlis Belsher Place 
groundbreaking ceremony at the University of Saskatchewan 
along with the Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport; the 
Minister of Justice; and the member from Saskatoon Westview. 
 
In 1930 the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] Rutherford 
arena was officially opened. For over 80 years, Rutherford Rink 
has been home to the University of Saskatchewan Huskies 
hockey teams. The rink has also provided the university campus 
and community members with a facility to hold tournaments, 
skating lessons, public skating, and the annual campus rivalry 
between two U of S colleges, the Agros and the Engineers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to say that with numerous fundraising 
drives held by the university, Saskatoon citizens, and with the 
help of a generous $12.25 million donation from U of S 
alumnus Merlis Belsher, Rutherford Rink will be replaced and 
renamed Merlis Belsher Place. 
 
Construction on the new multi-use facility is set to begin 
sometime next week. This facility will provide Saskatoon 
Minor Hockey with 1,500 hours per year of ice time as well as 
two full-sized basketball courts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask my colleagues to join me in 
congratulating the U of S and the city of Saskatoon for their 
incredible fundraising commitments and efforts. I would also 
like to extend my sincere thank you to Merlis Belsher and Ron 
and Jane Graham for their generous support and donations to 
help construct this state-of-the-art multi-purpose facility. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 
 

Work Progresses on Saskatchewan Hospital  
North Battleford 

 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Friday I along with 
the member from Cut Knife-Turtleford had the privilege to join 
with hundreds of people from the community, health 
professionals, and construction partners to celebrate that the 
Saskatchewan Hospital North Battleford is now 60 per cent 

complete, is on time for completion, and is on budget. 
 
Those of us from the North Battleford area have been seeing 
this amazing complex rise up over the last couple of years, and 
the progress has been astounding. This fast progress can be 
attributed to the contractors who have put in more than 535,000 
hours of work to keep the new Sask Hospital North Battleford 
on time and on budget. I would also like to note that 20 per cent 
of the workers on site are indigenous, with 25 per cent of the 
companies involved so far are from Saskatchewan.  
 
Mr. Speaker, it was a fitting milestone that fell at the conclusion 
of Mental Health Week and shows how our government has 
been investing where it counts to make sure that Saskatchewan 
has world-class facilities. And it shows that our government is 
acting on the recommendations in the mental health and 
addictions action plan. There’s increasingly an innovative 
approach to delivering mental health care and supports, which 
will ensure people get the help they need when they need it and 
in the best possible environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of this Assembly to join 
me in thanking all those who are working so hard to make this 
project happen, and thank the community of North Battleford 
which has rallied being this project. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Census Shows Saskatchewan Has Highest Proportion 
of Young People 

 
Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
announce that in Canada, Saskatchewan has the highest 
proportion of young people. This was announced in the newest 
census date release here in Saskatchewan last week. Mr. 
Speaker, this contrasts the record of the members opposite. We 
must not forget the generations of youth who left our province 
during the time of the NDP [New Democratic Party]. 
 
Saskatchewan has changed in the past decade, becoming more 
and more attractive for young people to stay and raise a family. 
Year after year, there are more opportunities becoming 
available for youth in business, education, and tourism. Not 
only are youth staying in Saskatchewan, there are many 
newcomers joining our communities each day as well. 
 
In the recent census, Saskatchewan has the highest proportion 
of young people aged 14 and below, which saw significant 
increase between the years of 2011 and 2016. The commitment 
our government has shown to younger generations and their 
future is reflected in this census, and the future of our economy 
and workforce is looking bright for all generations. With new 
schools opening as soon as this fall, more communities rising 
from the ground, Saskatchewan is a great place to live, work, 
and raise a family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in celebrating this 
government’s commitment to young people across 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Before question period, I’d like to thank 
members for their co-operation in reducing the partisanship in 



May 8, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2425 

the manner that they have been treating each other in the recent 
weeks. In this vein, I advise members that in accordance with 
the rules, I will make my decision on the privilege case before 
orders of the day.  
 
Let’s have a respectful question period today. Remember that 
vigorous debating of ideas and policies are encouraged in this 
Assembly, but we shouldn’t debate the character and motives of 
hon. members on both sides of our Assembly. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Details of Land Transactions 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this government likes to 
pick winners and losers. While the Sask Party tells 
Saskatchewan people they have to accept higher taxes, funding 
cuts, and job losses, they’re handing out a $60 million corporate 
tax break, $11 million to a couple of friends for their GTH 
[Global Transportation Hub] scandal, 300 acres of land to CP 
[Canadian Pacific] Rail for free, and the list just goes on and on 
and on. This while nuns, landowners, and Saskatchewan people 
got ripped off with the Sask Party’s GTH scandal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before the Premier stands up and grandstands or 
maybe waves a supposed secret memo, I want to ask him a 
simple question. If he says CP Rail’s treatment is defensible, 
why did SaskPower not get the same treatment? Why was this 
Crown corporation, who belongs to all of us, why was it forced 
to pay $25 million? Are our Crowns really nothing more than 
cash cows to that Premier? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 
and I want to thank my hon. friend for the question, Mr. 
Speaker. I would take exception, perhaps, to some of the 
preamble. I would point out that even after this budget made 
some tax changes, our taxes are much, much lower than they 
were in 2007 when we took over. Taxes for Saskatchewan 
families, for farmers and businesses, all much, much lower — 
for seniors as well — much, much lower than they were when 
we first had the honour of forming the government in 2007. 
 
And as to the member’s question, you know, Mr. Speaker, if 
you look through the cabinet documents that we have quoted 
here from when members opposite were in government, they 
understood the importance of having an anchor tenant, 
especially CP Rail, at the GTH. That’s why they approved $33 
million, Mr. Speaker, the NDP approved $33 million to make 
that happen. Mr. Speaker, they were working with the city of 
Regina. They were working with CP Rail. And by the way, it 
was exactly the right thing to do, because in order for a hub like 
this to be successful, there needs to be rail access. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as per the NDP plan, we moved ahead with 
CP Rail to ensure that rail service was there. Subsequent to that, 
all of the tenants . . . And, Mr. Speaker, we just had an 
announcement last week of a brand new tenant paying about 
260,000 an acre and creating jobs at the GTH. But as a result of 
the deal initiated by the NDP with the anchor being CP Rail, 

we’ve had commercial rates for subsequent tenants, mostly the 
private sector, Mr. Speaker, and in this particular case a Crown 
corporation. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Closing of Saskatchewan Transportation Corporation 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, lots of spin and noise, but 
not a single answer about why SaskPower was forced to pay 
$25 million for half the amount of land. It shows sort of the 
respect that they have, or the disrespect they have for our 
Crown corporations, that of course are world-class companies 
proudly built by generations. And our Crowns of course are 
service-providing, job-creating, money-making innovators, and 
they provide thousands of good, local, mortgage-paying jobs in 
every corner of the province, on top of, of course, keeping rates 
low and services provided across the province. 
 
You know, the Sask Party’s putting that economic impact — 
thousands of head office jobs and thousands of other jobs 
through hundreds of small businesses connected through their 
supply chains — on the chopping block.  
 
Mr. Speaker, they said that STC [Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company] was not a sell-off. Now we see that their cabinet is 
ordering STC to now sell off its assets by “sale, transfer, 
exchange, or any other manner that STC considers appropriate.” 
Sale, Mr. Speaker, in a rushed and desperate sale that’s not even 
being handled by CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan], avoiding accountability and oversight. With all 
this at risk, with the loss of STC, the countless lives and 
communities impacted, why is the Sask Party moving ahead 
with this desperate sell-off? Why won’t the Premier finally do 
the right thing and scrap this fire sale? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the hon. 
member’s question. Again I don’t agree with the preamble 
necessarily, Mr. Speaker, because what we do now going 
forward with the Crown corporations — much as the NDP 
planned with SaskEnergy when they were in government — is 
that we are not going to entertain any sort of partnership that 
risks head office jobs, that risks affordable rates for 
Saskatchewan people, that risks the kind of economic impact 
that the member was quite properly canvassing in his question, 
Mr. Speaker. And so we simply won’t be going forward with 
any arrangements, any partnerships, unless we can check those 
boxes and ensure that in fact this will strengthen the Crowns. 
 
With respect to STC, Mr. Speaker, a difficult decision was 
taken. Mr. Speaker, we have been subsidizing passengers on the 
bus to the tune of about $95 per passenger. The taxpayers have 
been providing a subsidy. Members opposite, when they were 
government, actually shut down routes when the subsidy was as 
low as — what? — $20, 30 . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . $5, 
$5 per passenger subsidy was considered too large for members 
opposite, and they shut routes down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that this is not a sale. It is a 
wind-down, Mr. Speaker. And moreover, I would share with the 
member that he’s sort of characterizing the fact that now buses 



2426 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2017 

will be sold as some sort of evidence that this is a sell-off. It is a 
wind-down, Mr. Speaker. The government routinely sells 
assets. There are CVA [central vehicle agency] vehicles, when 
they get miled-out, they are sold. SaskPower has a fleet of 
vehicles, of trucks, that at some certain point they are sold, Mr. 
Speaker. Unfortunately there’s not an entity to sell here because 
it loses so much money, and so we’ve simply made the difficult 
decision to wind it down. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Effects of Changes in Taxation 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a nonsense answer like 
that that has Saskatchewan people not trusting that Premier. 
And I guess, maybe as a bit of a reminder to him, this is a 
service to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. You know, 
the facts are the facts, and then there are the lines that the Sask 
Party performs every day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a Premier that of course promised not to 
raise taxes in the election of just a year ago, and now he’s 
forcing a billion dollar tax hike on hard-working, on everyday 
Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. And defying common 
sense, he’s adding his new 6 per cent PST [provincial sales tax] 
to job-creating industries like construction. 
 
You know, the Saskatchewan construction industry is united 
against these tax hikes, and it’s easy to see why. In just the first 
month following the tax hike, there were 4,200 fewer workers 
in Saskatchewan’s construction industry, that many fewer than 
just a year earlier, Mr. Speaker. The number of Saskatchewan 
people looking for work since the Sask Party took over has 
doubled to 40,000 people, and last month there was another 
5,600 more people looking for work in Saskatchewan than just 
last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this time, at a time where we need investment, 
at a time where we need job creation, how can this Premier 
justify his job-killing tax on construction? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, even after the changes in the taxes that the member’s 
referencing in his questions, Saskatchewan is paying today, the 
taxpayers here, businesses including in the industry across the 
province, and seniors and farmers are paying much less in terms 
of taxes. 
 
And when members opposite had the opportunity to do more 
than just ask questions, when they had the opportunity to 
actually do something, Mr. Speaker, in 2007 under the NDP, a 
person with 40,000 income paid 3,688 combined provincial 
income and PST. Mr. Speaker, today that same taxpayer, 2,939 
even after the budget, a decrease under this party in power of 20 
per cent. In ’07 a family of four with 50,000 combined taxes 
paid just over 3 grand. Now they’ll pay 716 bucks a year under 
our plan. That’s a 77 per cent reduction over members opposite. 
It’s true as well for a family at $75,000 combined tax, even 
after this budget, their taxes have dropped from when members 
opposite were in power by 31 per cent. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the member references jobs. We’re happy to 
have a debate about the job record of this province because 
even through this time of very low commodity prices, very low 
oil prices, and low potash prices, and some layoffs and some 
significant numbers of layoffs — even despite all of that, we 
saw the job numbers on Friday. This last month represents the 
third consecutive month of year-over-year job growth. Three 
months ago, we had the best numbers in the country, still 2,000 
more jobs than a year ago. 
 
And we know there’s more work to be done. We know the 
effort to diversify the economy is not over but, Mr. Speaker, 
given the challenges we faced and the jobs that have been 
created, Mr. Speaker, we are making progress in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
[14:15] 
 

Job Creation Record and Support for Women 
 

Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, this job-killing tax on 
construction could not have come at a worse time. For the first 
time in over 15 years, GDP has now declined for two 
consecutive years. The largest source of decline was a 14 per 
cent drop in construction, and the number of housing starts has 
fallen to their lowest level since 2009. 
 
At the same time, the Sask Party is also cutting services like 
health care and social assistance. More funding and job cuts are 
on the way, but those sectors have already lost 2,300 jobs since 
last year. These Sask Party attacks on education and health care 
hurt our kids and the province’s most vulnerable. They also 
disproportionately push women out of work. In April alone, 84 
per cent of the people thrown out of work in Saskatchewan 
were women. Mr. Speaker, at this same time, the Minister for 
the Status of Women has no one working in her office. I’ll 
repeat that. The Ministry for the Status of Women currently is 
empty. Why is the Sask Party turning its back on so many and 
leaving women behind? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. And I am very happy to rise in my place to talk about 
the job creation record of this government. Sixty thousand jobs 
have been created in this province since we formed 
government: second—highest in the entire country, Mr. 
Speaker, versus their record. Their record, Mr. Speaker, was 
dead last. Over their last decade in office, dead last in job 
creation in this country, Mr. Speaker. We continue to have one 
of the lowest unemployment rates in the entire country. 
 
The member referenced construction — non-residential 
building permits up 138 per cent, month over month, in 
February 2017; total value of all building permits up 66.4 per 
cent over the same period, leading the country in growth. I’m 
happy to go down more economic stats, Mr. Speaker, that show 
Saskatchewan continuing to lead Canada, versus their record 
which led Canada in the wrong direction. 
 



May 8, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2427 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Honorariums for Public-Private Partnership Bidders  
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, after hearing a response like that, 
it’s clear. The Saskatchewan Party’s priorities are not with 
Saskatchewan women. They are not with Saskatchewan people, 
not with stimulating the economy or with creating jobs, and not 
with helping the most vulnerable and those in need, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s clear. Their priorities are with helping their 
wealthy and well-connected and corporate friends. 
 
Last week in committee, we found out that the Sask Party 
forked over $5.6 million in consolation prizes to failed bidders 
in P3 [public-private partnership] projects in 2015-16 alone — 
millions of taxpayers’ dollars in goodie bags for large 
out-of-province corporations. Just a thank you for showing up 
at the party, Mr. Speaker, at a time when the Sask Party has 
been preaching belt-tightening to everyone else and cutting and 
slashing much needed programs for Saskatchewan people. 
 
How can the minister justify giving away those millions? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, this is a grand revelation. Mr. Speaker, we’ve been 
talking about honorariums. This is a transparent process with 
respect to P3s. They’re not new, Mr. Speaker. They’re 
Canadian best practices for large infrastructure projects, 
including P3s, Mr. Speaker: the city of Regina, the city of 
Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, and our government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a fairness adviser that files a report with 
respect to these matters, Mr. Speaker. The auditor has said we 
have good practice with respect to our P3s, Mr. Speaker. These 
P3s are saving the taxpayers of this province, over the life of 
those contracts, Mr. Speaker, over a half a billion dollars, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are large, complex projects, Mr. Speaker, 
and at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, as a result of the 
payment of the honorarium, the Government of Saskatchewan 
owns the contracts. They own all the work that’s been done on 
that, which allow us to be innovative with respect to further 
contracts coming down the road. But, Mr. Speaker, even in 
committee, even in committee last year, the interim Leader of 
the Opposition acknowledged the fact that there are 
honorariums to be paid and acknowledged the fact that they 
were fair in the circumstances. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, this isn’t just business as usual. 
And the fact that the Sask Party thinks it is, the fact that the 
Sask Party thinks it is explains a lot about how we got here. 
 
P3s cost money, period. They’re good for the party making the 
announcement, but everyone else pays the price, Mr. Speaker. 
On the Swift Current long-term care facility, there were two 

payments of $300,000. The Saskatchewan Hospital in North 
Battleford, two payments of $500,000. On the Regina bypass, 
there were three payments totalling $3 million, Mr. Speaker. On 
the joint-use school project no. 1, 600,000; and on project no. 2, 
$500,000 for each. All of them, Mr. Speaker, for failed bids. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s budget is full of taxes and cuts that will 
hurt families and local businesses, but the big corporations get 
to pay less and collect more cash. Mr. Speaker, why won’t the 
Sask Party simply admit that the P3 process costs Saskatchewan 
families too much? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and the 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I argue with the preamble. 
This is business as usual, Mr. Speaker. P3s are being used, Mr. 
Speaker, in over 40 jurisdictions in this country, successfully, 
Mr. Speaker. We’re going to be saving over $500 million for 
the taxpayers, Mr. Speaker. Even . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, even the Notley government 
in Alberta is using the P3, and they’re paying honorariums, not 
only with respect to the Anthony Henday, Mr. Speaker, but 
most recently the P3 that that government announced for the 
south Calgary bypass, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is about innovation, Mr. Speaker. And if the 
members opposite want to look to see where the savings are in 
our P3s, they only have to go online. They only have to go 
online, Mr. Speaker, and look at the value-for-money reports. 
All the numbers are there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But again, Mr. Speaker, the interim Leader of the Opposition 
acknowledged the importance of honorariums in committee last 
year, Mr. Speaker. So for the fact that they stand up and think 
this is a big surprise, Mr. Speaker, some big, hidden number, 
they only have to look online to look at the actual numbers, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re saving the taxpayer, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 
Speaker, these honorariums amount to no more than one-third 
of 1 per cent of the total contract price, a small price to pay for 
innovation. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, this government helps their friends 
but are hurting Saskatchewan people and our kids. Education 
taxes went up, but funding went down. People are paying more, 
and the Sask Party is giving less. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve already seen huge job losses in the 
education sector, and more are coming. Teachers in Regina are 
now getting emails about what these cuts mean for classrooms 
and for students. There will be more jobs cut. Teachers are 
being told to expect larger class sizes, fewer resources, and 
fewer supports for students.  



2428 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2017 

Mr. Speaker, when will the minister finally admit that his cuts 
are going to cost jobs and hurt our kids? And when will he 
realize that since he’s taken away all control from school 
divisions, he will have no one to blame for the damage to our 
kids’ education system but himself? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, they want to talk 
about control. We don’t have a desire to control school boards, 
but we do have a strong desire and a strong need, on behalf of 
all of the citizens and students in this province, to make sure 
that money is spent wisely and spent carefully, to make sure 
that we’re not duplicating service, to make sure that we’re 
doing a good job of procurement. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to urge the members opposite to 
show some clarity in their own positions on where they’re at on 
things. They seem to change their mind. They’ll say something 
one day, something different the next, and they never go back 
and say, oh that isn’t what I meant. All those things, Mr. 
Speaker, are on the public record. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last Thursday, the interim Leader of the 
Opposition accused the government of mischaracterizing his 
quotes regarding funding of independent schools. I want to read 
one of those quotes again and ask him whether that’s still his 
position: “. . . this government is diverting already thin 
educational dollars to private independent schools. This move 
reduces equity, standards, and support for students . . .” That 
was his position, March of 2012. Does he have a different 
position today? Does he stand by his 2012 statements? Or does 
he want to have something new and fresh and different today? 
We’d like to know his position regarding his 2012 comments. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Funding for Health Care 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, even before all the Sask Party 
cuts have finished rolling out, 2,300 jobs have already been lost 
in education and health care. And still they have the nerve to be 
so smug. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party cut audiologists and support 
workers with the hearing aid program. Mr. Speaker, that’s 19 
fewer people providing services to kids, seniors, or anyone 
requiring hearing services. The Sask Party also cut podiatry 
services. They cut spiritual care. They cut the travel clinics, and 
they cut parenting mentoring programs. At least 59 positions 
have been cut, and the minister can’t even give us the full 
picture on the jobs he is cutting. 
 
Does this minister not realize the impact that his cuts have? 
Does he not realize the importance of these jobs? And does he 
really want to stand by his previous statement and say that these 
workers do not provide core services? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
had a number of difficult decisions to make in this budget. 

We’ve lost $1.2 billion in resource revenue, Mr. Speaker. 
Health is 40 per cent of the provincial budget. It’s going to have 
an impact. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have focused on core services in Health. We 
have had a number of programs that again were difficult. They 
would have been nice to have, Mr. Speaker, but we’re focusing 
in the key areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member in her preamble insinuates somehow 
that this side of the House, that this government doesn’t care 
about health care. Since we formed government, there’s been 
over a 50 per cent increase in expenditures in health care. Mr. 
Speaker, when we had the privilege of forming government, 
there was a perennial doctor shortage in this province. Mr. 
Speaker, there’s now 750 more doctors. There’s over 3,000 
more nurses. There’s many more care aids in long-term care, 
Mr. Speaker. While we had difficult decisions to make, Mr. 
Speaker, we stand on our record in health care. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, our province needs health care 
professionals, and the Sask Party is dropping the ball. At the 
same time they’re cutting health care jobs, at the same time 
they’re cutting health care jobs, Mr. Speaker, they are 
struggling to recruit doctors: the Sask Party’s own report that 
says that per capita Saskatchewan has 18.9 per cent fewer 
physicians compared to the Canadian average. 
 
Mr. Speaker, included in the doctors we need the most are 
pediatricians and psychiatrists — the people who care for our 
sick kids and the doctors who provide the mental health care 
folks need. What has the Sask Party been doing to address this 
shortfall? They’re cutting deeper. How can this Minister of 
Health think that another 3.5 per cent cut will help get the 
doctors we need in this province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, we know we can always do 
more and we’re going to continue to strive to do better. But, Mr. 
Speaker, the critic should probably get her numbers straight. 
There’s 23 per cent more psychiatrists in the province right now 
than there were when we were given the privilege of forming 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the recruitment that’s went on for the children’s 
hospital for instance, the member opposite tries to scare people 
that there’s not going to be enough people recruited in the 
different positions. Mr. Speaker, the team has done an 
outstanding job of recruiting medical specialists. Mr. Speaker, 
that’s going to continue.  
 
As I said in my first answer, the member’s criticizing about not 
enough doctors. Mr. Speaker, there’s 750 more doctors 
practising in this province than it was when they were in 
government. Mr. Speaker, there are areas we can always do 
better, Mr. Speaker, but if she’s calling this a shortage, what 
was the case when they were in government? Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 



May 8, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2429 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Services Provided by Community-Based Organizations 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, there are even more health cuts 
in community-based organizations. These small but crucial 
organizations provide services and help people every day. They 
are now being asked to justify their own existence and choose 
what services they’re providing on tough budgets that they 
would cut in order to save the others.  
 
Mr. Speaker, there are equally important CBOs 
[community-based organization] in Social Services and Justice 
that perform very important jobs. With almost no funding, Mr. 
Speaker, at a time when the Sask Party is cutting so deeply to 
everything, these CBOs are needed more than ever. Can the 
Minister of Social Services tell us today which of the CBOs will 
be cut, by how much, and how does she plan to make up for the 
loss of those services? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I 
thank the member opposite for the question. In the 2017-18 
budget, Mr. Speaker, our government is going to continue to 
partner with CBOs with an investment of approximately $420 
million government-wide, Mr. Speaker. There is no general 
increase for CBOs this year. Our officials are going to work 
with our CBOs over the coming months to discuss the services 
they provide, to ensure they’re effective, efficient, and 
sustainable, Mr. Speaker; that is, that they are aligned with 
government priorities. Mr. Speaker, this kind of review is just 
part of sound management and responsible government. 
 
It’s also something that has been flagged by the auditor for a 
number of years, Mr. Speaker, that we continue to have these 
kinds of conversations with our CBOs. I’m looking forward to 
those discussions. They might result in new ideas about how we 
can work better together to meet the needs of Saskatchewan 
people, Mr. Speaker. I look forward to that process. Thank you. 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 

Provision of Funeral Services 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, those CBOs look after the most 
vulnerable, most marginalized people in our province, people 
who even in death can’t avoid the Sask Party’s cuts. Last week 
the Minister of Social Services defended the move to slash 
funding to funeral services. She tried to justify the cuts with 
shaky references to other provinces. But under her plan, 
Saskatchewan will be the only province that doesn’t cover a 
funeral service. 
 
These cuts weren’t thought out. The minister didn’t even talk to 
the funeral home association before announcing the cuts on 
budget day. The Sask Party gave no real consideration to the 
way these cuts would affect the most vulnerable, Mr. Speaker. 
Now that it’s clear how damaging and unusual these cuts are, 

will the minister do the right thing? Will she restore funding for 
funerals? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and 
again I thank the member opposite for the question. On Friday, 
officials and I met with the Saskatchewan Board of Funeral 
Homes and issued a joint statement which recognized that we 
both share in common the desire to support people who are 
vulnerable, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank the board and 
especially Todd Lumbard for starting from a place of 
constructive common ground.  
 
We have a working group consisting of our ministry officials 
and members of that board, and we will be working together 
over the coming months to find mutually agreeable solutions to 
this end. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget was clearly difficult, and for reasons 
of confidentiality, we were not able to have specific discussions 
with stakeholders in advance. But however, our officials did do 
some cross-jurisdictional research, especially around the issue 
of rates, Mr. Speaker. Our current flat rate plus the additional 
fees that we were paying, Mr. Speaker, set us, on an average 
basis, among one of the highest rates in Western Canada. 
 
And so again, I have directed my deputy minister to create a 
working group to work with the Saskatchewan funeral boards, 
and we’re going to develop some options together, Mr. Speaker. 
Thank you. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND  
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed 
by the Standing Committee on Human Services to report that it 
has considered certain estimates and to present its fourth report. 
I move: 
 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on 
Human Services be now concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair: 
 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on 
Human Services be now concurred in. 

 
Is the Assembly read for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 



2430 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2017 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Question of Privilege  
 
The Speaker: — On Thursday, May 4th, 2017 I deferred 
making a decision on whether a prima facie had been 
established in the privilege case raised by the Government 
House Leader earlier that day. I wish to advise the Assembly 
that earlier today I received a written request from the 
Government House Leader to withdraw the case. The letter 
indicates that both House leaders have come to a mutual 
understanding concerning the subject matter of the case. 
 
I wish to thank the House leaders on both sides for their 
co-operation in resolving this issue. Given the request to 
withdraw the letter and an agreed-upon resolution by both 
House leaders, I find that this matter is now closed. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 70 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 70 — The 
Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Why 
can’t we all just get along indeed, Mr. Speaker? But you know, 
despite the moments of co-operation that break out in this 
Assembly, you happen upon bills like this where, you know, 
why can’t we all just get along becomes apparent. I couldn’t 
even have the moment. 
 
But you know, such is the relentlessness of the agenda of this 
government, Mr. Speaker, where of course they bring forward 
the PST amendment Act, 2017 where again, you know, it’s not 
much more than a year after the last election where they said, 
you know, we’re going to keep Saskatchewan strong, and toe 
the line, and all these great things, Mr. Speaker. And it turns out 
there was, I don’t know if there was an asterisk in the deal or, 
you know, see the fine print, or what the particular approach 
was. But, Mr. Speaker, the cheque has come due in terms of 
what this government wasn’t talking about, didn’t have the 
decency to speak about with the fine people of Saskatchewan 
when they’re asking them for their vote last year at this time. 
 
So of course, Mr. Speaker, we see here as part of a 
billion-dollar tax increase that this government is moving 
forward on Saskatchewan people, and the way that they are 
making Saskatchewan people pay the price for this 
government’s waste, mismanagement, and scandal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of Bill 70, they’ll be raising the PST from 
5 per cent to 6 per cent. And again, one of the things that was 

interesting in the budget speech debate, Mr. Speaker, was you 
had different members on that side talk about how it was the 
lowest PST in all of Canada, Mr. Speaker, for, asterisk, 
jurisdictions that had a PST. Of course they didn’t talk about 
Alberta, Mr. Speaker, and the fact that there is no PST there, 
and the fact that of course along the west side, this poses a 
tremendous competitive challenge for men and women engaged 
in business all up and down that west side, Mr. Speaker. Didn’t 
hear much about that. 
 
But again, I don’t know if they get a crowbar over there when 
they get the new MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 
in the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, because it sure ain’t a shoehorn 
that does the kind of wrenching the facts around that goes on, 
Mr. Speaker. But again, in terms of the celebration of the lowest 
PST for all the jurisdictions with the PST, except for Alberta of 
course, Mr. Speaker, that was the battle cry over there in the 
budget speech debate. But of course the cheque comes due, Mr. 
Speaker, and we see here where they’re raising the PST from 5 
per cent to 6 per cent and expanding the PST of course, Mr. 
Speaker, expanding the PST to insurance premiums, to 
children’s clothing, to construction labour, and to restaurant 
meals, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I just want to, you know, in terms of all the young people 
that we heard being celebrated just in this very session of the 
House, Mr. Speaker, in terms of all those young people that are 
here in Saskatchewan and what a great thing that is, Mr. 
Speaker, well guess what? They all need clothing. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I don’t know if it was like, you know, the Sask Party 
caucus hung back and thought, well here’s a growth market for 
taxation; let’s put the PST on children’s clothes. They may have 
thought it in the last few months, Mr. Speaker, but they 
certainly didn’t say a darn thing about it at election time. 
 
We also see the, again, as referenced here around construction 
labour and the, you know, the very definition of a disincentive 
for growth or a job-killing tax, Mr. Speaker, and the kind of 
impact that this is contributing to in the loss of construction jobs 
that is observable as late as this Friday with the Statistics 
Canada jobs report, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And again, I add parenthetically, you know, it’s interesting how 
they’ll look at the Statistics Canada report and that’s something 
that they want to talk about, but when it comes to the impact 
this government has had on tuition and the way that Statistics 
Canada comes out and, you know, measures the fact that 
Saskatchewan is now providing leadership on the top end of 
tuition. And you know, Lord only knows where that’s going to 
wind up after this round of tuition increases, after what different 
folks from the university sector describe as the worst budget in 
their history, Mr. Speaker. We only know where that’s going to 
wind up, and it’s going to be higher. And will Saskatchewan 
lead the nation in tuition or be second? We’ll find that out come 
the Statistics Canada report in the fall. But they’ll be falling all 
over themselves to try and discredit it at that point, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In terms of the restaurant meal PST increase, again, Mr. 
Speaker, I’ve been around long enough to have seen the 
Boughen Commission report and that being one of the items 
that was recommended for consideration by the people of 
Saskatchewan. And again the way that the folks working in the 



May 8, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2431 

restaurant sector and the food and beverage sector come 
forward with a pretty vigorous campaign against that measure, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And one only thinks that the advantage of just dropping this on 
those men and women was, you know, not by accident, Mr. 
Speaker, in terms of the way that this government came forward 
with that measure in the budget. Because if there had been 
advance notice, certainly, Mr. Speaker, not only is the sector 
clearly on record against it, but you don’t have to go back too 
far into the speeches of members opposite, Mr. Speaker, to hear 
about the vehement opposition that got expressed by those 
members against PST on restaurant meals. 
 
They’ve discontinued the trade-in allowance on light used 
vehicles, Mr. Speaker. They’ve removed the lower PST for 
mobile, modular, and ready-to-move homes, Mr. Speaker. 
They’ve raised the minimum tax on goods and services valued 
between 25 cents and 49 cents, from 2 cents to 3 cents, Mr. 
Speaker. There are so many ways that this particular bill makes 
the people of Saskatchewan pay the price for the Sask Party’s 
waste, mismanagement, and incompetence, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in terms of again where they get the mandate for this, well 
they certainly didn’t get it at election time, Mr. Speaker. Of 
course we only heard about keeping Saskatchewan strong at 
election time, and when they come forward with the 
billion-dollar tax increase and socking it to families and socking 
it to job creators in this province, well here we are. This is 
where the cheque is coming due. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is, as with all taxation bills . . . There’s a level 
of complexity in this particular piece of legislation that will 
lend itself well to further discussion in the committee, Mr. 
Speaker, so at this point I’d like to invite my colleague opposite 
to do what need be done to move Bill 70 on to committee. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the minister that Bill No. 70 be now read a second time. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 
that Bill No. 70, The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 
2017 be committed to the Standing Committee on Crown and 
Central Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the standing 
committee on Crown agencies. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 
facilitate the committee work this afternoon, I move that this 

House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that this Assembly do now 
adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly now stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:43.] 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2419 
Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 2419, 2420 
Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2420 
Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2420 
Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2420 
Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2420 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2421 
Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2421 
Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2421 
Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2421 
Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2422 
Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2422 
Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2422 
Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2422 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
National Mining Week 

Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2423 
World Ovarian Cancer Day 

Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2423 
Launch Youth Performance Festival 

Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2423 
Family First Radiothon Fundraiser 

Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2423 
Groundbreaking Ceremony for New Sports Facility 

Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2424 
Work Progresses on Saskatchewan Hospital North Battleford 

Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2424 
Census Shows Saskatchewan Has Highest Proportion of Young People 

Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2424 
QUESTION PERIOD 

Details of Land Transactions 
Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2425 
Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2425 

Closing of Saskatchewan Transportation Corporation 
Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2425 
Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2425 

Effects of Changes in Taxation 
Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2426 
Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2426 

Job Creation Record and Support for Women 
Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2426 
Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2426 

Honorariums for Public-Private Partnership Bidders 
Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2427 
Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2427 

Funding for Education 
Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2427 
Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2428 

Funding for Health Care 
Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2428 
Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2428 

Services Provided by Community-Based Organizations 
Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2429 
Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 2429 

Provision of Funeral Services 
Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2429 
Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 2429 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
Standing Committee on Human Services 

D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2429 



 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Question of Privilege  
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2430 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 70 — The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2017  
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2430 
  Merriman (referral to Crown and Central Agencies Committee) ............................................................................................ 2431 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


