


















































November 30, 2017 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 21A  THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 30, 2017, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Nicole Sarauer 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Hon. Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Hon. Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 
Vacancies — Kindersley, Melfort 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 47; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 2 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3207 
 November 30, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cox: — I request leave for an extended introduction, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you to all members of this Assembly, I’m 
pleased to introduce and recognize a guest seated in your west 
gallery. Joining us this morning is Dr. Qingwang Yuan. He is 
joined today by some of his colleagues: Muhammad Imran — 
just give us a wave please — he’s the business unit manager at 
the Saskatchewan Research Council; and Kelvin and Cyndie 
Knorr. Kelvin is the research operations manager at the 
Saskatchewan Research Council energy division. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Dr. Yuan is from the Shandong Province in China. 
He attended China University of Petroleum before coming to 
Canada and earning his Ph.D. [Doctor of Philosophy] at the 
University of Calgary. Currently Dr. Yuan is a U of R 
[University of Regina] post-doctoral fellow in petroleum 
systems engineering. 
 
Through a Mitacs fellowship with the Saskatchewan Research 
Council, he and his team developed software that improves 
enhanced oil recovery through modelling, allowing industry to 
be more efficient in the recovery process. This in turn may not 
only improve extracting heavy oil from the ground, but also 
reduce the impact on our environment. 
 
Last week he was recognized for his work in Ottawa by being 
presented with the Mitacs post-doctoral award for outstanding 
innovation. And Dr. Yuan was one of five Mitacs award 
winners nationally. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also understand that he has accepted a position at 
Stanford University where he’ll be continuing his work on the 
shale oil and gas production. Mr. Speaker, he has also indicated 
that he may be coming back to Saskatchewan after that, and 
we’re very happy to hear that. And I believe that he’s travelling 
to the US [United States] as quickly as this Saturday. 
 
We’ll be hearing more about Mitacs and the good work that the 
program does in a member’s statement shortly. But certainly we 
want to wish Dr. Yuan well and thank him for his great work. 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to welcome him and 
his colleagues to the Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
quickly join with the minister opposite and, on behalf of the 
official opposition, welcome these fine individuals from the 
Saskatchewan Research Council and Dr. Yuan to his 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
He may be heading off for that great fellowship at Stanford, but 
we’re hoping that he’s coming right back, Mr. Speaker, to 
continue the award-winning work that he is doing in this 
province and on subject matter that is of great importance to the 
people of Saskatchewan. So on behalf of the official opposition, 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the minister in welcoming Dr. 
Yuan to the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, I’d like to introduce a couple of guests seated in 
your gallery, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce 
Ramit Kar, the general manager for Uber in Western Canada. 
At Uber, Mr. Kar had helped pass Canada’s first set of 
ride-share regulations in Edmonton as well as the launch of 
Uber in Calgary. With Mr. Kar is Jean-Christophe de le Rue, 
who is the communications associate for Uber in Canada. 
 
I’m pleased to have these guests here today, and I thank them 
for coming and ask that members help me welcome them to our 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, I’d like to introduce guests in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker, home-based educators from my constituency, from the 
Meyronne and Assiniboia area, Mr. Speaker. And I would like 
to introduce to you Avery and Marina Smith and their five 
children . . . Sorry, my colleague’s going to do that one. I’m 
sorry. Colin and Jill Smith and their four children from Wood 
River constituency; Sally Willis and their four children, also 
from Wood River constituency. And it’s my pleasure, Mr. 
Speaker, to introduce the grandmother to all these children up 
there, Pat Smith, a good friend of mine. And also Chris and 
Melissa Putman and their three children also, Mr. Speaker. And 
Teri Hanstock and her three children from Assiniboia. So I’d 
like to welcome all of them to their Legislative Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, it’s my honour to introduce, seated in your gallery, 
a couple of good friends and good people within our province. 
I’d like to introduce David Froh, who’s a vice-president with 
Economic Development Regina, someone who certainly has the 
greater economic interests of this region and this province in 
mind at all times and someone who’s worked on this front for 
some period of time. He also has some familiarity with this 
building, once serving as chief of staff to a minister of Energy 
and Resources. 



3208 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2017 

I’ve known Dave for a long time. I’m lucky to count him as a 
good friend. I watched him in action years ago also working 
with young people dealing with some significant challenges, 
and watching him build relationships that made a difference in 
the lives of those young people. He was a decent football player 
back in the day, not so much anymore. A few interceptions back 
for I think the Regina Thunder at one point, a few for 
Sheldon-Williams. I think the gentleman sitting beside him, 
Eric Anderson, might suggest that had he had better hands he 
may have been a receiver. But it’s my honour to welcome 
David Froh to his Assembly. 
 
And I’d also like to welcome someone who’s no stranger to this 
Assembly, Eric Anderson, who’s seated beside David. Of 
course they’re good friends. Eric Anderson is the coach of the 
Sheldon-Williams Spartans football team. They had a good 
season here this year. And he also is somebody that gives a lot 
back to his community. And of course he works as a research 
officer for us as the official opposition here in the province. 
 
So I’d ask all members to welcome Eric Anderson and David 
Froh to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
privilege to reintroduce Avery and Marina Smith and their five 
children from the constituency of Indian Head-Milestone. Not 
too many people are lucky enough to have two introductions in 
the same sitting but you are. Anyway they’re part of the 
home-based educators from the constituency of Indian 
Head-Milestone. And I’d like all members to welcome them to 
their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Seated in the 
west gallery is Morgan Schwager, if you can give us a wave. 
Morgan is here to watch the proceedings today. She is currently 
studying indigenous social work at the University of Regina. 
She also plays flute at the U of R concert band. She has 
volunteered extensively at the North Central Family Centre as 
well as helping fund raise for Syrian refugees that have come to 
our province. 
 
Morgan has a keen love of politics. She’s hoping to be a 
summer student in the legislature this next year. And beyond 
that, Mr. Speaker, her end goal is to sit on the benches over here 
with the Saskatchewan Party. And we wish her well in her 
endeavours, and I ask all of my colleagues to welcome her here 
today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize another tall member from the 
caucus. I recognize the member from Regina Walsh Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’ll just 
join with the member from Regina Rosemont and welcome Mr. 
David Froh to his Legislative Assembly on behalf of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. I’ve known David for a long 
time as well. Actually David, Eric, and I have a tie. We all 
played senior bowl, I think Eric probably a year after us. But I 

met David in grade 12 playing senior bowl, and he was a great 
football player. And he does a lot for the community in the area 
of Regina, first with STEP [Saskatchewan Trade and Export 
Partnership], now with Regina Downtown economic 
development. And I just want to say thank you very much for 
all you do and welcome you on behalf of the Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join the 
Minister of Advanced Education and say congratulations to 
Qingwang Yuan. And right beside him there is Muhammad 
Imran, is sitting beside him. Muhammad Imran is a constituent 
of mine, and he used to live in my neighbourhood. He just 
moved away a couple of blocks away from my house now. He 
is a father of four and working in the Saskatchewan Research 
Council. Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask all this House to 
welcome Imran in his legislative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I would like to introduce a 
few of my friends sitting in your gallery, Carter Stewart, Blair 
Stewart, and Shahid Pervaiz. Shahid Pervaiz is one of my best 
friends, known him very many, many years. And, Mr. Speaker, 
Blair was the founder of Fill-More Seeds and well known in 
seed cleaning and shipping special crops. Mr. Speaker, Blair is 
the owner of the longest straight rail line in the world. Now that 
is from Stoughton to Richardson. I ask all the members of the 
Assembly to join me, welcome Carter, Blair, and Shahid in their 
own Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to take a 
second to introduce Cyndie Knorr to the Assembly this 
morning. Cyndie’s here with a group from the Research 
Council, but she is also a very able and capable photographer in 
her own right. She has a photography business and is a member 
of the Canadian photography association, gives back to her 
community.  
 
And her son Raymond Knorr represented Saskatchewan this 
summer at the Canadian Grand Masters Fiddling Championship 
and he did very, very well. I think it was third place, fourth 
place he came in. And they have three very musical children. 
Their son Ben is studying at Berklee school of music in Boston 
right now. So a very, very talented family, talented children, 
and a great mom. And I would like everyone to welcome 
Cyndie to her Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve saved the best for last in the introductions and that’s the 
grade 12 students, 37 grade 12 students from A.E. Peacock 
Collegiate in my constituency of Moose Jaw North. I’d like to 
welcome them and especially welcome Mrs. Kiefer, who is very 
diligent in bringing a class here every year to watch the 
proceedings and learn a little bit about the legislative process. 
So I ask all members to welcome the grade 12 class from A.E. 
Peacock and Mrs. Kiefer. Thank you for coming. 



November 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3209 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to you and through you to the Assembly, I would like to join the 
member for Regina Pasqua in introducing Blair and Carter 
Stewart and Shahid, and welcoming them to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Stewart Southern Rail has been a great venture, which has built 
80 to $100 million worth of business along Highway 33 
because of that railroad being in operation. It’s a benefit to the 
entire province, and I would ask the Assembly to welcome them 
to their Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Walsh Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
pleased to rise today to present a petition from citizens from 
across the province who are opposed to the federal 
government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the citizens of 
the province that will cripple our economy and take us 
backwards. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on our 
province. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed from citizens of Spiritwood, 
Canwood, Shell Lake, and Leask. I do present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition calling for critical supports for survivors of 
domestic violence. Those who have signed this petition wish to 
bring to our attention the following: Saskatchewan has the 
highest rate of domestic violence amongst provinces; employers 
should be obligated to reasonably accommodate survivors of 
domestic violence in the workplace; and employees who are 
survivors of domestic violence should be able to take a leave of 
absence from their employment without penalty. I’d like to read 
the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Legislative Assembly to pass legislation providing critical 
support for survivors of domestic violence. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is what we’re calling for in Bill No. 605. 
We hope that the government takes it on and passes it in its full 
form. The individuals who have signed this petition today come 
from Regina and Pilot Butte. I do so present. 
 
[10:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am honoured to 
stand today to present a petition for a second bridge for Prince 
Albert. The individuals that signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, 
wish to bring to your attention the following: that the 
Diefenbaker bridge in Prince Albert is the primary link that 
connects the southern part of the province to the North; and that 
the need for a second bridge for Prince Albert has never been 
clearer than it is today. 
 
Prince Albert, communities north of Prince Albert, and 
businesses that send people and products through Prince Albert 
require a solution; and that the local municipal governments 
have limited resources and require a second bridge to be funded 
through federal and provincial governments and not a P3 
[public-private partnership] model; and that the Saskatchewan 
Party government refuses to stand up for Prince Albert in this 
crucial infrastructure issue. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan ask that the 
Saskatchewan Party government stop stalling, hiding 
behind rhetoric, and refusing to listen to the people calling 
for action, and begin immediately to plan and then quickly 
commence the construction of a second bridge for Prince 
Albert using federal and provincial dollars. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing this petition come from the 
city of Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present another petition calling for the reopening of the Buffalo 
Narrows Correctional Centre, Mr. Speaker. In this time of truth 
and reconciliation, the decision by this government to close the 
Buffalo Narrows Correctional Centre in the North moved 
precisely in the opposite direction of the action called for out of 
the Truth and Reconciliation Commission. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the prayer that reads as follows: 
 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan immediately reopen the 
Buffalo Narrows Correctional Centre to better our 
community for generations to come. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by individuals 
from the Buffalo Narrows community. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition calling on the government to stop the cuts to our kids’ 
classrooms. Those who have signed this petition wish to draw 
our attention to the following: that the Sask Party has cut at 
least $674 in government funding for every student across the 
province; that the Sask Party hiked education property taxes by 
$67 million but cut total government funding for classrooms by 
$121 million; and that even though the Sask Party is making us 
all pay more, our kids are actually getting less. 



3210 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2017 

They also wish to draw our attention to the fact that these cuts 
means that students will lose much needed supports in their 
classroom, including reduction of the number of teachers, the 
number of EAs [educational assistant], speech and language 
pathologists, occupational therapists, physical therapists, as well 
as pre-K [pre-kindergarten] programs for children with special 
needs. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, the undersigned, call upon the government to reverse 
the senseless cuts to our kids’ classrooms and stop making 
families, teachers, and everyone who works to support our 
education pay the price for the Sask Party’s 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those who have signed this petition today reside in 
Regina and Prince Albert. I do so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 

World AIDS Day 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Tomorrow we 
recognize World AIDS Day. Each year, on December 1st, we 
show support to those who live with HIV [human 
immunodeficiency virus] and AIDS [acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome] and their loved ones. And we remember 
those who lost their life. 
 
HIV/AIDS continues to impact many people across 
Saskatchewan but, Mr. Speaker, much progress has been made 
in this fight. With early diagnosis and proper treatment, people 
can live healthy, productive lives, but there are barriers that 
prevent people from getting tested and seeking care. Stigma and 
discrimination are among those barriers. Great strides have been 
made in communities that have addressed HIV stigma and taken 
proactive steps to engage people in testing and care. I commend 
them for that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government recognizes the seriousness of this 
issue and remains committed to addressing the high HIV rates 
in Saskatchewan. We continue to invest in better access to 
testing and treatment, preventing new infections, and improving 
the lives of people living with HIV and AIDS. We’re working 
with dedicated partners, health care providers, federal 
government, community-based organizations, leaders, people 
living with HIV and their families, and today I want to thank 
them for all their efforts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members join me in acknowledging 
World AIDS Day. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 

Cumberland House Wins Northern 
Football Championship 

 
Mr. Vermette: — On a rainy, snowy, windy October day in 
Prince Albert, two northern football teams battled it out on the 
Max Clunie field. The Creighton Kodiaks and the Cumberland 

House Islanders faced off for the northern championship on 
October 21st. Facing typical Saskatchewan fall weather, the two 
young football teams played their hearts out in front of many 
family and friends. 
 
The Creighton Kodiaks took an 18-0 lead into halftime and 
controlled most of the play. However, determined play by the 
Islanders allowed them to claw back against the Kodiaks and 
claim a 32-24 victory and claimed their second northern 
football championship. 
 
The Islanders went undefeated in the northern football league 
this past season and hosted their first provincial football game 
against the Rosthern Huskies. Thank you to the coaches, fans, 
and volunteers at Charlebois Community School for supporting 
the Islanders this season. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 
 

Support for Research Internships 
 
Mr. Steele: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise and 
share how government continues to support research internships 
for our graduate students. Mr. Speaker, our government is 
providing 400,000 to support 94 internships in science, 
technology, engineering, math through Mitacs. Mitacs is a 
national, non-profit organization committed to driving Canadian 
innovation through research skills training for Canadian best 
students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of those students, Dr. Qingwang Yuan, joins 
us today. His work is just one example of how investment in 
Mitacs supports innovation and industry right here in 
Saskatchewan. Since 2007 a total of 11 million has been 
invested by the funding partners in Mitacs programming in 
Saskatchewan. With this year’s funding, Saskatchewan will 
have provided 256 million to Mitacs since 2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read a quote by Alejandro Adem, CEO 
[chief executive officer] and scientific director for Mitacs. He 
says, “With this investment, the Government of Saskatchewan 
is helping Mitacs researchers like Qingwang Yuan connect with 
local companies to develop new technologies, improve 
processes, and increase production.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all the members to join me in thanking 
Mitacs and our partners for providing innovative results. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

World AIDS Day 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
acknowledge World AIDS Day coming up tomorrow, 
December 1st, raising awareness of HIV/AIDS.  
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has the highest rate of HIV in 
Canada, a shameful three times the national average in fact. Mr. 
Speaker, I also want to note that infection rates are growing 
across the province, an alarming trend that other jurisdictions 
are not seeing. As legislators, we need to be doing more as a 



November 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3211 

province to work with communities to prevent HIV and to 
better support those who are HIV positive. Mr. Speaker, we 
need to be prioritizing preventative measures to deal with this 
crisis in our province. 
 
I want to take this moment to recognize the incredible efforts 
and work of advocates and front-line health care workers in this 
regard. We know that this work is not easy, and we appreciate 
the incredible effort you put in every day. 
 
As part of World AIDS Day, a coalition of advocacy groups, 
including AIDS Saskatoon, Sanctum Care Group, Persons 
Living with AIDS Network of Saskatchewan, All Nations 
Hope, and AIDS Programs South Saskatchewan, will be raising 
the provincial awareness flag tomorrow morning at 10 a.m. at 
the Saskatchewan legislature.  
 
I ask all members to join me in thanking these organizations for 
all that they do to raise awareness of this issue, work to prevent 
the spread of HIV/AIDS, support those living with this illness, 
and fight for change. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
University. 
 

Global Entrepreneurship Week 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. November 13th to 
19th was Global Entrepreneurship Week, and 2017 marks its 
10th anniversary. Around the world, this week inspires of 
thousands of events and competitions in over 160 countries, 
encouraging the next generation of entrepreneurs. 
 
Here in Saskatchewan a number of outstanding events were 
hosted, bringing together many of our province’s innovative 
entrepreneurs. In Saskatoon, Square One held an event called 
Fuel, which was a small-business exposition. Fuel gathered 
government departments, non-profit organizations, and 
businesses that support and celebrate small businesses. The 
event gave entrepreneurs a chance to meet face to face with 
experts who provide valuable programs, services, and products 
to small businesses. 
 
Another event, Ignite your Ideas, was held in both Saskatoon 
and Regina. Ignite gave space to an innovative platform, putting 
entrepreneurs in front of as many professional mentors as 
possible in a short time frame. 
 
Mr. Speaker, small businesses, which are businesses with fewer 
than 50 employees, account for over 98 per cent of the 
businesses in our province. They are active in virtually every 
sector of the economy, providing vital inputs that keep the 
wheels of industry turning. Saskatchewan’s business-friendly 
policies and strong economy in recent years have been reflected 
in a growing small-business sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like all members to join with me in 
thanking small-business owners and employees who help keep 
Saskatchewan strong. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Westview. 
 

Manufacturing Week 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this week is Manufacturing Week in Saskatchewan. 
Manufacturing is one of the province’s strongest and most vital 
industries. Last year the value of manufacturing shipments 
totalled over $14 billion and manufacturing employed over 
25,000 people. As of December 2016, Saskatchewan had 1,081 
manufacturing establishments. Nearly 89 per cent of these were 
classified as small businesses having fewer than 50 employees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in real dollar terms, Saskatchewan’s 
manufacturing GDP [gross domestic product] increased at an 
average growth rate of 2.8 per cent per year from 2006 to 2016. 
Over that decade, this percentage increase was the highest 
among the provinces — a massive improvement in productivity 
and success, something we did not see when the members 
opposite were in power. Mr. Speaker, during the last decade the 
value of our manufacturing shipments grew at the highest 
average rate of any province: 3.7 per cent a year.  
 
Mr. Speaker, looking beyond the numbers and percentages, we 
see how valuable manufacturing is to this province, and we 
need to recognize the efforts of hard-working individuals all 
across this province. The success of manufacturing contributes 
to our growing economy and makes Saskatchewan strong and 
prosperous. 
 
I ask all members to join me in recognizing Manufacturing 
Week. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Opposition Policy on Taxation 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday we continued to see 
the hypocrisy from the members opposite. Not only did the 
member from Nutana misquote and misrepresent the Minister 
of Finance’s comments yesterday, but she obviously has not 
explained economics to her caucus colleagues. Members 
opposite have called for more spending almost every day in this 
Assembly, then have the gall to complain about deficits, but the 
member from Fairview asked the government yesterday, and I 
quote, “. . . stimulate the economy, and start helping 
Saskatchewan people get back to work?” 
 
Great sentiment from the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
News flash: 20 minutes later they voted against tax changes to 
support small business. The Finance critic said that businesses 
hitting $500,000 threshold are too big to deserve any help. And 
I ask her, where is your cut-off for small business in the NDP 
[New Democratic Party]? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen the NDP MPs [Member of Parliament] 
and the Saskatchewan NDP executive members lobby the 
federal government for tax changes this year that would have 
devastated small business and farmers. Members opposite 
continue to talk out both sides of their mouths on finances, on 
deficits, on pipelines, and now on taxes, Mr. Speaker. Those 
NDP policies certainly grew economies before, Mr. Speaker, 
primarily in Alberta and Manitoba. Members on this side will 
keep on working for the Saskatchewan people. 



3212 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2017 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

State of Provincial Finances 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Finance minister 
and the Premier spoke about being on track. It was almost as 
though they were hoping no one would notice the track leads to 
a $680 million deficit. Almost like they were hoping no one 
would notice that were taking the entire debt that our province 
has accumulated since 1905 and doubling it in just five years. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s almost like they were hoping no one 
would notice that they have pretty much thrown their plan out 
the window since they dropped their budget last spring. Mr. 
Speaker, even their own leadership candidates admit that. Half 
of them don’t think the government will meet their goal of 
getting to balance by 2019, and that includes the Premier’s 
deputy minister who’s on leave from her senior role in the 
public service to run to lead the party. She says to show 
compassion, they need an extra year. 
 
[10:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, what does the Deputy Premier think? Does he 
stand by his Finance minister or will he show compassion and 
admit their so-called plan is off by at least a year? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I have to say that that 
question does demonstrate that, yes indeed, the NDP don’t 
understand finances. When you have a budget and it projects a 
deficit, and then at second quarter you’re at that particular . . . 
you’re projecting that you’re at the number that was in the 
budget, that’s on track, Mr. Speaker. That’s not a surprise. It’s 
not a surprise. That number was in our budget. We have a 
three-year plan, Mr. Speaker. It’s unlike the members opposite 
that have absolutely no plan. 
 
And what happens when that happens, Mr. Speaker? Well next 
door in Alberta the Dominion Bond agency had this to say: 
 

DBRS has maintained the negative trend because the 
province has yet to demonstrate any real willingness to 
address the weakest budget outlook among all provinces 
despite high levels of per capita spending and the lowest 
tax burden in the country. DBRS is concerned that the plan 
to return to balance relies on recovery in resource 
revenues, rather than fundamental adjustments to the 
budget. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this province is doing things differently. We’re 
addressing that issue, Mr. Speaker, and our credit rating 
remains strong. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, the truth of the matter is, they’ve 
been making it all up as they go along. When the budget came 
up, they all said it had to be done. The Premier said that every 
cut and tax hike was “difficult but necessary.” And the Finance 

minister said, “Are we prepared to walk back on other things? 
No.” Mr. Speaker, in May the Premier defended all of the 
heartless cuts, the unfair tax hikes, and even the plans to sell off 
our Crowns and told Saskatchewan people, “I remain confident 
that we made the right decisions.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, in just the last six months they have flip-flopped 
quite a bit. Much of that was good news. Cuts to funerals for the 
most vulnerable and our libraries were very hard to fathom. 
But, Mr. Speaker, even after all these changes, the Premier still 
says his party can get to balance. If that’s true, were those cuts 
and tax hikes ever necessary in the first place? And what other 
damaging decisions could have been avoided if the Sask Party 
had actually made a real plan before dropping their 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste on the backs of 
Saskatchewan people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, obviously the plan is 
working because we’re on track to where we said we would be. 
That is taking a $1.2 billion shortfall in revenue resources, 
something that has been . . . [inaudible] . . . over the last three 
years, Mr. Speaker, and almost cutting it in half in this first 
year. And yes, Mr. Speaker, there was difficult decisions that 
needed to be made. And yes, we had a contingency to address 
unintended consequences because we went places that we 
hadn’t gone before. Mr. Speaker, we made those changes. I’m 
glad the members opposite recognize that those were good 
decisions, Mr. Speaker. They want to just keep spending more 
and more money in every single area. Mr. Speaker, they don’t 
want the debt to go up. They want the budget to balance. They 
want to spend more and more and more money, Mr. Speaker. 
That is not a plan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, let’s just look at the corporate 
tax giveaway they put in their budget. The then Finance 
minister tried to justify it by saying that some wealthy business 
owners, including people in his own caucus, make over half a 
million dollars a year and would benefit from a tax break. When 
we opposed it and said it was a gift to their corporate friends, 
they scoffed and said it was absolutely necessary to stimulate 
the economy. Then they scrapped it. Mr. Speaker, now they’ve 
created a new level of elite — so-called small businesses. These 
are those same businesses, and apparently Sask Party caucus 
members that make over $500,000 and aren’t considered small 
businesses anywhere else in the country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, given all of their other heartless cuts, including 
scrapping the STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company] 
and all of the tax hikes they’ve piled on families, small 
businesses, and producers — including on health and life 
insurance — how can the Deputy Premier justify this tax 
giveaway that will cost the people of Saskatchewan over $11 
million a year and doesn’t even help over 92 per cent of small 
businesses in this province, who are the real job creators? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the fact that the Leader 
of the Opposition is saying that these are so-called small 



November 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3213 

businesses show how out of touch they truly are with the 
business community within this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since 2008 CFIB [Canadian Federation of 
Independent Business] has had these recommendations or 
requests of the government, and they are this. I suppose they 
didn’t ask before, because they knew how out of touch those 
members were, so they didn’t even ask for this. And they have 
corporate tax relief, small-business income tax threshold, 
increase the small-business threshold from 500,000 to 750,000, 
Mr. Speaker. This has been requested since 2008, and this is a 
representative agency for small business — the real small 
business in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But tell me something, Mr. Speaker. If they’re so wise in relief 
for small business, I want them to tell me, what will $15 a 
minimum wage affect small business and job creation in this 
province? Because that is what one of their candidates is asking 
for. What would a carbon tax in this province affect small 
business in this province, Mr. Speaker, which is what those 
members opposite support? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Global Transportation Hub and 
Details of Land Transactions 

 
Ms. Sproule: — Oh, I was so caught up in the discussion, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, let’s shift a little bit. The Sask Party’s 
GTH [Global Transportation Hub] scandal keeps growing, but 
as we all know, there are answers to questions. There are 
answers to questions that we still need about the Sask Party 
scandal that wasted millions of taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
Yesterday the Provincial Auditor tabled answers to questions 
that I asked in committee last year. That was when we were 
starting to dig into the Sask Party scandal. And in her answers 
it’s now clear that the government did not give the auditor all 
the information, despite what they have repeated time and time 
again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year I asked the auditor, who in cabinet was 
on the GTH subcommittee that directed the scandal to proceed? 
She said, “I do not have the names of the individuals on cabinet 
at that time, or the names of the individuals on its 
subcommittees.” Really? Why didn’t the government disclose 
to the auditor who from cabinet was on the GTH 
subcommittee? And will they tell us today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment, 
GTH, and Sask Power. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, after watching question period for the last number of 
weeks, Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious why question period probably 
should end about seven minutes in each and every day, as the 
member opposite just confirmed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has provided the opportunity for 
the Provincial Auditor to request any documentation, cabinet 
information, Mr. Speaker. We’ve been very clear about that, 
Mr. Speaker, unlike the members opposite who, when there 

were questions with respect to the operation of the government 
of the day when it came to projects and business dealings by the 
members opposite, Mr. Speaker, the only transparency that was 
provided was for the deputy minister to the Premier, the 
hand-picked deputy minister to the Premier to do an internal 
report, Mr. Speaker, that basically cleared the government of 
any problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve asked the Provincial Auditor. We invited 
the Provincial Auditor. We gave access to information that the 
Provincial Auditor required, Mr. Speaker. That’s how we 
conduct ourselves on this side of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, it’s answers like that that 
sometimes make a farce of question period. It’s just a few 
names. And Saskatchewan people have the right to know which 
cabinet ministers ultimately let this land scandal proceed before 
the Premier signed off on it. 
 
But there is more, Mr. Speaker. I also asked the auditor for 
information surrounding the mysterious, unsolicited phone call 
that Bill Boyd, the then GTH minister received about the sale of 
the GTH land. And despite what the current GTH minister and 
the one before him have been saying over and over all along, 
she said that that information was not included in the scope of 
the audit. She also said that when it comes to that mysterious 
phone call, “We did not interview individuals specifically in 
relation to the call.” Well, Mr. Speaker, why? It’s because it 
was beyond her cabinet-mandated scope.  
 
This is an important question that could help us finally get to 
the bottom of this Sask Party scandal that has wasted millions. 
So will the minister finally allow Bill Boyd and Laurie Pushor 
to testify in front of a legislative committee so we can get to the 
bottom about that phone call? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Global 
Transportation Hub. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, the cabinet-mandated 
authorization for the Provincial Auditor was the . . . The 
Provincial Auditor is an independent officer of this legislature 
and could have access to any information that she requested, 
which we provided, Mr. Speaker.  
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to further work that may take place, 
the Premier has indicated that in light of the fact that the file has 
apparently been turned over to a prosecutions branch in another 
province, that the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police], to 
my knowledge, have concluded their look at this, Mr. Speaker, 
that the Premier has indicated that that doesn’t rule out taking 
further action.  
 
The member knows this. The member has been here for a 
number of years now, Mr. Speaker. She knows this information. 
We have said this information, Mr. Speaker. I don’t mind 
standing and repeating myself time after time after time. But the 
member does know this. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 



3214 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2017 

Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, none of them are willing to admit to 
the facts, and here’s just one more fact that they keep denying. 
They raised education property taxes and cut tens of millions of 
dollars in government funding from our kids’ classrooms. The 
Education minister can deny it or sidestep it all she wants, but 
we’re paying more and we’re getting less. And yet the minister 
says that the situation is “balanced.” Mr. Speaker, she even 
claims that people are happy because the cuts were less severe 
than they could have been.  
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve now received a ministerial briefing 
note prepared in August that says, and I quote, “All boards have 
expressed concern about not having sufficient funding.” Mr. 
Speaker, if this is what her own briefing notes say, why has she 
been saying something so very different? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again, we’ve 
been over this in recent days. I referenced one specific division 
whose chief financial officer was quoted as saying, “They 
reduced where possible including on unnecessary travel. Look 
for efficiencies as directed by the government.” She said, “All 
the changes we’ve made have not resulted in any changes at the 
classroom level. This is responsible fiscal stewardship.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon Public, Regina Catholic, St. Paul’s 
Catholic, Prairie Valley, among others, have seen 
classroom-based, full-time employee numbers — which of 
course include teachers — increase, along with enrolments, Mr. 
Speaker. Again we want to acknowledge divisions’ efforts to 
minimize those front-line impacts to the classroom, to be those 
sound fiscal stewards, Mr. Speaker, across this province this 
year, of over 9,000 regular, classroom-based, full-time 
employees, which again includes teachers. There are 95 fewer, 
that is true, through attrition and retirement. Of course that 
poses some challenges, Mr. Speaker. We thank divisions for 
their commitment to putting students first.  
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview.  
 
Ms. Beck: — Yet again, Mr. Speaker, that minister is 
incredibly out of touch, not only with her file but with reality. 
Let me quote from that internal briefing again: “Overall, the 
relationship with the sector is strained.” Well, Mr. Speaker, no 
kidding. Parents, trustees, and everyone who works in education 
and in our schools, and yet even, unfortunately, the students, 
know that this is true. Everyone, it would seem, but that 
minister.  
 
Mr. Speaker, even their leadership candidates can see the truth. 
The member from Saskatoon Northwest said, “. . . I think there 
were some people that we didn’t listen to. We need to pay a bit 
more attention to education and to our health care system.”  
 
Mr. Speaker, when will the Minister of Education stop denying 
the facts and actually start listening to what is going on in our 
classrooms?  

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education.  
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Every day the 
member opposite stands up and questions our commitment to 
education, our record investment in education over the last 10 
years. She mentions a lot of groups and a lot of stakeholders, 
and they’re all very important, Mr. Speaker. But there’s one 
group she doesn’t mention very much, which was a first today, 
and that’s the parents of this province, Mr. Speaker.  
 
There is one very important commitment to students, teachers, 
and parents that we’re undertaking on this side, and that’s 
invoking the notwithstanding clause to protect school choice, 
Mr. Speaker. The member opposite cannot seem to decide 
which side she’s on. None of them can. One day she charges 
we’re “playing politics.” The next day she acknowledges that, 
“Of course the parents who should be and would be impacted 
by this decision would be concerned about their children being 
disrupted.” So which is it, Mr. Speaker?  
 
She’s also said, “Invoking the notwithstanding clause is without 
precedent.” Not so. And you know who was a key advocate for 
it in the first place, Mr. Speaker? Mr. Allan Blakeney. I’m sorry 
to break it to her, but the die is legally cast. We had to do 
something about it. And what we had to do, and parents asked 
us to do, was to take action to protect school choice in the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[10:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Support for Social Services 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, another minister that’s out of 
touch is the Minister of Social Services. Yes, Social Services 
spending is up, but that’s because more people are relying on 
social services. And that’s nothing to brag about.  
 
The reality is the Sask Party have made cuts to programs that 
people depend on. They cut the SAID [Saskatchewan assured 
income for disability] program, cut supports for people with 
special dietary needs, and only partially walked back their cut to 
funerals for the most vulnerable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even the Premier’s chosen candidate to replace 
him said that cuts to Social Services made by the Sask Party 
were “a little too harsh.”  
 
Does the current Social Services minister agree? Like the 
former minister, do these cuts weigh heavily on him? And will 
he reverse these cuts? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And first 
off, I reject the premise of the question. I’m very proud of what 
we’ve done in Social Services, Mr. Speaker. One thing that I’m 
most proud of, and I’ve said this before and I’ll say it again, Mr. 
Speaker, is the SAID program. 
 
We have increased all of our programs year over year, Mr. 



November 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3215 

Speaker. We have diversified our programs to make sure that 
they are tailored to the clients that are needed, Mr. Speaker. In a 
very tough financial year, Mr. Speaker, we were able to 
increase the services to social assistance because we have seen 
an increase of clients coming in to Social Services, and within 
our department we’re ready to be able to meet those needs 
immediately, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, we already know that the Sask 
Party Social Services ministers like to say they aren’t heartless 
people, but they have to start showing it. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
AIDS Awareness Week and Saskatchewan is faced with the 
reality that Saskatchewan HIV rates continue to get worse.  
 
Clearly we should be increasing social services like housing and 
addiction supports to address this crisis. Instead, the Sask Party 
has been cutting programs and crucial supports like mobile 
crisis and the Lighthouse. Mr. Speaker, the evidence is clear 
that these programs save lives, reduce the spread of HIV, and 
actually save money in the long run. So why is the minister not 
willing to address this crisis through cost-effective social 
supports? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services.  
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Being 
World AIDS Day coming up, Mr. Speaker, we’re very 
supportive of all of the programs that our community-based 
organizations do to be able to serve the clients with AIDS. As 
far as Social Services, Mr. Speaker, we work in conjunction 
with the Health ministry to make sure that all of the needs are 
able to be met from the clients.  
 
In regards to the Lighthouse, Mr. Speaker, we haven’t cut any 
funding and I want to correct them on the record on that. If 
they’re referring specifically to North Battleford, we do a 
fee-for-service basis on that, Mr. Speaker, and if there are 
clients there that need that service, we will be able to provide 
that fee for service, Mr. Speaker. But again, on the record, we 
haven’t cut any funding to the Lighthouse. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker.  
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale.  
 

Rate of HIV Infections 
 
Ms. Chartier: — How about the cut to the special diet for 
people living with HIV, Mr. Speaker? This government doesn’t 
get it. Saskatchewan has the highest rate of HIV in Canada and 
there are almost triple the number of new cases in the province 
than the national average. We are the only province that has 
seen HIV incidence go up, and HIV doctors in this province are 
saying this is “cause for alarm.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, numbers are going up in rural and remote areas. 
People simply can’t get access to the services they need, and 
funding for HIV in the province hasn’t even kept pace with 
inflation. Mr. Speaker, the rise of HIV in Saskatchewan has 
been called a crisis. So why has the Sask Party failed to take 

any real or effective action to save lives? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The increase in 
HIV diagnosis is extremely troubling. We’re very concerned 
about it. Mr. Speaker, last year a number of months ago when 
this issue was raised, Dr. Denise Werker, who is the deputy 
chief medical health officer, spoke to this.  
 
Mr. Speaker, the increase in diagnosis is in great degree to the 
increase in testing that’s done, Mr. Speaker. We’ve dramatically 
increased the amount of testing that’s been done over the years. 
Early diagnosis is extremely important. Mr. Speaker, we have 
increased numbers of staff support. In 2010 we implemented a 
$4 million a year injection of cash into HIV diagnosis and 
various treatments around that, Mr. Speaker. We’ve continued, 
we’ve continued that . . . Mr. Speaker, this is a serious issue and 
yet the member across heckles during it, the member from 
Meewasin, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I look forward to 
subsequent questions on this matter.  
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

Support for Worker Safety 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, the latest numbers on workplace 
fatalities are out, and I think we can all agree that even one 
death in the workplace is one too many. But still, here in 
Saskatchewan we have the second-lowest fines in the country 
for employers whose workplace safety violations result in a 
worker being killed on the job. Mr. Speaker, the number of 
workplace fatalities here in Saskatchewan had been declining 
for years, but then they plateaued. And after seeing these 
numbers, what is the minister doing to protect Saskatchewan 
workers? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we have a Mission: Zero 
plan in our province where even one injury is one too many. It’s 
something we take seriously. For somebody to go to work in the 
morning, and their family realize that at the end of the day that 
they’re not coming home, is something that’s simply 
unacceptable — not just to this side of the House but to both 
sides of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 2012 and 2014 this government increased fines. 
Fines from a corporation went from 500,000 to 1.5 million. 
Fines for individuals went from 300,000 . . . were increased 
120,000. Mr. Speaker, the new maximum corporate fine is 
actually now the highest in Canada. Mr. Speaker, prior to that, 
fines were not increased since 1994. The critic, who is the 
member opposite who asked the question, was the Labour 
minister at the time. Never increased the fines once during his 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, the government has had a decade, 



3216 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2017 

a decade to take meaningful action to protect employees and 
they need to start taking accountability for their own action. 
And these are just not numbers; they’re real people who went to 
work and never came home. They worked in both the private 
and public sectors.  
 
Mr. Speaker, we must do a much better job to protect the 
working people of Saskatchewan from dying at work. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we are well aware of the Westray Act at the federal 
level and I know both the minister and I have met with the 
United Steelworkers on this particular issue of people dying at 
work. So again, what is the minister’s plan to improve the 
outcome for Saskatchewan workers? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve reduced the 
workplace time-loss injury rate by 10 per cent from 2015. The 
rate has gone from 2.07 in 2015 to 1.86 in 2016. We are 
improving all the way across Canada, but in Saskatchewan we 
are improving faster than other jurisdictions. We are now 62 per 
cent lower than we were in 2002, which was the all-time high 
— an injury rate of 4.95 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve implemented a targeted intervention 
strategy where we work with the employers that have the 
highest injury rate. We’ve implemented new regulations for 
late-night retail stores. We’ve implemented Canada’s first 
asbestos registry. The strategy is seeing results: 2015-16, 14 per 
cent reduction; 2016-17, a 10 per cent reduction. Mr. Speaker, 
we have more work to do. We are proceeding in the right 
direction. But, Mr. Speaker, I’d urge the members to continue 
to work with us. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Charges Under Environmental Laws 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to talk a little 
bit more then about scandals. No matter how many scandals 
pile up, and no matter how many times the Premier and the rest 
of the Sask Party have the opportunity to distance themselves 
from Bill Boyd, they refuse to. The list of his scandals is long, 
but there’s something about the most recent one that really 
stands out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in August Mr. Boyd was charged with breaking 
laws that fall under the Ministry of the Environment. Mr. 
Speaker, at the same time, the Sask Water Security Agency, 
which also falls under the Ministry of the Environment, granted 
him irrigation permits on the same property.  
 
Mr. Speaker, this doesn’t do much to support the Minister of the 
Environment’s claims that they take irrigation and illegal 
drainage seriously. What has the minister done to look into the 
situation to make sure that the left hand of his ministry is 
talking to the right hand? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the 

member for her question. Four charges were laid against that 
gentleman under The Environmental Management and 
Protection Act, the EMPA. The matter is before the courts and 
will go through the legal process as it would for any other 
individual, and at this point we can’t comment any farther on it. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 114 — The Vehicles for Hire Act 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 114, The 
Vehicles for Hire Act be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Crown Investments have 
moved first reading of Bill No. 114. Is the Assembly ready for 
the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall . . . first reading? I recognize the 
Minister of Crown Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Next sitting of the Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 607 — The All Families are Equal Act 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — I move that Bill No. 607, the all families are 
equal bill be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 
moved first reading of Bill No. 607. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read the second time? 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Next sitting of the Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 



November 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3217 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 73 and 74. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 
to questions 73 and 74. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
University. 
 

Government Supports for Small Businesses 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
happy to rise to my feet in my place today to speak about how 
valuable small and medium-sized businesses are here in 
Saskatchewan. Small businesses are the backbone of the 
Canadian economy. Our government proudly stands behind 
them and supports them. 
 
Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan NDP stood in this 
legislature to vote against government legislation designed to 
lower costs for small businesses by raising their income 
threshold to $600,000. By raising the income threshold, Mr. 
Speaker, small businesses have greater incentive to hire more 
workers and invest in new capital right here in Saskatchewan. 
Mr. Speaker, that doesn’t sound like they’re standing shoulder 
to shoulder to shoulder with Saskatchewan people at all, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Per capita, Saskatchewan has the highest number of small 
businesses. There are 129 small businesses for every 1,000 
people in Saskatchewan. The national average is only 105. 
Ninety-eight per cent of businesses here in Saskatchewan are 
small businesses, Mr. Speaker. That speaks volumes to the over 
30 per cent of GDP these businesses contribute to our economy. 
Without the income these businesses generate, we certainly 
would be at a far different place than we are today. 
 
[11:00] 
 
Small business is big business in Saskatchewan. Small business, 
and that’s businesses with fewer than 50 employees, Mr. 
Speaker, account for almost 99 per cent of the more than 
150,000 business enterprises in our province. They are active in 
virtually every sector of our economy, providing vital inputs 
that keep the wheels of industry turning. Small businesses are a 
source of innovative products and services that contribute to the 
quality of life that we all enjoy. 
 
In 2016 small businesses employed 31 per cent of 
Saskatchewan workers and paid out over $6.2 billion in wages 
and salaries, 26 per cent of the province’s total payroll. 
Saskatchewan ranks third among the provinces for the share of 
its total economic output generated by small businesses. Small 
business is vital to the health of the economy. Increasing the 
income threshold to $600,000 provides Saskatchewan small 

businesses with an incentive to hire more workers and invest 
new capital right here in our province. Meanwhile, rates for 
personal income tax in Saskatchewan continue to be reduced, 
which also helps stimulate employment. 
 
Over one-quarter of Saskatchewan’s payroll earnings are from 
small business. Earnings of small-business employees in 
Saskatchewan are the third-highest in Canada and have the 
second-highest growth rate among the provinces. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s time for a little history. In 2007, Mr. 
Speaker, there were 94,904 small businesses in Saskatchewan. 
Today, 10 years later, there are 148,533. Mr. Speaker, that’s a 
64 per cent increase. The question begs to be asked, Mr. 
Speaker: why? The answer, and you’ve heard it here before, 
many, many times, Mr. Speaker: policy matters. 
 
Now the first policy change came on July 1st, 2008. On that 
date the threshold for small-business income was revised 
upward to $500,000. At that time, Mr. Speaker, the tax rate was 
four and a half per cent. That was a good start.  
 
The next policy change came on July 1st, 2011, once again 
implemented by the Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker. This 
was the big one where we lowered the tax rate for small 
businesses from four and a half to two per cent. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, from July 1st, 2011 to today there was a huge growth 
of small business to the current 148,000. Once again, Mr. 
Speaker, we ask the question: why? And once again the answer 
is, policies matter. 
 
Since 2011, the sectors with the highest percentage employment 
growth have been construction; public administration; 
accommodation and food services; professional, scientific, and 
technical services; and educational services, Mr. Speaker. In 
2016, average weekly earnings in Saskatchewan small business 
were at $816, the third highest in Canada. Small-business 
earnings in Saskatchewan were about 1 per cent higher than the 
Canadian average. In Saskatchewan, small-business employees’ 
earnings grew, on average, by 3.1 per cent per year between 
2006 and 2016, the second-highest growth rate in Canada. The 
national average rate was 2 per cent per year over that same 
time period. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as always, we’re in touch with 
constituents that have small business. We’re in touch with 
constituents that work for small business. And every once in a 
while we get emails from small-business owners and 
small-business employees telling us their story. And I’d like to 
share one here today. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, here’s an excerpt from an email I received 
from Mark and Jannecke Friesen, who own The Tree Whisperer 
arborist service in Saskatoon. And I quote, the email says, Mr. 
Speaker, and I quote: 
 

I started my business as a way to make a little extra 
revenue while I was a full-time employee for the federal 
government in 2012. I had an old, beat-up truck and a 
chainsaw, so I started cutting down and pruning trees for 
neighbours, friends, and relatives. I had a lot of experience 
while I was growing up cutting trees, so it was a natural fit 
for a small start-up. I soon became quite busy and had to 



3218 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2017 

buy another chainsaw and recruit a friend to give me a 
hand. 
 
From those humble beginnings, I have now been able to 
retire from my job as a correction officer after 25 years of 
service and go full time with my tree service. We have had 
steady growth, doubled every year, with 2017 being no 
different. We’ve added equipment: seven chainsaws, 
climbing gear, PPE, a dump trailer, big-capacity chipper 
and chip truck, two other support trucks, a stump grinder 
and cargo trailer, as well as a skid-steer and a flat-deck 
trailer. 
 
Our growth is steady and sustainable to the point where we 
will need to hire a second crew for next season. I had four 
full-time employees this past season, and I will be hiring 
an additional three workers next season.  

 
Mark continues in his email. He says: 
 

To continue to grow and create revenue and employment 
opportunities throughout the winter months, we’ve added 
snow removal to our list of services, both residential and 
small commercial customers.  

 
Mr. Speaker, here’s a good point in his email here. He says, and 
I quote: 
 

We have been able to sustain and support this growth in 
large part because we have a business-friendly government 
that is keeping the small-business tax at a reasonable rate 
while allowing us to reinvest our income into our company 
to support that increased demand. I hope to be able to 
continue to grow my business by adding additional 
equipment and personnel as demand and revenue dictates 
and budget expenses and [in quotation marks] “taxes” 
allow. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s just one small business in Saskatoon that’s 
continuing to invest in their own businesses, hire new people, 
and continue to grow our economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan small businesses are under attack. 
Our federal government has criticized them as tax cheats and 
demonized them. Over the summer, while many family 
businesses were preparing for harvest and providing goods and 
services ancillary to harvest, the federal government introduced 
corporate income tax proposals that stated a large percentage of 
small businesses are merely a vehicle for wealthier Canadians 
to save on their taxes. In fact the NDP MP Erin Weir questioned 
the need for individuals like doctors and farmers to incorporate 
at all, ignoring the fact that the federal changes as proposed 
would have not only had serious consequences for the 
economy, but would make it virtually impossible for farms to 
be passed on from one generation to the next. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government supported the outcry from small 
businesses and wrote to the federal Finance minister outlining 
our opposition to the proposed changes. We respect 
hard-working business owners and we recognize and appreciate 
the importance of small business to the overall health of our 
economy. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this tax change will save some small businesses 
$10,000 a year. Where do you think they’re going to spend that 
money? If past behaviour is indicative of future behaviour, Mr. 
Speaker, I can tell you what they’ll do. They’ll use that money 
to invest in their companies, whether it’s in equipment, 
supplies, a renovation, or most likely, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 
people. It will help ensure the viability of that small business 
and allow further expansion. More importantly, Mr. Speaker, it 
will help ensure that small business lays down deeper roots and 
stays in our community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister said it best Tuesday night at 
committee. She said: 
 

We . . . [are] mindful of economic reports. We know that 
small business is the number one employer in our province. 
We hear from small businesses. And when they do better, 
they tend to (a) spend money within our economy, but (b), 
most importantly, they hire the most people. They’re the 
number one employer. 

 
I couldn’t agree more. Mr. Speaker, the NDP are constantly 
asking government for investment and more spending while 
continuing to call the government out for deficits. Mr. Speaker, 
we are making a small, targeted investment in our economy 
through small businesses. And that investment this year is 
almost $4 million. 
 
Now here’s what the NDP said on Twitter yesterday: “We will 
continue to fight for small businesses but we will not support 
the Sask Party’s attempt to help only the wealthy and well 
connected.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I can assure you that the majority of 
small-business owners that I know and the entrepreneurs that 
are starting new businesses in Saskatchewan would not be 
considered wealthy. And as far as being connected, I don’t 
know. I guess I see them when I go and buy a pop or a loaf of 
bread or fill up my car with gas. You know, I guess you could 
say they are connected. They’re connected to their community, 
to their neighbours, to the many charities and churches they 
support. So yes, Mr. Speaker, I guess they are connected, well 
connected, but in a good way, not in the way the opposition 
means it, Mr. Speaker, but they are absolutely well connected to 
their communities. 
 
So let’s look west and see what’s happening over there, Mr. 
Speaker. Under the Alberta NDP government, deficits have 
exploded. Businesses are leaving, and investment is flowing out 
of their borders. In the spring, the NDP unleashed a wrath of tax 
increases, including a significant hike to the corporate income 
tax rate. What that does, Mr. Speaker, is hit average families 
right in the pocketbook in the form of lower wages. 
 
Higher business taxes discourage investment. When businesses 
can invest in equipment, machines, or technology, workers 
produce more. That creates higher valued outputs, increasing 
our productivity. Higher productivity increases wages. Higher 
corporate taxes stifle productivity, therefore decreasing wages. 
 
A University of Calgary study recently looked into this further, 
Mr. Speaker. This study estimates that Alberta’s NDP’s 2 per 
cent corporate tax rate will reduce labour earnings by about 



November 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3219 

$830 per year per person. In fact the DBRS [Dominion Bond 
Rating Service Ltd.] has taken notice of Alberta once again, Mr. 
Speaker, and not in a good way. Alberta has just received 
another downgrade in its credit score. The Calgary Herald 
writes, “Rating agency DBRS announced Wednesday that it had 
downgraded Alberta’s rating from AA (high) to AA while 
maintaining a negative outlook for the province.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan NDP does not support our tax 
changes. They simply don’t get it. They don’t look at the 
literature and the studies, Mr. Speaker. They don’t look at the 
facts. They say they support small business, standing shoulder 
to shoulder to shoulder, but then they do something completely 
different. And yesterday, yes, they voted against changing the 
threshold from 500,000 to 600,000. 
 
Besides tax policy, Mr. Speaker, our government makes 
strategic investments in entrepreneurship and small business in 
a number of different areas. Let’s talk about Innovation Place at 
the University of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Innovation Place 
is a thriving hub of activity. It is one more place where the 
Government of Saskatchewan is investing in our small 
businesses. 
 
On its website it says: 
 

The Saskatoon campus began operations in 1980 and is 
located adjacent to the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
Innovation Place builds on the University’s strengths in 
agriculture, information technology, and environmental 
and life sciences, as well as the strengths of nearby federal 
and provincial agencies. 

 
[Mr. Speaker] Innovation Place is home to 110 tenants, 
employing over 2,500 people. The technology park 
includes 20 buildings with 1.3 million square feet of space. 
A Co-Working Space, offering shared workspace for the 
tech development community, and Co.Labs, 
Saskatchewan’s first technology incubator, are located in 
the Concourse building. 

 
Co.Labs is a partnership between Innovation Saskatchewan, 
Government of Saskatchewan, and Innovation Place. And, Mr. 
Speaker, Co.Labs is a fantastic opportunity for small tech 
companies to be nurtured and mentored as they start the 
entrepreneurship journey. Companies involved in this program 
have achieved fantastic success. Whether it’s 7shifts, TinyEye 
therapies, or Solido automation, entrepreneurs can now access 
space, mentorship, programming, and community. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on and on about the great 
work the small businesses do in our communities across our 
province, but I think I’ll wrap it up and leave it to some of my 
other colleagues by making the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly commends the Government of 
Saskatchewan for extending the small-business rate of 
2 per cent from the first $500,000 of income to the first 
$600,000 of income to encourage the growth of small 
business in our province. 

 
Thank you. 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 
University has moved: 
 

That this Assembly commends the Government of 
Saskatchewan for extending the small-business rate of 
2 per cent from the first $500,000 of income to the first 
$600,000 to encourage the growth of small businesses in 
our province. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
from Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
good day to be able to get up and talk about small business in 
Saskatchewan, and as an owner of a small business myself, I 
think it’s . . . I’m proud to be part of the entrepreneurial spirit of 
Saskatchewan. We know that small businesses are creating jobs 
right, left, and centre. We know, in fact the example that the 
member gave of a tree trimming company . . . I don’t know — 
the minister from Meadow Lake seems to want to get in on the 
debate. I hope he’s in in the next . . . He has a chance coming 
up, so hopefully he’ll get in on that. 
 
[11:15] 
 
But you know, companies that start maybe as a side business, 
the guy who worked full-time for the federal government and 
then he decided he wanted to try get a tree-cutting business 
going. And he did that, Mr. Speaker, on his own. He figured out 
how to get clients, how to grow his business, to the point where 
he now has a company that he’s proud of and is a fully 
participating taxpayer here in Saskatchewan. And I support that, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s a great thing and I’m proud of that 
individual. He’s like probably the 12 out of all the 13 
companies that are actually small here in Saskatchewan, by the 
definition that the federal government uses, by the definition 
used by every other province in Canada. 
 
So what we’re talking about today is a definition, Mr. Speaker, 
because when you look at . . . And these are the numbers that 
the minister gave in committee the other night. We know that 
there are 65,000 CCPCs [Canadian-controlled private 
corporation] here in Saskatchewan. We know that. My 
company is one of them. And they’re working hard to employ 
people, to raise revenues and, you know, watch the expenses. 
And make sure the staff are looked after, that they have health 
care plans and dental plans and all those things that small 
businesses do. But what’s really hurt them the most in the last 
little while is the budget that this government brought down in 
March of this year. 
 
And in fact, you know, when we look at concerns about small 
businesses . . . I’m going to pull out what the Canadian 
Federation of Independent Business had to say about their 
budget, because that’s where the pain is, Mr. Speaker; that’s 
where the pain is. That’s where an increase in PST [provincial 
sales tax] has devastated small businesses here in 
Saskatchewan. And you never heard that member say one word 
about the negative impacts that this budget has brought on small 
businesses in Saskatchewan. 
 
When we’re talking small, the definition that we’re using is the 
one the rest of Canada uses — 500,000 in taxable dollar 



3220 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2017 

income. So this is $500,000 after all the expenses are paid, after 
all the employees are paid, after all the PST is paid, and after 
you’re not getting a commission anymore for collecting the PST 
because that was taken away from small businesses in this 
budget as well. 
 
So what did the CFIB . . . I scanned their thing to see them 
begging this government to increase that limit that’s used as a 
definition across Canada to those 5,000 companies in 
Saskatchewan that actually are making $600,000 in taxable 
income. So what motivated this? This is what I asked the 
minister the other night. There was no analysis. There was no 
tax policy analysis. 
 
Tax is a complicated thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There are all 
sorts of factors that play in. The development of corporate tax 
over the last 40 years, the development of R & D taxes or 
exemptions for research and development, the development of a 
small-business income tax rate — all of those things are a very 
intricate dance. And if you pull out any tax policy book — I got 
one out of the library the other day — and I’ll tell you, within 
the first chapter there’s a lot of language in there that you have 
to read several times through — at least I do — because it’s 
very dense and complicated. And I did take a tax law class 
when I was in school and it was one of the most difficult classes 
because it’s so complicated. And we know that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So was the CFIB pounding down the door of this government to 
make this increase and change the definition of small business 
to expand it to what is clearly medium-size or large businesses, 
Mr. Speaker, by any measure in Canada? Were they asking for 
that? Well gee, I looked really hard and I can’t find it anywhere 
in their press release, Mr. Speaker. They talk about getting back 
to balance in three years, but now we hear from the 
compassionate Alanna Koch that maybe it’s going to be four 
years because of compassion. 
 
We heard about tax increases. That’s what the CFIB was 
concerned about, Mr. Speaker, was tax increases which this 
government brought down to the tune of a billion dollars. And 
here’s what they said. They’re describing them and then they go 
on, Marilyn Braun-Pollon went on to say: 
 

“With only seven per cent of entrepreneurs supporting tax 
hikes to balance the budget [these are these small 
businesses that they’re championing; only 7 per cent 
supported tax hikes to balance the budget], we are 
disappointed the government decided to increase taxes by 
$908 million. With small business optimism lagging and 
hiring plans at record lows, we worry this will jeopardize 
our overall competitiveness,” added Braun-Pollon. “As the 
province’s finances improve, we expect government to 
reduce the PST.” 

 
Now she talks about the general corporate income tax rate that 
was going to be reduced in half point increments to 1 per cent 
less. Here’s what they said about that: 
 

“We certainly welcome this tax relief and understand 
Saskatchewan will have among the lowest income tax 
rates in the country, when implemented. However, these 
changes will be more than muted by the massive tax hikes 
introduced in this budget,” noted Braun-Pollon [which I’m 

quoting there]. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, CFIB was asking for lower taxes. They were 
asking for . . . They applauded the corporate income tax. So 
what did this government do? They reversed it. They were 
going to lower corporate income taxes by 1 per cent. Oh, well 
we’re going to reverse that now; we’re going back on what we 
talked about in the budget. And when I asked Finance officials 
the other night about why all the miscalculations in the 
mid-year report, they basically said it’s because the government 
keeps changing their mind on implementation. And this is just 
another example of that. 
 
So to me this is a knee-jerk reaction coming from the politicians 
that run this government rather than a reasoned tax policy that 
comes from consulting with experts in the field. When I asked 
the minister whether she consulted with tax experts, she scoffed 
and said, basically, well I just talk to people. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we know what people say if you say, do you 
want lower taxes? Generally 90 per cent of them will say yes. 
So that’s not really sound tax analysis or sound tax policy. If 
you’re going to do something like this, change the definition of 
what small means. And the minister tried to say that these were 
small businesses that were marginal. Well I’m sorry, Mr. 
Speaker, I don’t know if anybody in this province would look at 
a company that’s making $600,000 after taxes and call them 
marginal. 
 
In fact most of the companies that are paying taxes . . . There’s 
only 38,000 of them that are actually paying taxes. There’s over 
20,000, 27,000 companies that aren’t making enough to even 
pay taxes, Mr. Speaker. So when she’s talking marginal, I don’t 
think she’s done her homework there, and I really question what 
people that she is talking to. Because if you’re telling me that a 
company, based on a federal definition that is used across every 
province and territory in this fine country of ours, is saying, 
okay, 500 is a good limit to define a small business, and this 
government says oh, heck no, we know a whole 5,000 other 
companies that need that extra $10,000 to do well . . . and 
they’re already making $600,000 after taxes. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we know that they’re consulting with . . . The 
former minister would consult with some of his colleagues who 
are maybe in that tax range. He said as much in committee last 
year. But really this is not something you can undertake lightly 
without understanding the impacts. And who is it benefiting? 
When I asked the minister in committee, well who are these 
companies? Can you tell me what kind of companies they are? 
She scoffed at me again, Mr. Speaker, and said why would we 
want to know that. 
 
Well who are these businesses, Mr. Speaker? Isn’t that 
something that a proper tax analysis should look at and say oh, 
they’re all in one industry maybe? Or maybe they’re spread out 
across different types of industry. Is it the mom-and-pops where 
the minister or the member opposite buys his pop and his loaf 
of bread from? Are those the ones that are making $600,000 
after expense money, taxable income? Is it them? We don’t 
know and the minister has absolutely no interest in finding out. 
That’s concerning. And that tells me that this is motivated not 
by altruism or a love for the small-business sector of 
Saskatchewan. 



November 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3221 

We know that the small-business sector is working hard, and 
they were hurt badly by the budget. And I expect that that is 
some of the emails that the member opposite is getting as well, 
is those emails, because we’re certainly getting them. And the 
concern from the small-business sector about the budget 
completely overwhelms anybody asking for an increase for 
after-tax income 500 to $600,000 just because this is a major 
issue in small-business land. That’s not true, Mr. Speaker. We 
know the issue is that they’re suffering because of this budget, 
because of the horrible changes this government made, the 
flip-flops they’ve made, and businesses are having a terrible 
time of it. 
 
So the NDP supports these businesses, these small businesses, 
and we certainly do not agree with the member opposite. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
[Applause] 
 
Mr. Nerlien: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for that very 
warm welcome. I am pleased to rise in the Assembly today to 
discuss and debate this important motion. We can’t begin to 
appreciate this motion without drawing a picture of small 
business in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, at this stage I won’t get 
into the numbers, but would like to give you a sense of what a 
small business might look like in your community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, small business is private enterprise at its core. The 
nature of small business has evolved from the earliest 
experiences of the trade of meat or grain or trade in tools, 
followed by trade in weaved items, spices, and spirits. Canada’s 
earliest business ventures were relationships around the trade in 
agriculture, forest, and fur products. 
 
Mr. Speaker, entrepreneurship takes many forms. It may be an 
individual entrepreneur, a partnership, or any number of forms 
of incorporation. In fact it might even include a variety of 
relationships between individuals, partnerships, and 
corporations. If we walk down any Saskatchewan street or drive 
down any grid road, we have no idea what form of business 
each establishment or yard site operates under. 
 
My father and mother were consummate entrepreneurs. Many 
members on this side of the House have vast business 
experience. I have the greatest respect for the people of our 
province who get up in the morning, risk everything they have 
every day to enjoy the challenges, work through the hardships, 
build the relationships, hire, train, and inspire those around 
them to be the best that they can be every single day. Unlike 
employees, these are the folks that invest their lives, usually all 
of their wealth, and their integrity in their venture. They most 
often do not have benefit plans, and rest assured, they do not 
have EDOs [earned days off] and leaves of absence. They work 
through illness and injury, and their days might be 14 to 16 
hours long and sometimes seven days a week. 
 
These should be our heroes. These men and women should be 
the ones with their pictures on our walls because they have built 
this province and country from day one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, taxation has been a tool used to fund government 

initiatives for the last 8,000 years. Evidence of taxation from 
6000 BC [before Christ] in Iraq . . . And later the Greek, 
Roman, and Egyptian governments used taxation to fund 
centralized programs. The tax tools ranged from food products 
and human services to the earliest forms of currency. 
 
Later the Stamp Act of 1765 was the fourth stamp Act to be 
passed by the Parliament of Great Britain and required all legal 
documents, permits, commercial contracts, newspapers, wills, 
pamphlets, and playing cards in the American colonies to carry 
a tax stamp. The exact date the Act was enacted was November 
1st, 1765. That particular Act, you will know, resulted in the 
colonial protests against British taxation in the United States, 
which led of course to the American Revolution. 
 
The independent American nation collected taxes on imports, 
whisky, and for a while even glass windows. States and 
localities collected poll taxes on voters and property taxes on 
land and commercial buildings. In 1861 Lincoln introduced the 
first true income tax, a 3 per cent tax on incomes over $800 and 
5 per cent on incomes over $10,000, to pay for the Civil War. 
 
Taxation of business has long been a part of the relationship 
between businesses and its responsibility to the infrastructure of 
the community in which it might operate. Taxation is simply a 
tool to facilitate the transfer of moneys from persons to serve 
the public good. I note for the record that corporations are 
defined as persons. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, taxation from its earliest iterations has 
been used to incentive or constrain behaviours by one or more 
elements of society. And rarely is a tax measure permanent in 
the sense that the measure may be identified but the rate will 
often change depending on economic or political circumstance. 
Our friends opposite would be most familiar with changing tax 
rates as they increased taxes 21 times in their last period of 
governance in the province. 
 
It goes without saying that we should all be vigilant when the 
subject of taxation comes up. This motion is an important one 
as any movement in taxation has significant consequence and, 
in this case, opportunity around it. Of course there is diversity 
of opinion on how tax policy is applied. 
 
[11:30] 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, specific to the motion before us, a tax relief 
measure aimed at Canadian-controlled private corporations, 
which are defined as a privately held company, private 
company, or a closed corporation. The business company is 
typically owned by relatively small numbers of shareholders or 
company members and it does not offer to trade its company 
stock in the public forum but rather the company stock is 
offered and owned and traded and exchanged privately. By 
definition it cannot be substantially owned by a non-resident or 
by a public company. 
 
Small business is defined by our federal government, and 
therefore the provincial government, as companies that have a 
tax rate on the first $500,000, which the province is now 
extrapolating to increase it to $600,000. It should be noted that 
of the 69,000 Saskatchewan corporations that file tax returns, 
65,000 are Canadian-controlled private corporations. Seventy 



3222 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2017 

per cent of those earn less than $100,000 taxable income and 
about 5,000 earn more than the half a million dollars with 
another 1,000 near the current threshold. That would leave 
about 5,000 that will immediately benefit by the increase in the 
threshold, of which currently about 3,000 earn over 600,000. 
 
My friends opposite often vilify these evil corporations. You 
will often hear their references to corporate friends, 
out-of-province corporations, or high-paid consultants, always 
in a negative context. They refer to wealthy and connected 
friends, and my colleague spoke eloquently on that subject. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just because someone is successful, just because 
someone is successful and supports our particular political 
stripe should not make them public enemy number one. The 
concept of growing a business from single entrepreneur to a 
partnership or CCPC is completely lost on members opposite. 
Perhaps some of the same private corporations grow to be 
public corporations wherein members opposite will be even 
more aghast that someone could actually succeed, and they will 
surely cast aspersion upon them. 
 
Saskatchewan consistently ranks near the top of the nation for 
business environment, according to the independent 
organizations like the CFIB. The innuendo inferred by the 
member opposite as so-called small business, the Leader of the 
Opposition — so-called small business — Mr. Speaker, what a 
slap in the face for all of those working people in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Nutana in committee the other 
night suggested that professionals don’t employ a lot of 
employees. I can’t begin to imagine where that perspective 
comes from as virtually every professional I know has a staff of 
one or more people. And perhaps this is another attempt by the 
members to cast aspersion on another valued segment of our 
tax-paying public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, philanthropy has long been a part of our business 
community, as throughout history businesses have always been 
a part of building a strong community around themselves. This 
is not seen as a cost but is generally a commitment to the 
well-being of the employees and their families as well as the 
very essence of the communities in which they operate. These 
small businesses are the ones that hire and train high school and 
university students. They employ tens of thousands across the 
province in trades and in retail and service sectors. They 
employ the pipefitters and welders, the bricklayers and 
plumbers. These are the businesses that build your home, feed 
your family, and maybe even cut your hair. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when they refer to “benefit the 
wealthiest,” I read into that that they are saying, don’t succeed. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s absolutely shocking, the actions and 
behaviour and comments by the members opposite. And I can 
assure you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I fully endorse and 
support the motion made by the member from Saskatoon 
University. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 

pleased to enter this debate today. It’s interesting to me. I come 
from a family of entrepreneurs as well. My parents were 
small-business people. My sister’s a small-business person. My 
brother is a small-business person, Mr. Speaker. I’ve many 
friends who operate a variety of different kinds of small 
businesses. I represent many folks in Saskatoon Riversdale who 
have small businesses, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And quite frankly, when you mentioned extending the 
small-business rate of 2 per cent from the first 500,000 of 
income to the first 600,000 of income to encourage the growth 
of small business in the province, frankly the majority of people 
with whom I’ve spoken to have pointed out that they’re 
nowhere in that range, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Just because you . . . The big thing in this whole debate, Mr. 
Speaker, is real and meaningful action to support small 
businesses, Mr. Speaker — real and meaningful action to 
support small businesses. I know that while the CFIB . . . My 
colleague from Saskatoon Nutana just pointed out how the 
CFIB felt about this government’s provincial budget, 
particularly around the PST increase, Mr. Speaker. Adding PST 
to, adding previously exempt items to no longer being exempt 
— construction services, Mr. Speaker, and insurance services 
— impacts small, small businesses . . . small businesses. I’m 
not sure why my s’s aren’t working here today, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
A constituent of mine who is a contractor, actually, I had a 
conversation with her and this is just a response that she gave to 
me around this particular change. She’s an electrician and a 
contractor, and she says: 
 

PST is a definite problem. Not only does it take money 
directly out of my pocket on dollars earned, but it affects 
the ability to win contracts in the first place, [adding that] 
6 per cent an invoice can be very prohibitive to some of 
my lower income or more frugal clients, can mean the 
client’s overall budget is smaller to accommodate the extra 
taxation, which means I earn less but I am taxed more. 
 
Some small companies are absorbing the cost of the PST 
so they are more competitive. I’m not interested in 
reducing the cost of my labour so the government can 
spend more with the same impunity they have thus far. I’m 
not sure what the new bill will do to help me. My guess is 
nothing, as I don’t operate in that income bracket. But 
removing the PST on my services would put money in my 
pocket for sure [Mr. Speaker]. 

 
I spoke with a café owner, a very successful café owner in 
Saskatoon who makes a decent living and provides a great 
service and a great product to people in Saskatoon. Her taxable 
income is less than 200,000, Mr. Speaker. This is someone who 
goes full out, Mr. Speaker. We support, fully, small businesses, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ve had the privilege in my life, most of my first . . . Well all of 
my first jobs actually were for small-business people. I worked 
in a laundromat. I worked at the Manhattan Ballroom in 
Saskatoon. I worked in a chocolate shop, the first Belgian 
chocolate shop and a cappuccino place in Saskatoon, Glad’s 
Chocolatier, many years ago. I saw exactly what small-business 



November 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3223 

people do. Well in my own family, as I said, my parents — the 
work, the number of hours that are put in, the commitments, the 
taking of risk to do what you love but to provide a service or a 
product to people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But this is about tax policy that has a positive impact on the 
largest number of people possible. So this change will impact 1 
of 13 businesses, Mr. Speaker. The other 12 get nothing from 
this, Mr. Speaker, and in fact I’d argue they get less than 
nothing because of the PST changes, Mr. Speaker. In fact they 
are being hurt by this government’s policies. I completely agree 
with my colleague from Saskatoon Nutana who talks about tax, 
this not being a reasoned decision. I believe in evidence-based 
policy and having as much information . . . And admittedly tax 
policy is not my area of expertise. And I actually don’t think it’s 
most of ours so that’s why we consult experts and do a 
thoughtful and meaningful process, Mr. Speaker. The minister 
in committee couldn’t answer many of my colleague’s 
questions on who this was going to impact, how many jobs it 
was going to create. 
 
And so coming from a government who less than a year ago 
implemented serious changes that had a negative impact on 
small businesses, this is coming from a government who just 
recently put in place negative changes, increasing PST and 
adding it to things like construction services, insurance, 
restaurant meals. We’re seeing the effect of that. Here in 
Saskatchewan there are 1,900 fewer people working in the food 
services industry, Mr. Speaker. Those are people, those are 
small businesses providing jobs and making a living and doing 
what they love, Mr. Speaker, and this government is hurting 
them. 
 
When it comes to insurance premiums, PST on insurance 
premiums, you talk to small businesses who want to do 
something for their employees and be the best possible 
employers. Adding 6 per cent on insurance premiums has been 
very impactful. You think about, so who’s going to pay that 6 
per cent? Does it go on the back of the employee? Does it go on 
the back of the employer? And if they choose . . . So that extra 
6 per cent means that someone has to suck that up in either their 
income or their profit or they provide fewer health services. 
And quite frankly as the Health critic, I know that we already 
do . . . This will have an impact on people receiving things like 
dental services and have a ripple-down effect, Mr. Speaker, or a 
trickle-down effect in not a positive way. 
 
So if this government was really serious about supporting small 
businesses, they would be putting money back into the pockets 
of the most number of people. I haven’t even touched on action, 
Mr. Speaker. The reality is when people have money to spend, 
they spend it in small businesses. I know when people in my 
constituency have money, they spend it. And those people who 
are on the margins who aren’t high-income earners, who are 
lower or medium-income earners, spend all their money in our 
province, Mr. Speaker. They’re not going farther afield. They’re 
spending every dollar they have here in their respective 
communities and in their province. 
 
So charging PST on things like children’s clothing, Mr. 
Speaker, is an issue. You know the PST on insurance, I’ve had 
lots of people come into my office, seniors actually, who want 
to purchase health insurance to ensure that they have that 

ambulance ride covered or partially covered, or to make sure 
that they have the necessary therapies. And that takes money 
out of their pockets, that 6 per cent. That 6 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker, when you’re on a fixed income as a senior, has a huge 
impact on your disposable income, and that means you can’t 
support those small businesses that you’d like to. 
 
It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that members opposite, one of the 
members who is running for leadership actually, thinks that this 
should be a more thoughtful process actually. I’m just taking a 
quote from the minister of . . . He’s no longer the minister. My 
apologies, the member from Willowgrove, the member from 
Willowgrove. I should know my colleagues’ constituencies, but 
when we’ve referred to them as ministers sometimes we forget 
that. Mr. Speaker, he has said in his own suggestion, if he 
becomes the premier he will have a tax review panel. He says: 
 

My constituents have told me, and more recently 
throughout my leadership campaign, the people of 
Saskatchewan have voiced their concerns about these 
recent changes. We must undertake a more thorough 
review of some of the recent sales tax policy changes. 
Having listened to many presentations, I am convinced that 
the current approach may not raise the revenues expected 
within the budget and that there are more effective 
alternatives to be considered. 
 

Wise words, Mr. Speaker. A more considered approach to tax 
policy, to think about how we put money in people’s pockets so 
they can spend in small businesses and to provide actual relief 
for the 12 other small-business people out of the 13 who aren’t 
benefiting from this change, Mr. Speaker, this should be 
something that the government shouldn’t have written down on 
the back of a napkin and decided that this is the way to go, Mr. 
Speaker. This should have involved research, and perhaps 
taking this member who is running for leadership, his approach, 
that perhaps this needs a broader look to think about how we 
better support small businesses here in Saskatchewan. 
 
But make no mistake, people on this side of the House know 
full well the importance of small business in the province. They 
are the generators of income or jobs in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. The PST, Mr. Speaker, is a huge problem. This 
government should have taken the time and instead of 
implementing a change that will support one business out of 
every 13, they should have thought about the other 12, Mr. 
Speaker. And with that, I will not be supporting this motion. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 
Jaw North. 
 
[11:45] 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
can’t understand why that party on that side is so against 
business. Mr. Speaker, this is outrageous. The thing about 
business is it’s the spine of our economy; it’s the spine of our 
society. And yet that party votes against it and is against 
business. They think that business is bad. Business is good. 
They consider that if you’re in business, you’re ripping off the 
people. If you’re in business, you’re treating your employees 
wrong. If you’re in business, you’re making lots of money. 
That’s not true. Business is what creates economies in our 



3224 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2017 

province, and we need business. Business is good. 
 
Small business accounts for 98 per cent of business in 
Saskatchewan and drives a large part of our province’s 
economic activity. Our government recognizes and appreciates 
the huge contribution that small-business owners make to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The NDP voted against these measures and against 
small-business owners. In fact the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana claims that small businesses do not earn $600,000 a 
year in taxable income. Well, Mr. Speaker, the CFIB, the voice 
of small business, have asked our government to increase the 
small-business threshold, and they’ve asked this since 2008. So, 
Mr. Speaker, this is something that they’ve recommended, 
they’ve asked for, and we are in the process of doing. 
 
In reality it’s an easy equation, Mr. Speaker: you create a 
competitive tax system that will support small business and it 
will attract business. Business is good. Business attracts 
investment. By starting a business, you’re either renting a 
property or you’re building a property, so you’re creating 
activity. You’re hiring people. Those people are building 
homes, homes with fences and gardens and all the extras that 
comply to additional businesses. In fact the member from 
Saskatoon University kind of explained how one business will 
lead to another and to another and to another. 
 
So when you get people starting a business, they hire people. 
Those people purchase vehicles. They purchase food and 
clothing. They start families. They have kids in school and into 
extracurricular activities like sports and hockey and soccer and 
baseball. They’ll develop cultural with music lessons and 
Scouts and Guides. These all create an economy and they create 
communities. Then they start doing volunteers for their 
communities, organizing on boards and coaching teams 
voluntarily, leaders in gymnastics and Guides. They’re building 
a community, and it’s all because there’s a business sector there 
that is creating all this. There’s rinks built to accommodate the 
community. There’s churches. There’s community clubs like 
Kinsmen and Rotary and Lions. There’s sports teams 
developed. It’s all part of a community because you’ve got an 
active business sector. All this because someone had invested in 
an idea to create a business in a community. 
 
We support businesses. Businesses create a tax base. Businesses 
pay property tax, business tax, corporate taxes. They hire 
employees, and those employees have personal income tax and 
consumption taxes, creating a strong base economy. And with 
that strong base economy, you build communities to invest in 
infrastructure thereby employing more people. You build 
schools, roads and sidewalks, and hospitals and care homes, and 
daycares. Even garbage pickup and recycling is all part of a 
community built and employing people because business is 
supporting the community. Mr. Speaker, business is good. 
 
Back in ’08 and ’09, we recognized the need, and we lowered 
the property taxes. That helped. We’re standing up against the 
carbon tax. What a useless piece of legislation that is, is the 
carbon tax. It does nothing to reduce carbon. It just takes money 
from people. If it was going into investment and to research and 
development, I could see it. But it’s none of that. It’s just a 
carbon tax, a tax on the people. We’ve voiced our opposition to 

the unfair federal tax charged against businesses. And we’ve 
created an attractive business climate. When you create an 
attractive business climate, business will follow. It’ll grow and 
flourish, and it’ll continue to build economies. Mr. Speaker, 
business is good. 
 
Mr. Speaker, tonight I’ll be attending the Saskatchewan 
Polytechnic business and industrial banquet in Moose Jaw. 
There’s four of them in the province and the Moose Jaw one is 
generally the biggest one of the four centres. And Saskatchewan 
Polytechnic is tuned into the business sector to develop 
workforce to support Saskatchewan businesses. There are over 
100 programs offered through Sask Polytechnic in support of 
business, courses like construction, electrical, automotive, 
business, finances, just to name a few. Sask Polytech supports 
business and we support Sask Polytechnic. 
 
Since 2007 our government has committed to create and 
maintain a favourable business climate. One of the building 
blocks of any community is a thriving business sector. Our 
competitive tax structure offers credits for research and 
development. We’ve created a red tape committee, a regulatory 
modernization and accountability Act to reduce red tape to 
remove barriers to growth. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, last month we celebrated Small Business 
Week. It was a time to highlight how small business has a rather 
big impact on our province. Those businesses with fewer than 
50 employees account for almost 99 per cent of all the business 
in the province. Last year small business contributed nearly 
one-third of the province’s GDP, employed almost one-third of 
the province’s workers, and paid over $6.2 billion in wages and 
salaries. 
 
Small businesses are active in almost every sector of our 
economy. They grow our economy. They create business. They 
encourage investment. They are a vital part of the community 
with employment, with sponsorship, with volunteers, thereby 
enhancing the overall quality of life that we all enjoy. You 
might say, in Saskatchewan, small business really is big 
business. It’s the heart of Saskatchewan’s economy is small 
business. 
 
We need small business, and we support small business. That’s 
what the extending of the 2 per cent rate from 500,000 to 
600,000 will do. It will attract and it will grow our business 
economy. You know, Mr. Speaker, we appreciate those 
businesses that have developed well and produce Saskatchewan 
products and promote our productivity and export throughout 
the world. We further appreciate their business entrepreneurial 
spirit that has helped build our province. 
 
Saskatchewan people are resourceful and innovative. We 
appreciate the business community — businesses like Morris 
Industries, like Degelman, like Bourgault, Doepker, and Brandt, 
and Honey Bee, Frontier. These aren’t going to be part of that 
group that will receive the increase in the rate. But they are all 
businesses that started as small businesses, and they rely on 
other small businesses to serve them. So, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
why the small business is so important. 
 
When I think of all the things that the business has done for this 
province in attracting and creating and building and evolving 



November 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3225 

. . . Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot to be said, and I’m obviously 
going to be running out of time. But when I think of 
organizations like STEP that has helped to increase the target to 
the exports and the management of small businesses, when I 
think of even the Global Transportation Hub, which is 
something I will defend very harshly because I think it’s 
something that’s very central to the economic development of 
our province and the growth of the province as we go further. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s lots more that I can say and a lot to this, 
but I just want to reiterate how good it is to have a province that 
recognizes the value of business and the value of small 
business. And I support the motion that was made by my 
colleague from Saskatoon University. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m really 
proud today to participate in this debate with regards to Bill 84. 
And, Mr. Speaker, of course we all support small businesses. 
Small businesses create about 80 per cent of all of our new jobs 
across our province and they grow our economy. And we want 
to commit and support to all small businesses in Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when I’ve been going to communities and 
talking to municipal leaders across this province, they’ve told 
me about how businesses are struggling in their communities 
and they’re closing their doors because of the deceitful cuts that 
this government made in their previous budget. And so, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we need to think about all these businesses 
that are struggling, not just a few businesses in this province, 
and we’ve got to think about people who are contributing to our 
whole province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve got to take into account the increase 
in the PST and how that had a big impact on businesses. Taking 
the exemption off has affected many, many businesses, 
increasing that 1 per cent and the insurance. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that insurance PST has been huge and lots of 
companies have talked to me about how that can make or break 
their business. 
 
So it really concerns me when we have a government here that 
talks about how they’re not going to help the cattle farmers that 
were impacted by the fires. The municipalities are struggling 
with the cuts-in-lieu, and we see that the municipalities are 
going to be needing to increase their taxes as well. 
 
So we look at these small businesses. The PST has increased. 
The exemption has been taken off. Their businesses have gone 
down because families are struggling with these increases as 
well and the cost that it is for them to participate going to these 
businesses. And then the educational taxes have also gone up 
with this. And there’s only one taxpayer, you know, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and we’ve got to keep that in mind as well. So when 
families are making less and therefore spending less, that 
impacts small businesses and we’ve got to keep that in mind 
when we’re making decisions here. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what really kind of concerns me is 
that there really was very little information provided by the 

minister when she was asked questions with regards to the 
consultation of stakeholders with regards to this bill. She didn’t 
have a real clear example of who she consulted with. She said, 
“people.” Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that doesn’t give us a 
good example of which stakeholders were consulted and no 
information on exactly how many jobs this is going to create, if 
any. Will this create jobs? We know our unemployment rate is 
extreme in this province and I know in Prince Albert and in the 
North especially. And so how much is this going to contribute 
to increasing employment? And how will this address the high 
unemployment rates? And who exactly has been asking for 
this? We’ve gotten no answers with regards to this, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
But I know that all the businesses in this province have been 
asking for support from this government and the municipal 
governments have been asking for support from this 
government because they’ve been impacted by millions of 
dollars taken from their budgets. So we see that in Saskatoon, 
their taxes are going to be going up almost 5 per cent. Regina, 
taxes are going up. Prince Albert, taxes are going up. That’s all 
because of this government and their mismanagement with 
regards to the budget that they laid down and the millions of 
dollars they took away from our municipalities. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we also were wondering how many 
caucus members will be benefiting from this, the passing of this 
bill. So we know this spring while the Finance minister was 
talking about tax changes he said, and I’ll quote. I think this is 
important that we put this in Hansard because . . . I’ll quote 
this: 
 

You could have a small business making $600,000 in 
taxable income, and there are a lot of them in this 
province. I dare say I’ve got some colleagues in my 
caucus, caucus colleagues that run some of these 
businesses. 

 
So how many? How many of those people are benefiting, and is 
that why they’re focusing on these businesses? We need to 
represent all of Saskatchewan, not just our own personal 
interests. And sometimes I get concerned about if personal 
interests are being served here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s an odd 
thing for the Finance minister to say that using his caucus 
colleagues as those business owners that could potentially 
benefit from these changes. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that to me 
is very concerning. 
 
[12:00] 
 
And I find it also very interesting that this motion was brought 
forward by the member of Saskatoon University, a well-known, 
key supporter for the leadership candidate, the member for 
Saskatoon Willowgrove. And we know that that leadership 
candidate has indicated that he’s not very happy with the tax 
increases that this government has been implementing, and he’s 
been very vocal with that as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And so he indicated that he wants to reopen the provincial sales 
tax debate if he’s chosen as the next leader of the party. But not 
only just the provincial sales tax he wants to look into, he plans 
to appoint a tax review panel on his very first day as leader. So 
the panel would be given a 60-day window to consult with 



3226 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2017 

stakeholders and the public. And he quotes: 
 

“(The panel) will have the time to look at what other 
provinces are doing, coordinate where we can, and have a 
very in depth discussion with financial planners, with life 
insurance sales people.” 

 
Well I tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s really refreshing to 
hear that someone wants to talk with stakeholders when they’re 
talking about making changes within government. 
 
So the panel would be made up of tax-policy experts. And so 
that sounds like a little bit more definition than saying just 
“people” like our Minister of Finance says. It says that the 
member for Saskatoon Willowgrove hopes to review all aspects 
of taxation policy and rates in Saskatchewan. I’ll repeat that just 
in case nobody heard, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but the member for 
Saskatoon Willowgrove, the leadership candidate, hopes to 
review all aspects of taxation policy and rates in Saskatchewan. 
 
So not only this side of the House were concerned about how 
decisions are being made. It sounds like there are other 
members here as well that are a little bit concerned about how 
these decisions are being made. 
 
And so with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s really 
important to say again that we all are concerned about small 
businesses in our province, all of them. And we want to help all 
of them that are being hurt by the Sask Party. 
 
But we’ve got to take in mind the impact that the PST hikes 
have had on small businesses. And it hasn’t only impacted the 
most richest businesses; it’s impacted all businesses and we 
need to really take that into account.  
 
So I think that government shouldn’t just be playing politics 
with regards to making these decisions. Decisions should be 
made on the best interests of all businesses in this province and 
they should be made by doing fact-based, evidence-based 
decision making, asking stakeholders within the community 
what they believe should be happening and what would help 
them with regards to their business, and not just consulting with 
your caucus colleagues and said, what’s best for your business. 
You’ve got to talk to everybody in Saskatchewan and ask what 
will help with their businesses — all small businesses and not 
just a few within this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So with that, I cannot support this motion, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The time for debate has expired. 
Questions. I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In 
terms of the debate that’s taking place here today, it of course 
follows on a budget that was disastrous for families and small 
businesses that now these members are proclaiming an interest 
in. And at the time, CFIB of course had a lot of very damning 
things to say about the budget, Mr. Speaker. And it would 
appear that, you know, they made their play yesterday which 
was related to the motion here today, so you’d think it would be 
interesting to hear what the CFIB has to say. 
 
And you know, there’s a release that comes just this very 

morning, Mr. Speaker, where it’s entitled, from the CFIB of 
course, where it’s entitled “Sask small business optimism 
remains low in November; almost 1 in 4 businesses planning 
layoffs.” This comes in the wake of what these members have 
done, Mr. Speaker. To the member from Saskatoon University: 
how does it make any sense? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I think there was a question there, so 
I’ll recognize the member from Saskatoon University. 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
member opposite for the question. Definitely it was a very 
tough budget this March, Mr. Speaker. We had to make a 
number of tough decisions that affected a lot of people, affected 
a lot of business, affected a lot of families, affected a lot of 
people all over the province.  
 
Mr. Speaker, this initiative, this policy that we made yesterday, 
introduced yesterday and voted on yesterday, Mr. Speaker . . . 
The NDP, from the March budget till today, till yesterday and 
today, have been calling on us for tax relief, calling on us to not 
cut the corporate rate of income tax from 12 to 11 per cent. 
Over and over and over we heard that. Mr. Speaker, we are 
keeping that income tax rate, the corporate tax rate, at 12 per 
cent and we’re incenting business to grow, invest in our 
economy, and hire more people. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In 2014 current 
federal NDP MP Erin Weir wrote in an article in which he 
slandered small business and went as far to call them, and I 
quote, I quote, “the cult of small business.” More recently, he 
referred to small business as tax havens and small business 
owners as tax evaders. It seems that the federal NDP party does 
not really appreciate small business. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, my question is for the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. How can you support a Saskatchewan 
NDP MP who attacks our province’s small business? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask that former 
Finance minister how he was able to support a PST increase, 
Mr. Speaker? Those folks over there are bickering about it not 
being . . . [inaudible] . . . Mr. Speaker, I would like to know 
how they think over there that adding PST to construction 
services, to restaurant meals, support small businesses? That’s 
the real issue at hand right now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 
Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I didn’t 
get much of an answer from the member from Saskatoon 
University, so I’ll try it again, Mr. Speaker. In terms of the PST 
increase and expansion that went on in the last budget and in 
terms of expanding it to things like insurance, that’s something 
that we hear about from small businesses having a negative 
impact on their bottom line, not the measure that was 



November 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3227 

introduced yesterday. So it makes sense that the CFIB today 
comes out and makes no reference to the measure taken by this 
government because the real problem is for the small businesses 
that are out on the margins right now, Mr. Speaker, due in part 
to the cost increases passed on along to them by that 
government. 
 
So to the member from Saskatoon University: why don’t they 
try to fix the insurance increase on the expansion of PST to 
insurance instead of something else? Why don’t they do what 
they said they were going to do in their leadership campaign? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon University. 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll say it again. We 
had a tough budget in March. We had some tough decisions to 
make. But I think it’s important also to remember, Mr. Speaker, 
we still, even with the increase, still have the lowest PST rate of 
any province with a provincial sales tax. Even with the PST 
increase, every Saskatchewan resident will be paying 
significant less in income tax and PST combined than they did 
in 2007 under the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s rich. The NDP is yelling and making remarks 
about a 1 per cent increase in the PST that went up to 6 per 
cent. I’ll tell you what really hurt, Mr. Speaker. I’ll tell you 
what really hurt, Mr. Speaker — not a 1 per cent increase, but 
the 9 per cent PST that we had under the NDP. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Coalition for 
Tax Fairness, a group that directly attacks private corporations 
and lobbies the federal government to raise their taxes, Mr. 
Speaker, guess who is a signed-on supporter? The 
Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, whose president is Larry 
Hubich, who also sits on the NDP executive. Other signators 
include the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives, which the 
NDP quote from regularly, and the Broadbent Institute, which is 
an NDP proxy organization that members opposite belong to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. How can you get elected to this Chamber, refuse to 
actually say what you believe, then let your proxies do the dirty 
work? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Sorry, Mr. Speaker, I didn’t hear you 
acknowledge me, so I . . . Thank you. There’s too . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Wow. There’s a lot of anger over there right 
now, Mr. Speaker. I’m not sure what’s going on. 
 
What I say to the member from Carrot River Valley is this. On 
the day after they introduced this bill or passed a bill that was 
apparently lauded by the CFIB, what does the CFIB news 
release say? What is the headline? “Sask small business 
optimism remains low in November; almost 1 in 4 businesses 
planning layoffs.” 
 

So that is the CFIB’s response to a bill that they told us was 
begged for by the CFIB since 2008, Mr. Speaker? That shows 
how completely out of touch they are. And the CFIB is 
concerned about the PST hikes. They’re concerned about the 
health insurance that these small businesses are trying to 
provide to their own employees. That’s what they’re concerned 
about. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I once again recognize the Opposition 
House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the member 
from Saskatoon University: does he want to take this 
opportunity to apologize on behalf of that government for the 
budget that they passed in the spring which has had such a 
disastrous impact on our economy? And you know, up and to 
the point where CFIB, in the wake of this big announcement 
that they heralded yesterday, Mr. Speaker, in the wake of that 
announcement, they released the November numbers where one 
in four small businesses is planning on layoffs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Does the member from Saskatoon University want to take this 
opportunity to apologize for that budget and to apologize to 
those workers that are going to get laid off? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Before I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon University, it’s getting a little . . . The volume is 
getting a little up there, so perhaps the members could dial it 
back on both sides of the House. I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon University. 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I’ll 
tell you one thing. We had tough decisions to make in March 
and we made them. We’ve got a plan to get back to balance 
after three years and we’re going to continue down that path. 
 
I find it really, really ironic that the member would ask that 
question. I’ll tell you what was devastating, Mr. Speaker: 16 
years of NDP rule where they raised taxes 21 times, 21 times in 
16 years; a 9 per cent sales tax, Mr. Speaker; businesses leaving 
our province, one after the other after the other; our young 
people leaving the province over and over and over. The 
number one gift for high school graduates, Mr. Speaker — 
luggage. People were leaving, businesses were leaving, money 
was leaving. That was devastating. They should be the ones 
apologizing. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Mr. Speaker, in committee on Tuesday the 
member from Nutana said, “I’m thinking of professional 
corporations like lawyers or physicians or surgeons who do not 
typically have a lot of employees.” Since she is endorsing the 
member from Meewasin, maybe she should ask . . . The 
medical corporation employs a lot of people. Maybe she should 
ask all the members of CUPE Local 974 of Saskatoon 
Community Clinic if the member from Meewasin had a lot of 
employees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the member from P.A. [Prince 
Albert] Northcote: do you think it’s fair that the member from 
Nutana would pick and choose which small business should get 



3228 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2017 

a threshold increase based solely on her personal assessment of 
businesses? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The time has expired for the 
75-minute debate. We will move on to private members’ public 
bills. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 605 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Ms. Sarauer that Bill No. 605 — The Saskatchewan 
Employment (Support for Survivors of Domestic Violence) 
Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s a pleasure to rise today on this very important bill that’s 
before us. It’s a shameful situation we find ourselves here in 
Saskatchewan with having one of the worst records in Canada 
in terms of domestic violence. And I know both sides of the 
House are deeply committed to ending this and that we can do 
more. And we all are committed to that. 
 
[12:15] 
 
And of course this Bill No. 605, An Act to Provide Support to 
Survivors of Domestic Violence is one tool in a tool box that I 
think we need to get right to work on and end this scourge that 
we have that plagues our province in such high numbers and 
really is one that we hate to see happen. And we hate to see the 
causes and we need to do so much more in this. 
 
So I’m going to speak for a few minutes on this topic this 
morning and urge members to take a look at Bill No. 605, An 
Act to Provide Support to Survivors of Domestic Violence. And 
I want to thank our leader for bringing this forward. This is the 
third time she has done that and we hope this time that we can 
get to a vote and actually pass this. 
 
And as I said it can be one of the many pieces of supports that 
we can offer predominately women, but anyone who is 
suffering from intimate partner violence. This is one that we 
feel is, in our day and age, that we have a situation that arises 
where there is such a thing as domestic violence. We need to 
rise to our best and do what we can and take a look across 
Canada to take a look at what are the best practices. What are 
governments and legislatures finding to be those best practices 
and what can we do to make sure this can come about? 
 
And there has been an awful lot of work done in this area. And I 
want to congratulate PATHS [Provincial Association of 
Transition Houses and Services of Saskatchewan], the 
provincial association for transition housing, for their leadership 
in this area. And they have really been active in this area. 
 

I also want to thank the SFL, Saskatchewan Federation of 
Labour — Lori Johb particularly for her leadership, but there 
are many within their organization who have stepped up. 
 
And the Canadian Labour Congress, particularly because this is 
something that’s been seen across Canada as a priority item for 
us to tackle. Because we know that interestingly and 
importantly that people who are caught in the situation of 
domestic violence often see the workplace as a one safe place 
where they can be and one place where they can get some 
support from their co-workers. 
 
But we need to go beyond that because we know that people 
who are experiencing this and suffering from domestic violence 
need that support of that job. They need that income to make 
sure that if they are fleeing a domestic violence situation that 
we have done some work here. And we were glad to see the 
government take up part of the bill that the leader had 
sponsored in terms of issues around rental lease agreements and 
that type of thing. But we need to go even further and we need 
to see some more action in that area. 
 
I want to particularly thank . . . And how I got involved, and I 
appreciate the leader talking about how this, is a bit of a hybrid 
between Labour and Justice. Because how I got involved was 
with SEIU-West [Service Employees International 
Union-West], the young workers. And it’s great to see young 
people stepping up and saying these are the issues that our 
colleagues, our friends are experiencing in the workplace. What 
can we do about this? And it was a young woman who brought 
this forward to me, and that’s how I brought it forward to the 
leader who was actually doing a lot of work on this already. 
 
And so it just seemed to be a natural that we fit together and 
say, hey listen, can we make this work? And the SFL and the 
CLC [Canadian Labour Congress] really stepped up to want to 
join the movement that’s happening right across the province 
that’s demanding action, that’s demanding a response from us, 
the legislators in this province. And so this is very important for 
us to do. And so this is very, very important. 
 
But it’s not only PATHS and the community groups. And I 
want to talk about the YWCA [Young Women’s Christian 
Association] here in Regina, also in Saskatoon. Many 
community groups and the universities who’ve studied, or are 
studying this issue, but also business communities, business 
groups are stepping up. 
 
We had a very, very good meeting with the chamber of 
commerce who’ve really come to understand the importance of 
this. And while we continue to have conversations with them 
about this particular issue, they have talked about the 
importance of education and training and they in fact have 
released a statement to that effect. And if we have time we’ll 
get to that, Mr. Speaker. But I know there is so much research 
in this area that’s so critical that helps us understand what we 
can do. 
 
But what I wanted to do is just take a moment to reflect on Bill 
No. 605, An Act to Provide Support to Survivors of Domestic 
Violence. The preamble, and I think it’s important for people 
who are watching or who are tuning in today and for us all to 
reflect on this: “. . . Saskatchewan has the highest rate of 



November 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3229 

domestic violence by intimate partners amongst all Canadian 
provinces.” And that is something that none of us here want to 
see continue. We must do something about that issue. And we 
know that “. . . citizens of Saskatchewan are concerned at the 
lack of support for survivors of domestic violence.” 
 
It seems common sense that there are supports out there, but 
how do we do that? And of course no one organization can 
solve the problem. It’s upon all of us, and whether it’s in our 
business community, our church groups, our community 
groups, the legislature, we need to have a whole tool kit of tools 
that say, here are things that can help you flee that domestic 
situation, that you will get support. You will get housing. You 
will be able to maintain your job and actually get support in that 
situation. And we also know that Ontario, Manitoba, and 
Alberta, and other provinces have enacted progressive and 
supportive legislation that supports survivors that are escaping 
circumstances of domestic violence. 
 
So the bill talks about the definitions of domestic violence, and 
I think we’re pretty aware of that, and the impact of PTSD 
[post-traumatic stress disorder] and those types of things. And 
the bill really calls for leave of up to 10 days which the 
employee may choose to take intermittently or one continuous 
period, and a leave of up to 17 weeks in one continuous period. 
Now what we want to . . . And it talks about purposes of which 
the domestic violence may be taken leave for. And it’s of 
course medical attention which is a real priority; obtaining 
services from victim service organizations to obtain 
psychological or other professional counselling; or to relocate 
temporarily or permanently — and in terms of housing that’s 
hugely important — and to seek legal or law enforcement 
assistance, including preparing for participating in any civil or 
criminal legal proceedings that are related to or resulting from 
domestic violence. 
 
Now the 10 days, it’s really important we understand that five 
of those days are paid leave. With those paid leave, that can be 
taken from sick leave if the place of employment provides paid 
sick leave. And so we think this is a reasonable, reasonable, 
request. We think this shouldn’t be too onerous. We understand 
that, from what we hear from the Canadian Labour Congress, 
that people who are in this situation usually take one or two 
days. It’s not that they take the whole five days. It’s not a 
situation where people want to be away. In fact they want to be 
at work. They want to be with their colleagues. They want life 
to continue as much as they can in normalcy. But if they need to 
be away, they certainly have that support. 
 
We understand this can be difficult for places that don’t provide 
sick leave. And of course that’s another issue, workplaces that 
don’t provide any sick leave. But we think that this is one that 
we think is critically, critically important for the person but also 
for the family. I mean many times children are involved in this 
sort of situation and it makes it very, very difficult. This may be 
something that’d be related to schools and that type of situation. 
So we want to make sure that if we can keep the situation as 
whole as possible and ensure that people, when they are leaving 
domestic violence, a situation of domestic violence, that they 
have that support. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I do want to say that there has been some 
outstanding research done by PATHS, right from a simple 

pictograph to a full report. And as well I was very pleased to 
say that I saw this Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce policy 
statement on interpersonal violence in the workplace and the 
employer’s role. I was so happy to see them step up. And they 
released this just a few weeks ago as well, talking about it’s a 
very serious issue in Saskatchewan, that all citizens in the 
province have a shared responsibility to address, and while one 
incident of interpersonal violence in the workplace is too many, 
the fact that Saskatchewan has the highest rates of 
police-reported domestic violence for both males and females in 
Canada is totally unacceptable and action needs to be taken. 
And they also acknowledge that such deep-rooted societal 
problems require immediate action from all parties — 
governments, employers and employees. So this is very 
important. And as I said, they would like to see an education 
role. That’s very important. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would urge all members, I would urge all 
members to become familiar with the chamber of commerce 
report, become familiar with the work of PATHS, and I would 
say when we get a chance to vote on this, let’s support Bill 605. 
Let’s make sure we send a strong message to the people of 
Saskatchewan that we’re there for the people who are stuck in 
this situation. We think this is all, all important. The leader 
called this as one part of the puzzle, a small part of the puzzle, 
but I think it’s critical that we pay attention to that. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would adjourn Bill No. 605, An Act 
to Provide Support for Survivors of Domestic Violence. Thank 
you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 605, The 
Saskatchewan Employment (Support for Survivors of Domestic 
Violence) Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader and look forward to what he has to say. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You could be 
surprised. I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that the House adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This House stands adjourned until 
Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:27.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3207 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3207 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3207 
  Marit ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3207 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3207 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3208 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3208 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3208 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3208 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3208 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3208 
  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3209 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3209 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3209 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3209 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3209 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3209 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 World AIDS Day 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3210 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3210 
 Cumberland House Wins Northern Football Championship 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3210 
 Support for Research Internships 
  Steele ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3210 
 Global Entrepreneurship Week 
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3211 
 Manufacturing Week 
  Buckingham ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3211 
 Opposition Policy on Taxation 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3211 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 State of Provincial Finances 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3212 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3212 
 Global Transportation Hub and Details of Land Transactions 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3213 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3213 
 Funding for Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3214 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3214 
 Support for Social Services 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3214 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3214 
 Rate of HIV Infections 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3215 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3215 
 Support for Worker Safety 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3215 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3215 
 Charges Under Environmental Laws 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3216 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3216 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 114 — The Vehicles for Hire Act 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3216 
 Bill No. 607 — The All Families are Equal Act 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3216 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3217 



 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Government Supports for Small Businesses 
  Olauson .......................................................................................................................................................................... 3217, 3226 
  Sproule ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3219, 3227 
  Nerlien ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3221 
  Chartier ......................................................................................................................................................................... 3222, 3226 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3223 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3225 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3226 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3226 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3227 
  Dennis ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3227 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 605 — The Saskatchewan Employment (Support for Survivors of Domestic Violence) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3228 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

 
Hon. Steven Bonk 

Minister of the Economy 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 
Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Larry Doke 
Minister of Government Relations  

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 
Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Nancy Heppner 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Gene Makowsky 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  
and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 


	Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I would like to introduce a few of my friends sitting in your gallery, Carter Stewart, Blair Stewart, and Shahid Pervaiz. Shahid Pervaiz is one of my best friends, known him very many, many years. And, Mr. Speaker, B...
	SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE
	SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE

