






















































Hansard: April 27, 2017


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 79A  THURSDAY, APRIL 27, 2017, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 

 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 

Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 

 

 

 
 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 

Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 

Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 

Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 

Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 

Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 

Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 

Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 

Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 

Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 

Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 

Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 

Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 

D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 

Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 

Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 

Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 

Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 

Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 

Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 

Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 

Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 

Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 

Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 

Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 

Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 

Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 

Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 

Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 

Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 

Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 

McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 

Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 

Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 

Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 

Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 

Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 

Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 

Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 

Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 

Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 

Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 

Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 

Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 

Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 

Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 

Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 

Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 

Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 

Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 

Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 

Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 

Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 

Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 

Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 

Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 

Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 

Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 

 

 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 11 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2321 
 April 27, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before introductions of the day I will be 
tabling the Public Interest Disclosure Commissioner’s report 
under section 23 of the Act, and the Ombudsman’s report under 
section 38 of that Act. 
 
I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask for leave to 
make a statement regarding the National Day of Mourning for 
workers killed or injured on the job. Mr. Speaker, as part of 
this, the member for Saskatoon Centre will be making part of it, 
then I will complete after it, with leave of course. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the minister. 
 

COMMEMORATIVE STATEMENTS 
 

National Day of Mourning 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, tomorrow is the National 
Day of Mourning for workers killed or injured on the job. 
Across Canada, groups will gather to remember those who lost 
their lives from workplace illness or incident. Our flags will fly 
at half-mast here at the Legislative Building and vigils will be 
held throughout the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Day of Mourning is a time to respectfully 
honour and mourn those lost and to express our condolences to 
the family, friends, and colleagues who are grieving. It is 
impossible to imagine the pain that they must deal with every 
day. The Day of Mourning also serves to remind us about the 
importance of workplace health and safety. While we can never 
bring back those who lost their lives, I hope we can learn 
something from their loss. Each and every one of us is 
responsible for safety. We all need to take care of each other. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all colleagues here in the legislature to renew 
their personal commitments to safety and to remember each day 
to consider safety in all that they do. I ask everyone in 
Saskatchewan to make that same commitment. Whether or not a 
person is the employer or the employee, regardless of the 
industry you work in or the size of the company you work for, 
please consider the health and safety of everyone and make 
protecting them a priority. 
 
While our injury rate has been declining, it remains 
unacceptably high. We will never be complacent, as there is no 
acceptable level of injuries. Even one is one too many. Our goal 
continues to be Mission: Zero — zero injuries, zero suffering. 
Safety, quite simply, should be what we do around here, part of 
our personal and workplace culture. We all need to arrive home 
safely at the end of the day to spend time with family and 

friends and be active members of our communities. 
 
In 2016 the Workers’ Compensation Board reported that 31 
people lost their lives as a result of workplace injuries or 
illnesses, as well as one workplace fatality not covered by WCB 
[Workers’ Compensation Board]. Some of those people 
suffered from and ultimately lost their battles with health issues 
caused by exposure to asbestos years ago. 
 
We have learned from their suffering, and we have taken steps 
to prevent future asbestos-related fatalities through the recently 
introduced asbestos registry. For others, though their lives were 
cut short by preventable incidences, none of these deaths should 
have happened. 
 
The names we honour today are being read into the official 
record and will be inscribed in the national registry at the 
Canadian Labour Congress in Ottawa. 
 
I ask that all members please rise while we read the names of 
those who’ve lost their lives: 
 
John Jenkins Austyn Schenstead 
Dennis Baschuk Chance Horan 
Ian McLaughlin Kenneth Shaw 
Dustin Pratt David Wasyliw 
William Welsh Chad Wiklun 
Joel Fersch Samuel Thomas 
Eric Ndayishimiye Mike Kucik 
Rick Brown  
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite will read the next 17 names. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — 
 
Francis Rodier George Reimer 
Clayton Matyjanka Harvie Hawkes 
Murray Goodman David Davies 
Richard Machinski Che Bonter 
Mervin Morrow Joseph Kuntz 
Arlene Hubick John Young 
Orville Stainer Archie Procyshyn 
Virgil Ernst  
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I would also like to make 
special mention of teaching assistant Marie Janvier, and teacher 
Adam Wood, as teachers are exempt from WCB coverage. Both 
of those people were killed in the La Loche school shooting. 
 
Not included among these names are the people who lost their 
lives working on Saskatchewan farms and ranches each year. 
Today we honour their memories as well. 
 
On behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, I offer our 
sincere condolences to the family and friends who are grieving 
their losses. Mr. Speaker, to commemorate the Day of 
Mourning, I ask that we observe a moment of silence in this 
House. 
 
[The Assembly observed a moment of silence.] 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



2322 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2017 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, I’d like to introduce a good friend of mine and a 
constituent, Mr. Dave Fischl. He’s seated in your west gallery. 
Thanks, Dave. Dave is a retired Ministry of Highways worker 
where he was the fleet services manager and workplace 
diversity coordinator. In that position Dave won an award, 
Premier’s Award for Excellence, for his work with workplace 
diversity and inclusion and because he started a program for 
individuals with cognitive disabilities . . . [inaudible] . . . and 
people with all kinds of disabilities for inclusion in the 
workplace. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since his retirement, Dave continues to be an 
advocate for inclusion in the workplace, and he goes all over 
North America speaking about it, Mr. Speaker, for he still is 
very strongly committed to the workplace. And in fact he’s 
going over to Nova Scotia for two weeks to work for the 
government there in inclusion and First Nations with their 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’d like everyone to join me in welcoming 
Dave to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
University. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, most people think of Souls Harbour Rescue Mission as 
a soup kitchen, and while hope begins with a meal, Souls 
Harbour does so much more. They help our most vulnerable 
with emergency shelter, Mr. Speaker, free clothing, a daycare, 
youth programming, addictions, and affordable housing. Most 
importantly, every guest is treated with dignity and compassion. 
 
It’s my great pleasure to introduce some members for Souls 
Harbour who are in the gallery opposite us today, Mr. Speaker. 
They are Joseph Miller, the executive director of Souls 
Harbour. If you just give a wave, Joseph. Michael was here. I 
don’t see him now, but Michael Towers was also with us. 
Rebecca Cochrane, director of programs is with us today. 
Katrina Robinson, the director of development is with us today; 
and Kari Weiss, the director of finance. 
 
I would ask all members to join me in welcoming these fine 
individuals to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, I’d just 
like to join with the minister in welcoming the folks here from 
Souls Harbour Regina Rescue Mission. This is an organization 
that has done a tremendous amount of work, tremendous 
amount of good work over the years, Mr. Speaker. And 
certainly, they take the charge to love thy neighbour as thyself 
very seriously and in such a positive way. So it’s really good to 
see them here today at their Legislative Assembly, and certainly 

folks that are always very busy. 
 
And it’s also interesting to see Joe from this perspective. 
Usually when Joe’s that high up, he’s on the roof over on 
Dewdney Avenue raising money to fight homelessness in 
August, Mr. Speaker. But it’s really good to see Joe, and 
Katrina, Rebecca, Kari, and we’ll see Michael again, I’m sure. 
 
But this is an organization that has a tremendous amount of 
good impact on the community, Mr. Speaker, and it’s really 
good to see them here today at their Legislative Assembly. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr, Speaker. Sitting in the west 
gallery, I’d like to introduce some students and their teachers 
from Moose Jaw. École Ducharme has brought 16 grade 5 and 
6 students. They’re accompanied by their teacher, Madame 
Marie-Chantal Poulin; and their teacher aid, Madame Nicole 
Cochrane. I’d like to ask all members to welcome them to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition opposing the Sask Party’s cuts 
to spiritual care. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners are under the 
impression that the government has no idea what the role of 
spiritual care workers, professional spiritual care workers do in 
our health region facilities, nor did the government know the 
impact this cut would have on people’s healing and well-being, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
They point out that in this budget the government has 
eliminated funding for spiritual care services within our health 
care facilities; that Saskatchewan will be the only province 
within Canada to not fund this support for patients, residents, 
and their families seeking wellness. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners 
point out that the Sask Party hid their plan to scrap funding for 
spiritual care within health region facilities during the election 
just over a year ago, Mr. Speaker. They didn’t mention a word 
of that. 
 
The petitioners point out that spiritual care responds to the 
spiritual and emotional needs of patients and residents and 
provides a compassionate listening presence in times of crisis, 
Mr. Speaker; and that spiritual care supports families, patients, 
residents, and staff in their difficult times, Mr. Speaker; and that 
spiritual care can provide support for all families, patients, and 
residents, regardless of faith or belief, in obtaining comfort and 
support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
immediately reinstate the funding for spiritual care services 
in this province’s health region facilities. 
 



April 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2323 

Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens of 
Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of Shell 
Lake, Saskatoon, Leask, Canwood, Mont Nebo, North 
Battleford, Hanley, Osler, Rabbit Lake, Spiritwood. I do so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
in my place to answer the call from the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote for anyone, anyone in the Assembly that 
would help her in her petition for a second bridge for Prince 
Albert. And on this side of the Assembly we are very proud to 
stand with her and present these petitions day after day. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to present a petition on behalf of the 
city of bridge. And, Mr. Speaker, the need for a second bridge 
for Prince Albert has never been clearer than it is today. Prince 
Albert, communities, and people of Northern Saskatchewan, 
and all the businesses north of Prince Albert that send people 
and products through Prince Albert require a solution. 
 
And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 
Ask that the Sask Party government stop stalling, hiding 
behind rhetoric, and refusing to listen to the people 
calling for action, and to begin immediately to plan, and 
then quickly commence the construction of a second 
bridge for Prince Albert using federal and provincial 
dollars. 

 
And the people that have signed this petition, as we present 
page after page, day after day, week after week, month after 
month, are asking for this second bridge to be built. And on this 
particular page, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this 
petition are primarily from Prince Albert. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
[10:15] 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I’m rising today to present a 
petition opposed to the Sask Party plan to scrap and sell off the 

Saskatchewan Transportation Company. The people who have 
signed this petition want to bring to our attention the following: 
this Sask Party budget unilaterally eliminates the Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company, an important Crown corporation that 
provides a crucial service to people across the province who 
depend on it for travelling, accessing medical services, and 
shipping important packages. The STC [Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company] helps drive the economy with its 
parcel service that serves farms and other businesses. 
 
And the Sask Party did not inform Saskatchewan people prior 
to the 2016 election about their plan to scrap STC. That closure 
leaves 224 people out of work and communities from across the 
province isolated from each other. Less than a year ago, the 
then minister said STC is a needed service and that it was safe 
from sale. STC provides a vital service to many seniors, 
workers, and families throughout the province. And by 
scrapping STC out of the blue and without asking the 
permission of the owners, the Saskatchewan people, the Sask 
Party is sending a clear sign that other Crowns like SaskTel 
may be at risk of privatization. The Sask Party is breaking their 
promise to Saskatchewan people by getting rid of a Crown 
corporation. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately stop 
the plan to scrap and sell off the Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company and to resume transportation 
services to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed the petition today 
come from the city of Saskatoon and the town of Borden. I so 
submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition regarding pay equity here in Saskatchewan. The 
undersigned residents of this province want to bring to our 
attention the following: that the citizens of this province believe 
in an economy powered by transparency, accountability, 
security, and equity; and that all women should be paid 
equitably; and that women are powerful drivers of economic 
growth and their economic empowerment benefits us all. 
 
And we know the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives 
found that in Saskatoon in 2016, women earned on average 63 
cents for every dollar that a man makes, and in Regina, women 
earned on average 73 cents for every dollar a man makes. 
According to the most recent StatsCan data, the national gender 
wage gap for full-time workers is 72 cents for every dollar a 
man makes. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan eliminate 
the wage gap between women and men across all sectors 
where the Government of Saskatchewan has jurisdiction, 
provide a framework under which this can be done within 
the term of this Assembly, and that the Saskatchewan 
government call upon workplaces within Saskatchewan 



2324 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2017 

and within the private sector to eliminate the wage gap 
between women and men. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
the city of Saskatoon. I do so present, thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud today to 
stand in my place to present a petition to increase the funding 
for Prince Albert mobile crisis. Mr. Speaker, Prince Albert 
mobile crisis has had to close its doors during daytime hours 
resulting in a loss of resource to people in distress. They’ve had 
to make this decision because they lost funding that was 
provided by this government, and so they’re not available 
during the daytime hours. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been discussing domestic violence 
within our province. And we know that Saskatchewan has 
higher than average domestic violence, but Prince Albert is 
even higher than that average, Mr. Speaker. And we know that 
the police services, they do an excellent job at addressing the 
issues when they present to a situation. And the trained hospital 
workers at Victoria Hospital do an excellent job as well. But 
we’re missing a link, Mr. Speaker, and that’s our crisis 
intervention workers who are trained to be able to provide that 
counselling and intervention services in those times of need. 
And they provide that service to both victims and offenders and 
ensure that the family unit is getting the support that they need. 
And that’s so crucial, Mr. Speaker, in order to help fight the 
domestic violence that’s in our communities, and I know 
families would really appreciate that support. So I’m going to 
read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to increase funding to 
Prince Albert mobile crisis unit, so they may once again 
offer 24-hour emergency crisis service. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is a real issue in Prince Albert, and residents 
are concerned. And this particular petition is signed by the 
residents of Prince Albert. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
new petition regarding Bill 63 and the threat to local voices in 
education. Those who’ve signed this petition wish to draw our 
attention to the following: that they are opposed to changing 
The Education Act with Bill 63 as it currently reads, until the 
government takes part in active and good faith, transparent 
conversation with the Saskatchewan School Boards 
Association; and that there shall be transparency and agreement 
upon any changes to The Education Act; that it’s imperative that 
the government recognize that there must be an appropriate 
time frame in which elected board members are able to convey 
all information regarding decisions affecting their communities; 
and that they wish that the government would recognize that 
local school boards are the voice of Saskatchewan communities 
and that decisions should remain with such elected boards. 

I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan repeal Bill 63 
and preserve the governance of elected school boards. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions are rolling in from all across the 
province. The particular pages that I present today are signed by 
residents of Midale and Weyburn. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition to ensure job security for survivors of 
domestic violence. Saskatchewan has the dubious distinction of 
having the highest rate of domestic violence by intimate 
partners amongst all Canadian provinces. One in three Canadian 
workers have been impacted by interpersonal violence, and for 
many of them the violence will follow them to their workplace. 
Employers lose $77.9 million annually due to the direct and 
indirect impacts of domestic violence. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Manitoba has already enacted legislation 
similar to the private members’ bill we’ve tabled, and Ontario is 
on its way to enacting legislation that ensures job security for 
victims of domestic violence. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan enact 
legislation that requires all employers to provide a 
minimum of five paid workdays and a minimum of 17 
weeks unpaid work leave with the assurance of job security 
upon return for all victims of domestic violence in 
Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing the petition today come 
from Swift Current, Moose Jaw, and Pilot Butte. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition calling on 
the government to restore funding to post-secondary education 
in Saskatchewan. The undersigned residents wish to bring your 
attention to the following: that the Sask Party is passing on its 
legacy of debt to students and their families. Students 
graduating in Saskatchewan already face high levels of debt, 
having paid among the highest tuition rates in Canada. By 
cutting $36.8 million from post-secondary education, funding 
for scholarships, and cutting the tax rebate for tuition and 
supplies, the Sask Party is making the likelihood of students 
graduating with higher levels of debt that will be more difficult 
for them to overcome even higher. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately restore 
funding to Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions and 
stop the damaging cuts to our students. 
 

The individuals signing the petition today are from Regina and 
Saskatoon. I do so present. 
 



April 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2325 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moosomin. 
 

2017 Provincial 4-H Public Speaking 
Competition Winner 

 
Mr. Bonk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 2017 Provincial 
4-H Public Speaking Competition was held on April 23rd in 
Canwood. I attended this event along with the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers, and I thank her for her greetings she 
brought on behalf of the government. 
 
This year marks the 100th anniversary of 4-H here in 
Saskatchewan. With age categories ranging from 6 to 21, 4-H is 
focused on the four areas of head, heart, health, and hands, and 
their motto is “Learn to Do by Doing.” Focusing on critical 
thinking, confidence, and independence, 4-H provides a unique 
and inclusive space for the youth of Saskatchewan to develop 
leadership skills and friendships that will last a lifetime. 
 
I’d like to highlight a very special speaker from this 
competition, Mr. Speaker, my daughter, Emma. Mr. Speaker, 
Emma is part of the Elcapo Lighthorse 4-H Club, and this year 
there were 2,962 young public speakers competing for the 
provincial 4-H title. As her father and her biggest fan, I’m 
proud to report that my daughter Emma took home the gold this 
year for her speech on anti-smoking. Mr. Speaker, when she’s 
not working on her speeches, she is busy helping us raise 
animals on our family farm and keeping up with her love of 
writing and photography. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask all members in joining me to 
thank 4-H for their service to the youth of Saskatchewan for the 
past 100 years and to congratulate Emma for her provincial 
title. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

Day of Mourning 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, every 
year since 1985, the members of this Assembly have taken the 
time to mark tomorrow, April 28th, as the international Day of 
Mourning for workers injured or killed on the job. It’s an 
important time to remember the workers who’ve lost their lives, 
but also a time for us as legislators to ensure that we’re doing 
everything we can to make Saskatchewan a place where there 
are no work-related deaths or injuries. 
 
A private member’s bill in the House of Commons made April 
28th the official Day of Mourning all across Canada in 1991. 
We’re quickly approaching the 30th year when our whole 
nation stands with workers around the world to remember those 
who are killed or injured at work. 
 
We know that here in Saskatchewan there’s still a lot of work 
that needs to be done to make sure all our working men and 
women make it home safe at the end of each shift. Too many 
workers are hurt on the job each year, Mr. Speaker, and the 
numbers are even more alarming for young workers and for 
new workers. Since we marked the Day of Mourning last year, 

another 31 workers have lost their lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing this 
year international Day of Mourning and to keep working and 
making progress to bring an end to work-related injuries and 
deaths here in Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
North. 
 

Moose Jaw Business Excellence Awards 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, last Wednesday I, 
along with the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow, attended 
the Moose Jaw Business Excellence Awards hosted by the 
Moose Jaw & District Chamber of Commerce. It was a special 
night to recognize the dedicated work of businesses, their 
involvement in the community, and their contribution to the city 
of Moose Jaw and to the province. 
 
Businesses were nominated in 12 different categories, and the 
winners were selected by a panel of judges based on their 
business, work ethic, and community involvement. 
 
Congratulations to the award winners including Conexus Credit 
Union for community involvement, Boston Pizza on Main and 
Thatcher for customer service. The Young Entrepreneur Award 
went to Ultimate Auto Detailing and Accessories; Business 
Innovation to Emerald Custom Creations; Marketing to the 
Moose Jaw Warriors; the Heritage Award, the Tunnels of 
Moose Jaw; the New Business Venture, Peanut Hill 
Campground; Job Creation to Tim Hortons; Pillar of the 
Community was Chow McLeod legal professionals; the Impact 
Award to Riverside Mission. The Business Leader of the Year 
was presented to Scott Evans of Moose Jaw Ford Sales. I’m 
proud to announce that the Business of the Year Award was to 
Boston Pizza, Main and Thatcher. Mr. Speaker, a tremendous 
note of gratitude to the award winners and the nominations for 
their outstanding contributions to the city of Moose Jaw. 
 
I ask all members to join in congratulating the winners and to 
the Moose Jaw Chamber of Commerce for hosting this 
successful event. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Regina Ukrainian Co-op’s 80th Anniversary 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, it has been a fixture on 
Winnipeg Street since the 1930s, and this year the Regina 
Ukrainian Co-op is celebrating its 80th anniversary. 
 
In 1937 the Ukrainian Co-op was founded by members of 
Regina’s Ukrainian community who united together to fill the 
needs of their flourishing community by opening a 
member-owned and -run store. Once a small store in a house, 
the Ukrainian Co-op has grown thanks to the support of 
members who bought the property and several expansions. 
 
Now 80 years on, the Co-op is a staple in the community and in 
my constituency, complete with a full deli and butcher shop, 
grocery complement, and Ukrainian boutique featuring both 



2326 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2017 

Saskatchewan-made and imported goods from Eastern Europe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has and continues to have a robust 
co-operative sector. Co-operatives form an integral part of 
Saskatchewan’s economy. Often co-ops are started to knit 
cultural communities together, as in the case of the Ukrainian 
Co-op. Neighbours come together to create a business they own 
and run together, sharing in the responsibility of running the 
organization and sharing in the profits made. Moreover 
co-operatives are local. They hire local, buy local, and support 
local. Most Saskatchewanians support co-operatives, both 
consumer co-ops and credit unions alike because co-operative 
values are Saskatchewan values. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to join me in congratulating 
the Regina Ukrainian Co-op on their landmark 80th 
anniversary. May it continue to serve its members and 
community for decades to come. Thank you. 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Merit Awards of Excellence 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
Friday night I, along with the Minister of Highways and the 
Deputy Premier, attended the Merit 2017 Awards of Excellence 
held by the Merit construction Association of Saskatchewan. 
Here in our province, the construction industry is the 
second-largest private sector employer including more than 
7,000 businesses with over 50,000 employees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Merit Employer of the Year with fewer than 
25 employees went to Miller Contracting based out of Prince 
Albert. The company has been in business since 1972, 
attributing their success to the relationship they build with their 
customers based on trust, reliability, communication, and 
outstanding quality. 
 
The Merit Employer of the Year with more than 25 employees 
was Quorex Construction services. Quorex is based out of 
Regina and Saskatoon, operating on the philosophy that 
teamwork builds quality projects that are both on time and on 
budget. This company constructs projects province wide from 
schools to retail outlets as well as multi-family housing. Mr. 
Speaker, giving back to the community that supports their work 
ethic is very important to Quorex as they support projects such 
as Habitat for Humanity and Ronald McDonald House. 
 
Other winners from the night included Aaron Robin, based in 
Regina, for field employee of the year, from Coram 
Construction; Maureen Kugler, in Prince Albert, for office 
employee of the year, from Asiil; and Kent Kollar from Allan 
Construction based out of Saskatoon, for leadership and 
mentoring award. 
 
Mr. Speaker, please join me in congratulating the winners of 
this year’s Merit open shop 2017 Awards of Excellence. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 

University of Saskatchewan and Northlands College 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
share an exciting development that will improve post-secondary 
education in northern Saskatchewan. Yesterday the University 
of Saskatchewan and Northlands College completed a 
memorandum of understanding which seeks to offer a 
pre-engineering and science program in the North. The MOU 
[memorandum of understanding] will foster institutional 
collaboration with a focus on supporting under-represented 
student groups in learning more about science, math, 
technology, and engineering, while orientating them towards 
professional careers. 
 
This program will also aim to increase access to post-secondary 
education in the North, as the signing of this MOU is just the 
beginning of creating more opportunity for students. In turn it 
will provide access to student support services for learners 
enrolled in the program regardless of campus and geographic 
site. This new partnership paves the way to delivering 
high-quality and industry-relevant academic programming and 
programs such as math and sciences. 
 
I commend the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] and 
Northlands College on signing this MOU and for working to 
enhance educational and professional opportunities for all 
northern residents. I ask all members to join me in 
congratulating these institutions on their new partnership and 
for continuing to do right by our students. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Gardiner 
Park. 
 

Key Economic Indicators 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thanks a lot, Mr. Speaker. Our 
government is committed to making Saskatchewan a great place 
to live, work, and invest. The members opposite like to criticize 
our policies, and they stubbornly refuse to acknowledge that 
what we’re doing is working. I’m pleased to report this week 
alone there’s been key economic indicators released that are 
clear evidence that Saskatchewan is moving in the right 
direction. 
 
Yesterday the retail sales numbers for February were released, 
and they’re on the rise in our province. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 
they show the highest percentage increase in all of Canada. 
There was a point six per cent increase whereas nationally there 
was a point six per cent decrease that month. 
 
Year over year we’ve seen a 4.8 per cent increase in those sales 
numbers. Mr. Speaker, our economy continues to show strength 
and resilience. Recent growth in retail sales, wholesale trade, 
and manufacturing are demonstrating that fact. Policies of our 
government are making it possible for Saskatchewan to grow, 
which is a clear contrast to the NDP [New Democratic Party] 
ideas, Mr. Speaker. They even have a likely leadership 
candidate that wants to cripple our economy with a job-killing 
carbon tax. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Yes. Mr. Speaker, on this side of the 



April 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2327 

House, we’re meeting the challenge. The recent numbers I 
mentioned earlier show it. Our policies are keeping our 
economy growing and our province strong. Thank you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Details of Land Transactions 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I want to give the Premier 
a chance to clarify what he said yesterday. When referencing a 
cabinet document from the former government, he said, “The 
whole second page is about Canadian Pacific Railway, Regina 
intermodal facility, currently located in the downtown area of 
the city.” Of course it was, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The previous government wanted to work with the city and CP 
[Canadian Pacific] Rail to move the rail yard. But then the 
Premier tried to say that somehow this previous government 
was also responsible for the Sask Party’s scheme to give 300 
acres of land to CP Rail for free, a giveaway that they 
implemented a full two years after the change in government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier admit that he knows that what he 
is claiming is not what the memo says? And will he admit that 
suggesting the Sask Party was not responsible for something 
that happened a full two years after coming to office is not only 
wrong but absurd? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Oh, Mr. Speaker, I was hoping the Leader 
of the Opposition would lead with this line of questioning. It’s 
part of the narrative he’s trying to build that somehow the 
arrangement to move CP, to help CPR [Canadian Pacific 
Railway] relocate outside of Regina, was some sort of a match 
between the government and CP, some sort of an arrangement. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that arrangement began and monies were set 
aside under the NDP. Mr. Speaker, if he could just turn to his 
left and look at the current Deputy Leader, the then minister of 
Highways, and he would find cupid, actually, for this match that 
was made all those years ago, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will quote from a briefing note that contains 
quotes from a cabinet document. In 2006, December of ’06, 
when members opposite were the Government of 
Saskatchewan, the Ministry of Highways and Infrastructure 
submitted a project proposal to the federal government under 
the Asia-Pacific Gateway and Corridor Initiative, and it was all 
about the Regina region intermodal or RRIM project.  
 
Mr. Speaker, that same document goes on later to say for the 
ministry, authorizing, Mr. Speaker, for the ministry to finalize 
negotiations and formal agreements with the Government of 
Canada, CPR [Canadian Pacific Railway], right here on the 
dock, and the city of Regina, regarding their respective 
contributions, regarding their respective contributions — in 
other words, money from the then NDP government — 
requiring an estimated contribution from the provincial 
government of $33 million. 
 
Subsequent to that, in July of 2007 that member as the minister 

of Highways, what happened? In April, the province approved 
$33 million invested in the project in part, to do what? To help 
CPR locate to the hub, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Crown Corporations and Intent of Bill 40 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s just like, you know, he 
makes the claim and he sort of says it in a believable way, but 
what he’s quoting from doesn’t support at all what he’s 
claiming, Mr. Speaker. Here is the government, a full two years 
after . . . or they were the government for two years when this 
giveaway occurred, Mr. Speaker. And this is a Premier, file 
after file, that isn’t straight with Saskatchewan people. 
 
When it comes to the privatization bill, Mr. Speaker, we had the 
Justice minister spending the last few days telling us, swearing 
to us, that this was not a bill that would change anything. It 
doesn’t even change a definition, he said. Shaking his head, he 
told us it just adds a definition. And, Mr. Speaker, following the 
Premier’s lines, minister after minister responsible for Crown 
after Crown, has refused to give a straight answer about what 
the plans are for our Crowns. They tell us there is no plan to sell 
stakes in our Crowns, and they, in defying common sense, they 
deny that the STC sell-off is even a sell-off. 
 
So a question for the Premier: if as they claim, this bill really 
changes nothing, what’s the rush to give it Royal Assent today? 
Why can’t he wait even just a few weeks? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve already had several 
occasions of Royal Assent after bills have passed through the 
stages of the House, so this is basically routine, Mr. Speaker, in 
the legislature. 
 
I do want to share with my hon. friend yet more information 
about what his seatmate, the then Highways minister, did to 
orchestrate, help support CPR’s . . . to help provide money to 
CPR to have them relocate to the hub. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the documents also show, quote, I’m quoting: 
“The ministry of Highways and Infrastructure was in 
discussions with CPR towards finalizing [finalizing] the 
financial commitment from them towards the RRIM project.” 
Finalization of a financial commitment from them required an 
approval from cabinet — their cabinet, that minister, the Deputy 
Leader, cupid — for the maximum contribution for this match, 
the maximum contribution that the province would make 
toward the project. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, in a subsequent briefing note, we find 
out that in April, that approval was made by them, the NDP 
government, for $33 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the question was about the 
Crowns. The Premier went off with a bunch of nonsense again 
here on a scandal, Mr. Speaker, a giveaway of millions. Of 
course he has an MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 



2328 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2017 

still sitting in this Assembly who’s embroiled in a scandal and a 
government that’s embroiled in a scandal with millions of 
dollars that were wasted by this government. 
 
But it’s been clear from the get-go what their intentions were 
with this bill. They of course use the word “partnership,” but 
what that means here is sell-offs. It means one-time quick bucks 
for a government that couldn’t manage. 
 
Last night the Minister Responsible for SaskTel admitted as 
much. He even talked of a meeting he had with a 
telecommunication company. He said it was a chance run-in 
but, Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t, you know, while he was out around 
town. It was in this building, the legislature of Saskatchewan. 
The Opposition House Leader asked who it was that he bumped 
into, but he wouldn’t tell us. He wouldn’t even say if any of the 
names rang a bell, Mr. Speaker. And you know, these aren’t just 
any old Tom, Dick, or Harry, or Roger. The minister admitted 
that “. . . the government would entertain partnership ideas.” In 
other words, sell-offs. 
 
That would have been difficult before, but not so much now 
with this piece of legislation, the privatization bill that’s been 
pushed by the Sask Party. Will the Premier finally come clean 
about what offers or interests they’ve received for STC, 
SaskTel, and our other Crowns? And will he admit that he 
wasn’t straight with Saskatchewan people in the election? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, once again the 
member’s preamble is incorrect, I would say. And, Mr. 
Speaker, members opposite are having a hard time 
differentiating between a sell-off — what they call a sell-off or 
what might be a partnership — and a wind-down, Mr. Speaker. 
And the differences are pretty clear. 
 
The differences, if they look carefully, they’d find it in their 
own history because Premier Tommy Douglas, he had his 
government involved in a lot of business ventures. Why, they 
started a shoe factory in Regina. They had a wool mill to make 
blankets in Moose Jaw. They had fish plants in the North and a 
brick plant in Estevan. And then in 1948 they did start an 
intercity transit system. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, they didn’t sell these operations. 
They didn’t sell the fish plant or the shoe box or the shoe 
factory. They wound them down, Mr. Speaker, because they 
weren’t making any money. They weren’t in the interest, they 
weren’t in the interest of the province’s, I guess, fiscal outlook 
at the time. 
 
So I would also just want to answer the question directly to the 
member with respect to SaskTel. There are no offers, Mr. 
Speaker. There are no offers currently before the government or 
the minister. Has there been interest expressed? Well, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve been pretty clear from post the election when 
the MTS [Manitoba Telephone System] takeover happened, 
originally that we would consider that we would take an offer to 
the people, Mr. Speaker, in a referendum. We’ve subsequently 
changed that position; SaskTel’s not for sale. But you can 
imagine that when you say that, there’s going to be interest. 
Companies are going to come forward and say, well you know, 

what’s possible here. 
 
Mr. Speaker the same has been true with respect to Bill 40. Of 
course there has been that interest. You know what? That 
interest was expressed when members opposite were in 
government. There would be companies, there would be other 
telcos that wanted to know what the government’s intention 
was. There was an expression of interest. 
 
In fact, Don Ching, who was president of SaskTel, at the 
direction of former Premier Romanow, had SaskTel evaluated. 
They wanted to find out what it was worth in case they sold it. 
Mr. Speaker, there was interest expressed then. Of course 
there’s going to be discussions now. Nothing will move forward 
outside the interests of the province and outside Bill 40, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Role of School Boards and Intent of Bill 63 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure what’s worse: how 
little reason the Sask Party are giving the people of 
Saskatchewan to have faith in them, or how little they seem to 
care. According to this month’s Insightrix poll, 91 per cent of 
Saskatchewan people and 71 per cent of Sask Party supporters 
are opposed to the minister’s cuts to education — 91 per cent, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
[10:45] 
 
When librarians and people across this province spoke up and 
protested against their short-sighted slashing of libraries, when 
they challenged the minister, Mr. Speaker, they challenged him, 
they won. And he was forced to admit that he was wrong once 
before. So why won’t he just listen to the people of 
Saskatchewan, do the right thing on his own and scrap Bill 63? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the exact reason we have 
Bill 63 is to make sure that we keep resources in the classroom, 
not in the boardroom, not in the courtroom. We’ve now had a 
court ruling that’s come from the Court of Queen’s Bench 
which leaves our province in a very difficult situation. We will 
literally see thousands of students potentially moving from one 
school division to another. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask the question of the members opposite 
where they stand on that ruling, what their position of it is. The 
NDP have yet to take a position on that, Mr. Speaker. The 
member for Regina Lakeview — former Regina Public trustee, 
education critic, possible leadership candidate — participates in 
RealRenewal which advocates a single school system. Now, 
Mr. Speaker, we also have the member for Regina Douglas 
Park, a former Regina . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we have the member from 



April 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2329 

Regina Douglas Park, a former Regina Catholic trustee. Where 
does she stand? She’s the Justice critic. She would have an 
opinion on the legal matter. She should also have an opinion of 
where she stood as a Catholic trustee. 
 
The interim Leader of the Opposition: former trustee, former 
Education critic. The member for Saskatoon Centre: former 
teacher, former cabinet. Where do these people stand on this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, I am not sure if the minister is 
aware of how poorly those lines are playing with people in the 
sector. That minister’s condescending and arrogant tone 
certainly doesn’t match up with the hundreds of letters I’ve 
received in my office from parents and teachers who are 
worried about the cuts this government is making to their kids’ 
classrooms. 
 
Why does the minister not understand the concerns that parents 
have about the minister’s plan to take away local voices in 
education? He arrogantly proclaims that he knows better than 
Saskatchewan people, and he feels entitled to take the 
decision-making powers away from locally elected trustees and 
give full power to himself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, thousands of people spoke out in favour of locally 
elected trustees, but the minister is going against their will, 
against their wishes, and plowing ahead with Bill 63 and his 
plan to take control of school divisions. Why won’t he scrap 
Bill 63? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Bill 63 would have enabled a 
government to prevent the public board from suing the separate 
board when the separate board wanted to operate a school in 
Theodore to the benefit of parents in that community, to benefit 
of students in that community. And that lawsuit, which spent 
millions of taxpayers’ dollars instead of going to the classroom, 
has now resulted in a court ruling, and that court ruling would 
threaten, in terms of schooling, on an everyday basis, 5 to 
10,000 students. 
 
The member should want to listen to this: 5 to 10,000 students 
would be affected by this ruling if it’s implemented where 
non-Catholic students are kicked out of Catholic schools. What 
also hangs in the balance, Mr. Speaker, potentially, are other 
religious schools like the Huda School, like Regina Christian 
School. All of this is now at risk based on this ruling. Members 
opposite have said they support a single-school system, that 
they effectively support the spirit of the ruling. 
 
I’m asking the Leader of the Opposition to stand up and say 
what his position is. Does he support a public and a separate 
system? Does he support the Government of Saskatchewan 
protecting those families, ensuring the interests of those 
students, or not, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the . . . Order. Order. I recognize 
the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, here we have captain 
grandstand get onto his feet, Mr. Speaker, with an issue that’s 
. . . [inaudible] . . . to an entire province. And what we have is a 
Premier who sat on his hands when the sector and our school 
boards needed leadership. They wanted the government’s 
involvement to mediate and to find a solution. Instead this 
government, this government sat on its hands. It disrespected 
the sector. It didn’t listen to our school boards, and it left this 
decision come to be instead of providing some leadership, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
How did this Premier, seeing that this was coming, dealing 
with, in his way, big things like changing the school year, how 
did he not provide the leadership that the sector needed to 
mediate this situation? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, now this is getting really 
interesting. First of all, the Deputy Premier and the Minister of 
Education expressed, expressed on several occasions, his 
displeasure with one school board suing the other school board, 
Mr. Speaker. That leadership, that communication was made. 
 
But it’s interesting what the Leader of the Opposition, the 
interim Leader of the NDP is now saying. He said, you in 
government should’ve done something. You should’ve maybe 
stopped this lawsuit beyond, beyond perhaps leadership. Well 
you know what, Mr. Speaker? How might we do that in the 
future? Bill 63, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So if that’s his position, if his position is that the Government of 
Saskatchewan ought to be able to intervene in a legal way 
beyond, beyond the moral suasion, beyond the encouragement 
of the Minister of Education, then he should stand in his place 
and say, here’s our position on the Theodore ruling because we 
still don’t know that, and secondly, here’s my support for Bill 
63. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this is a Premier and a 
Sask Party that has disrespected education every step of the 
way. They’ve torn apart the education sector. They’ve failed to 
listen to the partners, school boards, or teachers, all while 
cutting, after cutting, after cutting. This court case is no 
surprise. This government had a chance to act and to show 
some leadership, to lean into this, and to mediate a solution, Mr. 
Speaker. This Premier sat on his hands while disrespecting the 
voice of the education sector, and we’re in this mess . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I’m having increased difficulties hearing the 
question. I would ask all members to at least be respectful in 
listening to the question and listening to the response. I 
recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we’re clearly in this mess 
in education in part because of this Premier and the Sask Party’s 
failure to lead, the failure to respect the education sector. How 
on earth can the Premier of Saskatchewan think that a full 
takeover of elected school boards is the answer to this very 
significant challenge? 
 



2330 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2017 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s good to hear the interim 
leader of the NDP admit that this is a significant challenge. We 
still don’t know what his position is though. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the member just referenced mediation. 
Again, he should probably be aware of the file before he gets 
into the debate because mediation was offered to both school 
boards in this regard. Both of them were offered mediation, and 
the public school board turned mediation down. They would 
rather spend tax . . . Well he wasn’t even listening; I’ll repeat it 
for him. 
 
Mediation was offered. The public board turned it down, Mr. 
Speaker. Every point of contact — and there were many 
between the government and the public school board — 
resulted in their intransigence and their determination to sue the 
separate board, which has got us to where we are today. 
 
Bill 63, when used . . . And, Mr. Speaker, the boards will be 
independent. They will operate schooling and education in the 
province of Saskatchewan. But on occasions like this, where we 
need to be able to do more than encourage or offer mediation 
that’s turned down, it means the Government of Saskatchewan, 
on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, the students of 
Saskatchewan, can step in and stop this sort of thing. 
 
And again, you know, all the bluster’s interesting, even the 
incorrect facts he’s raised in the House just now, but I don’t 
know his position. He’s got an Education critic who supports a 
single education system. He has been hiding under a pile of 
coats since this ruling was made. Mr. Speaker, now is his 
chance to stand up in favour of students in this province, in 
favour of separate and public education. Will he do that? Will 
he finally stand up and tell Saskatchewan people what his 
position is? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition . . . 
or, sorry. I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Provision of Teacher Education Programming 
in the North 

 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps 
if the Premier and the Minister of Education would have done 
their job, the people wouldn’t be in court today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This weekend, the member from Cumberland will join with 
people from across the North in celebrating what should be an 
exclusively and completely happy occasion. It’s another 
NORTEP [northern teacher education program] graduation day. 
For four decades, this has been a day that symbolized hope for 
the future, empowerment for the young people, and pride in our 
communities. But this weekend, Mr. Speaker, thanks to the 
Sask Party, there will be a cloud over this celebration, as this 
will be the last NORTEP graduation. 
 
So to the minister, even though she has consistently refused to 
stand up for the students, will she, at the very least, go to the 
graduation this weekend, and will she look those students, 
graduates and their families in the eye as they celebrate the 
success of this program one last time? Would she do that? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Mr. Speaker, I was very honoured to be 
invited to that graduation ceremony this weekend, and I just did 
a video that would be sent to the . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
Because my son is in a speaking competition this weekend, Mr. 
Speaker, and I had a prior obligation. And so I would have been 
honoured to attend, honoured to be invited, and honoured to 
judge the video clips for a video contest at Northlands, which is 
what I’m responding to in the video, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I can tell you these are proud, dedicated students who in 
many cases have overcome great adversity to get where they 
are, Mr. Speaker. And we are proud of them, which is what I 
express in the video, proud of all our northern students. And 
with young people such as these, the prospects of the North are 
in sure hands, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing lots of evidence of 
lack of respect for local voices in education today in this House 
and from this government. I would like to see this minister go. 
If she can’t go, can she find someone else from this 
government? There’s lots of you over there. Who’s going to go 
to that graduation, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And if you can’t do that, can you at least stand in this Assembly 
and admit that the Sask Party failed those students by closing 
down NORTEP, and they failed to ensure that teacher training 
in the North will remain affordable? With students now facing 
an increase in costs, nearly $7,000 more than they were paying 
before, will the minister admit these failures? And if she can’t 
do that, will she at least do the bare minimum and confirm for 
us today in this Assembly that those students already enrolled in 
NORTEP will receive the full support that they were promised 
on admission throughout the time in the program? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
would simply ask that some of that negative energy be 
channelled to focusing on the best interests of northern students 
and not on pitting one institution against another, with students 
caught in the middle, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let’s be very clear: Northlands has said it will automatically 
accept NORTEP students. Seventeen Bachelor of Education 
students are currently enrolled for this fall, and we are working 
with Northlands and NORTEP to come up with a fair, workable 
solution on supports for NORTEP students, which we believe is 
possible, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Currently NORTEP is the only program in the province that 
offers free tuition, books, and living expenses to non-treaty 
students. That poses some issues of equity for other students, 
including at Northlands, who pay tuition and apply for student 
supports, Mr. Speaker. Integrating northern university 
programming into our regional college system provides students 
with a much needed way forward and a great path to the future, 



April 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2331 

Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

Reporting of Political Donations 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, it’s hard for people to trust the 
Sask Party these days. Just think about what we’ve been dealing 
with: their desperate bill to let them sell off our Crowns, their 
massive giveaways to big corporations like CP, their massive 
tax cuts for companies and the wealthy while the rest of us are 
being asked to pay a billion dollars or more in taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’ve completely forgotten who they’re working 
for. But, Mr. Speaker, there’s hope. They could clear all of this 
up. They have an opportunity to rise to the occasion and make 
all these questions go away. Will the Sask Party finally come to 
their senses and join us to get big money out of politics? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and the 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we have a robust 
system in this province with respect to the public reporting of 
donations to political parties, Mr. Speaker, and we have a very 
robust lobbying legislation. So any member of the public, Mr. 
Speaker, any member of the public can look at that lobbying 
registry and find out who is talking to who in government, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I find it hypocritical though, Mr. Speaker, that that member 
would stand up and talk about big money in politics at the same 
time when they’re looking for sponsors for their leader’s dinner, 
Mr. Speaker. If they had the courage of their convictions, Mr. 
Speaker, if they had the courage of their convictions, they 
would say that, Mr. Speaker. But they don’t. They’re happy 
enough to continue on looking for donations, looking for 
donations from unions, Mr. Speaker, to sponsor any one of a 
number of things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So as far as we’re concerned, Mr. Speaker, the system that we 
have in place now is working very, very well, Mr. Speaker, and 
it will continue to work well.  
 
[11:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you. I’ve got a point of order, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — We’ll listen to the Government House 
Leader’s point of order, please. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The interim 
Leader of the Opposition during question period used the phrase 
“captain grandstand,” which I’m pretty sure is unparliamentary. 
And I’d ask him to withdraw and apologize and address the 
Premier by his proper title. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — I would withdraw that. 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — There’s a lot of additional noise in the 
Chamber today. I would ask that the Leader of the Opposition 
please rise to his feet and withdraw and apologize for the 
remark. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Yes, I have no problem apologizing, 
withdrawing and apologizing for those words. 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 
to report Bill No. 48, The Education Property Tax Act without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill be now 
read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in the Committee of the Whole on Bills on Bill 
No. 48 and that the bill be now read a third time. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed to move 
third reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 48 — The Education Property Tax Act 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I move that this bill be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 48 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 



2332 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2017 

motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 
Bill No. 49, The Education Property Tax Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2017, a bilingual bill without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in the 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that this bill be now 
read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in the Committee of the Whole on Bills on Bill 
No. 49 and that the bill be now read a third time. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed to move 
third reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 49 — The Education Property Tax Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2017/Loi de 2017 portant modifications 

corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Education Property Tax Act 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I move that the bill be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 49 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — I’ve been informed that Her Honour is here 
for Royal Assent. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
[At 11:06 Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following bills.] 
 
Her Honour: — Pray be seated. 
 
The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour that this 
Legislative Assembly in its present session has passed several 
bills which in the name of the Assembly I present to Your 
Honour and to the bills I respectfully request Your Honour’s 
assent. 
 
Clerk: — Your Honour, the bills are as follows: 
 
Bill No. 40 - The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016/Loi 

modificative de 2016 sur l’interprétation 
Bill No. 48 - The Education Property Tax Act 
Bill No. 49 - The Education Property Tax Consequential 

Amendment Act, 2017/Loi de 2017 portant 
modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée 
The Education Property Tax Act 

 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these bills. 
 
[Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 11:08.] 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 335 through 359. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 
to questions 335 to 359. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Budget Cuts 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour 
today to stand and speak in this debate with this motion that’s 
before us: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the government for their 
deep and unexpected cuts to cities and towns, for axing 
grants-in-lieu, forcing municipalities to raise taxes and cut 
services, and for making Saskatchewan families pay for the 
Saskatchewan Party’s decade-long run of mismanagement, 
scandal, and waste. 

 



April 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2333 

A lot in that motion talks about how municipalities are feeling 
with regards to this decision with the grants-in-lieu, Mr. 
Speaker. Why does this government want to break all these 
decade-old contracts with urban municipalities, Mr. Speaker? 
 
I know you’re familiar that my background is mental health, 
and I relate to this situation as a state of grief. Municipalities 
were not aware that this could even be possibly something that 
this government would be going forward with because, like I 
said before, Mr. Speaker, these were contracts that are decades 
old. They were signed years and years ago, and nobody ever 
thought that this government would break their contracts with 
municipalities without even any level of consultation. And, Mr. 
Speaker, when the minister says that she did consult because 
she said everything was on the table, that’s not proper 
consultation because the municipalities did not once believe 
that they would break decades-old contracts that were signed. 
 
And the minister’s responsible for managing a relationship with 
urban leaders, and that relationship requires that level of 
consultation when it’s time to make these tough decisions. And 
I think everybody in this province are aware of the financial 
situation we’re in, and I think municipalities were ready to 
partner up with the province and make some tough decisions 
where they needed to be made. But to eliminate contracts that 
were signed with the leaders and with the provincial leaders, 
that affects a lot of these municipalities in this province, and it’s 
going to be devastating for them. And they’ve had to make 
some really hard decisions on what they’re going to do with 
regards to this loss. 
 
And I don’t believe it’s very fair, and it didn’t include a lot of 
the other municipalities that are in the province when we were 
needing to make these tough decisions, you know, Mr. Speaker. 
So like in 10 years, these municipalities are going to lose $400 
million. That’s a lot of money, you know, and we need to talk 
to those leaders and consult with them and make a plan. 
 
So how can anyone trust any deals that they currently have with 
the government when we see that they can, with the stroke of a 
pen, break these contracts that they have agreed? And like I 
said, Mr. Speaker, municipalities are our partners. They can and 
are willing to help, and the minister just needs to consult with 
them and come up with a plan that’s more suitable and won’t be 
so damaging to these communities. 
 
I want to provide a little bit of history with regards to these 
payments-in-lieu. And so I’m going to read some information 
that was provided to all of the members here, I believe, from 
SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association]. It 
was a package that we got; I believe it was this week. And in 
here it says: 
 

In the early 20th century, many municipalities started 
producing and distributing electrical power which also 
gave them a new revenue source. While electrification 
often began in the business district, municipal power 
expanded to residential areas and out to nearby farms. 
SaskPower was created in the 1940s to expand 
electrification to all areas of Saskatchewan, and they 
bought out these existing municipal power utilities to 
create a provincial grid. These purchased agreements 
covered capital investments and include a guarantee that 

SaskPower and any subsidiaries would pay royalties in 
perpetuity on future sales of power. 

 
So this was for future sales; these were agreements. Basically 
because municipalities were giving up their own power 
company, the new company promised to pay them a little bit of 
the product they were going to sell. And these royalties were to 
be paid forever. Those agreements were forever. 
 
Not all municipalities had their own power utility to sell, so 
that’s why only some received these payments. It’s not unfair 
that they received them. It’s unfair that the provincial 
government used the budget to take these revenues away from 
SUMA members to cover the provincial deficit. 
 
[11:15] 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, like I said, these are going to be covering a lot 
of communities, and I wanted to read about some of the 
members here that are going to be impacted with these changes 
to our hometowns — every one of our hometowns. And I think 
it’s important for every one of the members here to pay 
attention to this. 
 
So the member from The Battlefords: it’s North Battleford and 
Battleford that are being impacted. The member from 
Weyburn-Big Muddy: Weyburn and Yellow Grass. The 
member from Melfort: it’s Melfort, Watson, LeRoy, Star City. 
The member from Melville-Saltcoats, he has quite a few 
communities that are impacted: it’s Melville, Esterhazy, 
Langenburg, Churchbridge, Saltcoats, and Bredenbury. And 
then the member from Kindersley: it’s Kindersley, Eston, 
Kerrobert, Macklin, Luseland, Eatonia, and Scott. And then the 
member from Martensville-Warman: it’s Warman and 
Martensville both being affected. And the member from Carrot 
River Valley: Nipawin is being impacted, Tisdale, Carrot River, 
and Arborfield. And the member for Rosetown-Elrose: it’s 
Rosetown, Delisle, Elrose, Kyle, Zealandia. And then the 
member from Wood River: it’s Assiniboia, Gravelbourg, 
Lafleche, and moose bank. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Mossbank. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mossbank. The member from Moosomin — 
I’m glad some people are listening here — is Moosomin, 
Grenfell, Kipling, Whitewood, Wolseley, Rocanville, 
Broadview, and Wapella. The member for carrot knife 
Turtleford: it’s Unity and Wilkie. And then the member for 
Cypress Hills: I know it’s Maple Creek, Shaunavon, Leader, 
Gull Lake, Eastend, Cabri, and Burstall. The member for 
Canora-Pelly: Canora, Kamsack, Preeceville, Sturgis, Norquay. 
The member from Biggar-Sask Valley: it’s Biggar, Langham, 
and Asquith. 
 
The member from Indian Head-Milestone: Fort Qu’Appelle, 
Indian Head, Balgonie, Qu’Appelle, Milestone, and . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Sintaluta. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Sintaluta, thank you. I see that he’s listening, 
and I’m happy to see that some of these members are listening 
today. 
 



2334 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2017 

The member from Kelvington-Wadena: Weyburn . . . oh 
Wynyard, Wadena, Kelvington, Foam Lake, and Rose Valley. 
And the member from Lumsden-Morse: Lumsden, Herbert, and 
Morse. And the member from Cannington: Carlyle, Oxbow, 
Carnduff, Redvers, Stoughton, Arcola, Lampman, and . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — Alameda. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Alameda, Alameda. So I see the member 
from Cannington is paying attention as well, and I’m glad. And 
I hope they’re going to go talk to their municipal leaders. 
 
The member from Batoche: it’s Wakaw, Birch Hills, Cudworth, 
Kinistino, and Duck Lake. And the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood: it’s Strasbourg, Balcarres, Cupar, and 
Lemberg. And the member from Estevan: it’s Midale, Bienfait, 
and Estevan. 
 
And there’s 12 members from Regina that are impacted. 
There’s 14 members from Saskatoon, two members from 
Moose Jaw, the two members from Prince Albert, and 
Yorkton’s impacted, the member from Swift Current, the 
member from Lloydminster, the member from Meadow Lake. 
And the member from Rosthern-Shellbrook is also impacted 
because Rosthern is one of the communities. 
 
But also the Minister for Government Relations with regards to 
her communities. It’s Humboldt, Watrous, Lanigan, Bruno, 
Allan, and Colonsay. So there’s a lot of hometowns here, Mr. 
Speaker, that are impacted, and the majority, well almost all of 
the members here, are impacted. 
 
And so I’m hoping everybody goes and talks to their municipal 
leaders. I’ve talked to quite a few of them. I haven’t talked to all 
of them. But I know with talking to the ones that I have, they 
say that they’ve been going through all of the emotions. They 
were really angry. They were surprised. They were shocked. 
They were angry. Then now they just are kind of in disbelief 
that this is happening. 
 
And they’re wondering, because these are contracts, Mr. 
Speaker, what would be the compensation for these 
municipalities for ending these contracts? If you have a deal 
with someone and you made a lifelong deal, there should be 
some level of compensation for cancelling that deal before the 
end of the deal. And will this change the status of the 
agreements with the sale of these utilities? So I think those are 
really important questions that should be pondered before the 
minister decides to put through the amendments of this bill and 
the decision with the grants-in-lieu. 
 
And so I also think it’s really important, Mr. Speaker, that we 
talk about what the consequences of downloading this 
provincial deficit onto these municipalities is, because that’s 
essentially what it is, Mr. Speaker. When we asked, why is this 
being done, they said, well we want to put that money into the 
general revenue so that we could help pay off our deficit. 
 
Well now this is putting these expenses onto the people who 
live in these municipalities, and we’ve heard of a lot of 
communities that have had to increase taxes. And we know 
because, well a lot of municipalities, they’ve made long-term 
budgets because they were thinking that this was going to be a 

consistent agreement with the province, that they increased 
taxes this year, but they’re probably going to have to increase 
taxes in the next years as well, you know. 
 
And so these are going to be families that are going to be 
paying for this. I know myself and the other member from 
Prince Albert, our taxes will be going up probably next year 
because of this. And I know all the members in Regina, their 
taxes have had to go up, you know, and they’re going to be 
paying more. And so that’s not just us, but it’s our families. It’s 
our neighbours. It’s everybody in our communities. 
 
They’ve also had to make decisions on cutting programs. And I 
was just reading before I came in this morning about how the 
Lighthouse in North Battleford . . . The North Battleford city 
council had to make a really tough decision and eliminate 
$25,000 that they give to the Lighthouse. And $25,000 for a 
community-based organization is a lot of money, Mr. Speaker, 
and that goes a long way. And that’s going to be a huge loss for 
the Lighthouse, but they’ve had to make those tough decisions. 
And so some communities cut the program. Some of them had 
to, like, eliminate some of the funding that they provide for it, 
which in essence will eliminate some of the services provided. 
 
And I know in Prince Albert our police services is one of the 
agencies that have had to make some tough decisions and help 
the city manage with this loss of funding. And so we have a 
community that has a lot of issues with regards to crime, and 
increasing issues with regards to crime, and so to see that our 
police budget is going to be reduced is really troubling and 
worrisome for a lot of the residents in the community. 
 
And we know that there’s going to be an increase in fees. We 
have heard of increase in parking fees. We’ve heard of increase 
in fees to going to our recreational facilities. There’s going to 
be a lot of increases. Not only did our PST [provincial sales tax] 
increase by 1 per cent and the PST exemptions be placed on a 
lot of different areas, now our municipal taxes are going up. 
We’re going to be having to pay more to do things with our 
family, and it’s going to impact just everyone here, you know? 
So we need to really consider that. 
 
And some of the cities were talking about possibly putting in 
their line when people receive their taxes, saying that this is the 
provincial government’s tax increase. Because it’s important 
that residents realize and know that it’s not the municipalities 
who have made that decision to increase the taxes. It’s due to 
the fact that this government is not abiding to the agreement 
that they have with the municipalities. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, before I close here I have a lot more to add, 
but I’ll hopefully have time to do that. I’d like to move this 
motion. And so the motion reads here: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the government for their 
deep and unexpected cuts to cities and towns, for axing 
grants-in-lieu, forcing municipalities to raise taxes and cut 
services, and for making Saskatchewan families pay for the 
Sask Party’s decade-long run of mismanagement, scandal, 
and waste. 

 
I do so move this motion. 
 



April 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2335 

The Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert Northcote 
has put forth the following motion: 

 
That this Assembly condones the government for their 
deep and unexpected cuts to cities and towns, for axing 
grants-in-lieu, forcing municipalities to raise taxes and cut 
services, and for making Saskatchewan families pay for the 
Saskatchewan Party’s decade-long run of mismanagement, 
scandal, and waste. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
from Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Steele: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, to you and through you 
and to the members of the Assembly and to all of those 
watching this debate, it is an honour to stand before you today. 
 
We are facing hard times that require tough decisions to be 
made when it comes to the 2017-2018 budget. Saskatchewan is 
facing a $1.2 billion shortfall in resource revenues; $1.2 billion 
shortfall cannot be ignored. We needed to tighten up our belt 
and figure out ways to help Saskatchewan move forward 
through tough times. 
 
Even with these tough decisions, our government has made the 
choices to ensure that it has as little effect on the people of 
Saskatchewan as possible. Mr. Speaker, one of those tough 
decisions was to change the grants-in-lieu program. This wasn’t 
an easy decision, but we heard consistently that municipal 
leaders did not want us to change the revenue sharing. 
 
When faced with the choice and the need to reduce spending, it 
was chosen to change the outdated, complicated grant-in-lieu 
program while maintaining revenue sharing. After the budget 
came out, we listened to the municipal leaders and worked with 
them to alleviate their concerns and to find ways to ensure that 
the municipalities who had grants-in-lieu are not getting more 
than 30 per cent deduction of their revenue sharing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it needs to be noted that a majority of the 
communities in Saskatchewan were not even receiving the 
SaskEnergy or SaskPower payments referred to in the 
grants-in-lieu taxation. That is based on a flat percentage of 
utility sales within the municipalities. 
 
Urban municipalities have been asked to absorb approximately 
a 2.5 per cent decrease, about 33 million. We believe this is a 
fair thing to ask our partners. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP are quick to criticize but haven’t yet 
offered any real solutions to the revenue shortfall caused by 
depressed commodity prices. So today, I would ask, what 
would the NDP have done? They would have cut funding which 
we have been . . . shutting municipalities down like they did 
when they were in power? Would they have closed schools? 
Would they shut hospitals? Would they fire front-line staff? 
Those questions are relevant because the NDP were in power 
when they closed schools and hospitals and refused to be a good 
partner to municipalities. Our record, however, since 2007, 
municipal revenue sharing has more than doubled, up to 130 
million a year, and municipalities will still receive over 257 
million in municipal revenue sharing. 
 

Since 2007, Mr. Speaker, Cypress Hills municipalities have 
received provincial funding to assist with much-needed 
infrastructure, highways, health care facilities, just to name to a 
few. In 2008 my constituency received funding to fix and repair 
highways — Highway 32, 3.4 million; Highway 37, 7.7 million; 
and Highway 1, 22.1 million. In 2009, 33.9 million was 
invested on the highway within my constituency. 
 
[11:30] 
 
In 2010 Highway 1 going west had 10 million spent on 
much-needed repairs and was in addition to 39 million invested 
on other highways in my constituency that year. Mr. Speaker, I 
could go on and list how much was spent every year on 
highway upgrades within my constituency, proving how our 
government is consistent and reliable. 
 
Several municipalities received infrastructure funding to assist 
in upgrades to their water treatment plants, sewage stations, 
parks and arenas through the years since we have became in 
government. Burstall received 472,000 for their water treatment 
upgrades. Fox Valley received 229,000 towards their water 
treatment upgrades. Swift Current, which is just beside my 
constituency, received 990,000 towards upgrades for their water 
treatment plant. Shaunavon Wickenheiser Centre received 
983,000 on phase 3 and 250,000 on their multi-purpose facility. 
Maple Creek received funding for their Centennial Park 
upgrade, 201,000; sewage main replacement, 239,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the NDP were in power, they were closing 
hospitals which in turn was hurting the survival of communities 
no matter what size. Mr. Speaker, our government wants 
communities to survive and thrive and that is why we continue 
to invest in communities within our province. 
 
In 2015 Maple Creek received 36.2 million to invest in their 
integrated health care facility. I’m happy to announce that 
Leader is moving forward with their construction of their 
integrated health care facility. Our government will be helping 
with the funding of 6.7 million allowing them to move forward 
with their construction plans. And those are just a few 
examples. If we look outside my constituency, there are 
numerous examples we have invested to build infrastructure 
within our province for new proposals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was a municipal leader for many years, and I just 
thought that the member from Prince Albert Northcote 
acknowledges that I had some experience in that area. It was a 
privilege to serve as reeve and councillor for the RM [rural 
municipality] of Gull Lake for over 20 years where I served on 
a number of committees in my time on council. This gave me 
the opportunity to develop an understanding of policy initiatives 
and appreciate the purpose and challenges working with 
provincial and federal governments. We had the responsibility 
to ensure that the health and welfare of our people in rural 
Saskatchewan were taken care of. We were about the municipal 
services, establishing policies, and providing direction from our 
operation of the municipality, giving me a very strong 
understanding of the needs of our rural people first hand. 
 
Our government also understands the people of Saskatchewan. 
They have shown over the years and continue to show, that the 
people of communities . . . communities matter to them . . . 



2336 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2017 

continue to invest in the communities to ensure that they thrive 
for the people who live there. 
 
I was very active in the SARM [Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities] for over 15 years. I had roles as a director, 
as vice-president before moving to provincial politics. I can say 
from the experience that the . . . from my . . . that was the 
experience that the NDP did not have a good working 
relationship with municipalities when they were in, refusing to 
invest in infrastructure, continuously cutting funding in 
municipalities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SARM has worked with our government and 
SUMA in an effective way to increase municipal co-operation 
and capacity. The government and SARM have built a good 
working relationship over the years that benefit the province as 
a whole. The contrast is clear. The NDP may talk tough, but 
they lack in the real solution and their record speaks for itself. 
Mr. Speaker, this conflicts with our record of investment and 
strong partnerships with Saskatchewan municipalities. That is 
why I cannot support the motion from the member opposite. 
Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And it is always an honour for me to be able to rise in the 
75-minute debate. I find it’s an interesting, almost two 
polarized, different world views. It’s always quite interesting to 
follow the discussion and see how people characterize their 
particular times in government. 
 
You know, the speaker who was just up, the member from 
Cypress Hills, was talking about all what he perceives as 
accomplishments since 2007. But he forgot to mention that this 
is a party that came into government when revenues were 
unbelievably high. Oil was $140 a barrel, Mr. Speaker. I mean 
when you talk about volatility in resource revenues, I mean this 
government was handed the best money this province has ever 
seen. And, Mr. Speaker, what did they do? They blew through it 
all. He forgot to mention that. 
 
He also forgot to mention that they also, in addition to that, 
spent every penny of savings that was in the coffers at the time, 
burned through it all. And now what’s the result of that, Mr. 
Speaker? They’re sticking it to the municipal sector, Mr. 
Speaker. And despite his good relationships, we know that the 
municipal sector is not sitting back on this and taking it lightly. 
There’s been so much concern raised by the municipal sector 
for the deep cuts that have been in this budget, cuts to cities, 
towns, and obviously to programs that are very important to 
rural municipalities. 
 
We had people from every community rising up, lots of rural 
communities, Mr. Deputy Speaker, rising up against the unjust 
cuts to the libraries. That’s one area where for $4 million, this 
government has actually seen the errors of their ways and had 
enough sense to change it. But they haven’t done that any 
further with the municipalities. 
 
Now I must say, there was some clawback after the initial 
announcement. We’ve seen that time and time again with this 

government. Oh, you know, people don’t like it; I guess we’d 
better fix it. But they’re very stubborn about which ones they 
fix and which ones they don’t. 
 
There’s a few things I want to raise in my short 10 minutes 
here, Mr. Speaker. And one is the bill that they’re imposing on 
the people of Saskatchewan and some of the clauses in this bill 
that are really unacceptable, Mr. Speaker. And particularly the 
specific clause that denies the right to appeal. This is a very 
heavy-handed tool that a government uses and shouldn’t be 
used at all, or if it is used, it should be used very sparingly. But 
we see that in at least two bills in this session alone, Mr. 
Speaker. They’ve also inserted the same bill in the amendments 
to the water Act — and, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s Bill 44 — and 
another clause where we see that people of Saskatchewan are 
being denied the right to appeal decisions of this government. 
 
Now I found a paper that I want to cite from a little bit. This is 
from the Law Reform Commission of Saskatchewan and it’s 
about . . . The title of the paper is Appeals from the Exercise of 
Statutory Powers of Decision. This is a final report that came 
out in March of 2012. Now the Law Reform Commission has 
made a number of recommendations which actually this 
government is going in the exact opposite direction from. And 
basically, I’ll just share with the Assembly here some of the 
thoughts that are put in this final report. So in the executive 
summary, they say this: 
 

This paper is concerned with appeals to the courts from 
decisions directly affecting individuals that are made by 
officials under statutory authorization. Such appeals are 
usually provided for by statute. However, there is a lack of 
consistency in the form and scope of statutory appeal 
rights, and some statutes do not provide for appeals. This 
paper makes recommendations respecting the right to 
appeal, grounds of appeal and structure of appeals. 

 
So there’s six recommendations that came out of this report. 
Number one, “There should be a right of appeal from the 
exercise of all statutory powers of decision.” Now, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s exact opposite of what we see in this bill where this 
government is denying the right to appeal from these statutory 
powers of decision. 
 
It goes on to say “Statutes that create a statutory power of 
decision and expressly prohibit appeal or judicial review should 
be amended to allow an appeal or review.” This is a complete 
opposite treatment of what the Law Reform Commission of 
Saskatchewan has recommended just five years ago, Mr. 
Speaker, in 2012. This government is going the exact opposite 
way. And I think it’s a scary thing in this day and age when we 
see a government refusing to follow recommendations from the 
Law Reform Commission that deal with people’s rights, 
people’s rights when their self-determination is being affected, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The third one, “When a statute containing a statutory power of 
decision is in the process of being amended or reviewed, a right 
of appeal should be inserted if none is present.”  

 
And, Mr. Speaker, there were days when governments weren’t 
required to be accountable to their people. It’s called a 
monarchy or it’s called a dictatorship, Mr. Speaker. But in a 



April 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2337 

democracy, governments need to be held accountable, and 
citizens and municipal bodies and whoever is affected by the 
decisions of the government need to be able to have recourse in 
the event that the government is overreaching its powers, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s what the courts are for. That’s what they’re 
for. So when we have a government that inserts clauses in bills 
like this and refuse to allow people their rights, which have 
been recommended by the people who study our laws, I think 
that’s a definite sign of a mature government that’s maybe gone 
a little bit overripe, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now in committee on April 5th, I raised the issue of this, the 
cuts to what they call payments-in-lieu of taxes or grants-in-lieu 
of taxes. We’ve understood subsequently that there are a 
number of different ways that payments or grants are raised by 
our public Crowns in order to provide funding to municipalities 
or funding to different agencies. But the one in particular that 
this government is now impinging upon, these are contracts 
that, I believe there are 13 of them that I know of, that are 
agreements in perpetuity. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when the revenue sharing formula was being 
discussed and reviewed, these contracts were taken into 
account. That was part of the negotiations that were in play 
when the formula . . . And as you know, it’s a complicated 
formula and it took a long time to accomplish. So these 
agreements were part of that, and yet this minister seems to 
think, oh well those are something that I just found on a line 
item and I’m going to cut them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other thing that really bothers me about this 
whole process is that these funds that were collected and 
provided to these communities, these municipalities, aren’t just 
being left with our Crowns, Mr. Speaker. No. What’s happening 
to them? They’re being clawed back and they’re being taken 
and put into the GRF [General Revenue Fund]. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we have something in this province called 
Crown Investments Corporation, the CIC, and this is a complete 
run around on the CIC. So I have the minister, I asked him in 
committee the other day, I said . . . First of all he wasn’t too 
sure what was happening to the money because I said, if I 
understand correctly . . . This is a quote from Hansard: 
 

If I understand correctly, instead of the money flowing 
from the Crowns to the municipalities, are those Crowns 
now required to pay that amount to the provincial GRF?”  

 
And then the minister gave me incorrect information. He said, 
“No . . . It’s not necessarily a cash payment to the GRF; it just 
simply shows up in their operating earnings.” And then he was 
corrected by his officials at that point, Mr. Speaker, and he says 
further on, “I’ve been corrected. It is money that they’re going 
to transfer to the GRF.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, so when you see . . . Let’s take a look at what the 
mandate of CIC is because clearly this government is going 
around that and not following the requirements of the law, Mr. 
Speaker. Crown Investments Corporation has statutory 
authority under The Crown Corporations Act, 1993. Here’s 
what it says on their web page, Mr. Speaker: 
 

CIC is the holding company for all subsidiary Crown 

corporations and shall exercise its supervisory powers 
granted by this Act in the interests of all Saskatchewan 
residents.  
 

And then it goes on to say: 
 

CIC is the agency for making and administrating, on 
behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, the 
investments authorized by this Act or any previous Crown 
Corporations Act. 

 
So let’s take a look, Mr. Speaker, at The Crown Corporations 
Act, 1993, and what is the role, objects, purposes, and powers of 
the CIC. We have section 5, CIC. And these are . . . Section 
5(1) is exactly what I read from the web site, but if you go on 
and look at it, it says CIC is responsible for “the financial 
relationships between subsidiary Crown corporations and the 
Government of Saskatchewan.” Section 5(2)d, CIC is 
responsible for “the financial relationships between subsidiary 
Crown corporations and the Government of Saskatchewan.” 
 
What this government is doing here completely does an end run 
on CIC, on The Crown Corporations Act, 1993. It’s 
unacceptable, Mr. Speaker. It’s unacceptable the way the cities 
are being treated, Mr. Speaker. And it’s unacceptable that 
taxpayers are going to bear the brunt of this one way or another, 
but it’s being off-loaded onto the cities. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I believe that members opposite are going 
to have to pay attention to what the law says and figure out how 
they can go around The Crown Corporations Act in this way. I 
certainly do support the motion, and I’m interested to hear what 
other members opposite have to say about it. And I look 
forward to the questions subsequently. 
 
[11:45] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for allowing 
me to speak against the motion presented by the member from 
Prince Albert Northcote. In the budget presented in March 
2017, this government was challenged with the task of trying to 
make up the difference in a $1.2 billion resource revenue 
shortfall. Now we’re well aware of the risks of putting too 
much pressure on one sector of the economy, so we tried to 
spread the risk, really, through the majority of segments that 
could absorb at least some of this shortfall. 
 
Now that was a $33 million, or a 2.5 per cent of the shortfall, 
request of our urban municipality partners. Not that this was 
taken lightly, as in times of economic difficulty, we realize that 
really every dollar paid or collected has a lot of places that it 
can be spent by any municipality. 
 
Municipal revenue sharing accounts for the majority of funding 
that originates from the provincial government. Contrary to the 
sky is falling, you haven’t done anything for us lately attitude 
expressed by the opposition, we need to remind them that the 
revenue sharing in this budget amounted to just under $258 
million in the 2017-18 year. Now this has increased by over 130 
million or just about two times what was provided in 



2338 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2017 

2007-2008. 
 
Other important expenditures in this year’s budget includes 
municipal infrastructure spending of 279 million, which 
includes transfers to municipalities including the new Canada 
building fund, Clean Water and Wastewater Fund, the federal 
Gas Tax Program, Public Transit Infrastructure Fund, transit 
assistance for people with disabilities program, and 
Communities in Transition funding. 
 
Transportation infrastructure spending in this budget adds up to 
over $860 million, including improvements in highways around 
Regina, Martensville, Warman, Estevan, Clavet, and municipal 
roads for the economy, urban connectors, and community 
airports. 
 
It’s interesting going through the archives of time and watching 
the actions and reactions of a provincial government going 
through similar economic situations and how they handled it. 
An article found in the Leader-Post dated February 6th, 2001 
talks about the city of Regina requesting a minimum increase of 
$3 million from the province if it was going to preserve existing 
services and programs without having to increase property 
taxes. The mayor of the day, Pat Fiacco, was quoted as saying 
this: 
 

Kim Trew, the NDP MLA for Regina Coronation Park, 
was quoted saying he wished that really the government 
could wave a magic wand and provide all the money that 
everybody could use. Now while Regina’s appeal for more 
funding will be taken into consideration, the government 
must be fiscally responsible. This is what Mr. Trew said. 

 
Now also in that 2001 article, it was discussed by Mayor Fiacco 
that over the previous 10 years, the province had slashed the 
city’s funding by over 70 per cent. He proclaimed the NDP 
government of the day had eliminated their deficit by 
downloading the tax burdens on local governments. And I’m 
interpreting that the opposition believes we must repeat what 
they had done in the past. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government has assisted the city of 
Regina over the last 10 years in a significant way. Revenue 
sharing alone has added up to over $345 million, providing 
$40.5 million in this budget year alone — 157 per cent increase 
since 2007. In addition, they’ve provided over $47 million in 
project funding for items such as wastewater and drainage 
projects, recreational infrastructure improvements, seven 
economic enhancement projects, wastewater treatment and 
wastewater projects. 
 
In addition, we have the Mosaic stadium project, $80 million; U 
of R [University of Regina] capital infusion of 99 million; K to 
12 [kindergarten to grade 12] school enhancements, $222 
million; IPSCO Place and Brandt Centre improvements, 22 and 
a half million; the Lewvan highway interchange, 18 million; 
and the Regina bypass.  
 
In the city of Melville, this government over the last 10 years 
has added over $9 million of infrastructure and grant funding to 
provide upgrades to their sewage and water system, waterline 
and rink upgrades. And they were a major contributor to the 
new Horizon Credit Union Centre arena complex. In addition, 

revenue sharing to the city of Melville of 860,000 this year has 
added up to just under $8 million over the last 10 years to the 
city of Melville. Mr. Deputy Speaker, is this a government that 
could be accused of downloading on the local government? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, after 10 years of generosity to the city and 
municipalities around the province, we have hit a bump in the 
road. We have a $1.2 billion revenue shortfall. We’re asking 
everyone in the province to help ensure that we have 
sustainable government services moving into the future. So I 
guess we have to remind the member from Saskatoon Nutana, I 
guess, of the billions of dollars of investments that we’ve gone 
through in this province in the last 10 years, really to cover up 
and fill in the shortfalls, the infrastructure shortfalls that we’ve 
inherited. 
 
So we’ve been accused of balancing on the backs of the 
taxpayers that was prefaced in the article that I referenced 
earlier. We can talk about the 40 new schools that we’ve built. 
How about the new health centres, long-term care facilities? We 
could talk about the thousands of new professionals that we’ve 
added to the provincial economy, including doctors, nurses, 
teachers. Maybe we should remind the opposition of the 
thousands of taxpayers who have saved billions of dollars over 
the last 10 years to the progressive tax changes that we’ve 
implemented. 
 
Maybe we need to remind them again of the billions of dollars 
that we’ve spent on social services, highways, education, parks, 
health care. Virtually every ministry has seen a budget that is 
significantly over the levels of funding that they’ve had with the 
previous government. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, part of this government’s plan is to 
address the shortfall, including changes to the administration of 
grants in lieu of taxes paid by the Crowns, and more 
specifically SaskPower and SaskEnergy. Unfortunately, due to 
historical wording used to describe various payments provided 
by our Crowns, we have a significant amount of confusion and 
misinformation really being thrown around by groups that are 
being relied on by our municipalities for information. 
 
While payments by SaskPower and SaskEnergy are referred to 
as grants in lieu of taxes, they’re actually based on a flat 
percentage of utility sales within a municipality and unrelated to 
the value of property. The reason payments are based on utility 
sales instead of asset values is that the payments are also used 
to compensate municipalities for the revenue that they would’ve 
been able to generate if they had their own electricity or natural 
gas distribution systems. These agreements and their history are 
extremely complex. They’re not very transparent and definitely 
not evenly distributed across the province. 
 
A large number of Saskatchewan communities really do not 
have these agreements and do not receive these payments from 
SaskPower or SaskEnergy. An example of the inequality would 
be the approximately 90 non-city communities that receive 
SaskEnergy grants-in-lieu that range in yearly payments from 
$2,200 a year to $75,000 a year. How do you explain to the 
Theodores and the Graysons really of the province why they did 
not receive these payments in the past? Some of these 
SaskEnergy agreements originated in the 1950s. 
 



April 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2339 

Or there are a couple of exceptions where SaskEnergy actually 
does pay tax. When SaskEnergy leases a building where the 
owner paid property tax, there’s a flow-through to cover the 
property tax. Or when SaskEnergy bought property from an 
owner who did pay property tax, the corporation still pays the 
tax. 
 
There needs to be a consistent process where everything is the 
same. Our stakeholders need consistency. Revenue sharing 
provides consistency. Grants-in-lieu, not so much. 
 
With Power, the payment of grants-in-lieu is based on 5 per 
cent of electrical revenue collected within incorporated cities 
and was paid in agreements between SaskPower and the cities. 
Grants in lieu of taxes originated as part compensation for the 
revenues that cities lost as a result of transferring their assets 
and their electrical system to SaskPower when they 
amalgamated all power services in the ’40s, ’50s, and ’60s. It 
can be defined as the opportunity cost of not having their own 
utility. 
 
However it’s also interesting to note that there are still two 
holdouts in the province who did not agree to the original 
transfers and maintain unique arrangements with the 
government. More inconsistency in the delivery of our core 
services to this province. 
 
Now let’s also confuse the situation a little more by discussing 
the municipal surcharge. That was started in the ’30s. These 
were offered as SaskPower Corporation absorbed all the small 
municipally owned and privately owned electrical companies 
that were scattered throughout the province. These entities were 
a significant source of revenue throughout the province. 
 
So it’s funny, the rural municipalities really received no 
municipal surcharge-in-lieu from SaskPower. This was 
contested by SARM in 2015 when they passed a resolution at 
their AGM [annual general meeting] requesting that all Crown 
corporations be required to pay tax on all facilities in the rural 
municipalities they’re situated in, to level the playing field in 
the utility sector and give fair compensation to these RMs. 
Ultimately the inconsistency of grants-in-lieu has resulted in 
significant discrepancies throughout the province. Now is the 
time to . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member’s time has expired. I 
recognize the member from Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, this is my first time rising in a 75-minute debate, and I 
found out I was going to do it about 10 minutes ago. So that’s 
fine. I don’t mind a bit of a surprise and a pop quiz, a surprise 
phone call. A little surprise, that’s all right. Right? 
 
But there’s some kinds of surprises that are much less welcome. 
Some kinds of surprises that we just don’t enjoy nearly as 
much, and we’ve seen a lot of that kind of surprise in this 
budget and from this government in recent weeks. 
 
We saw the huge surprise of cuts to libraries across the province 
and cuts to libraries completely in the major cities. People who 
are counting on those services for access to books, access to 
computers to look for jobs — surprise, not there anymore. And 

now, surprise, they’re back. How do you actually have any faith 
in what’s going to happen when you have that kind of yanking 
around of the public confidence? 
 
Students in schools and university planning ahead for their year 
ahead with a fixed amount of income, fixed amount of money 
they’ve got available — surprise, we’re going to cut the 
universities’ budgets significantly, the colleges significantly. 
Some of your programs won’t be there anymore. Your tuition 
may go well up. Surprise. 
 
Well what about a family who’s dealing with the illness or even 
pending departure of a loved one and wants to have that support 
in hospital, support for their spiritual needs and want to look to 
the chaplain in the hospital, want to look to that pastoral care? 
Surprise, it’s gone. 
 
Or people who are counting on the income that they’ve signed 
contracts for. The jobs that they are in that have . . . and the 
mortgages that they have to pay, the responsibilities that they 
have to pay that they’re planning based on the income, based on 
their salary. Well, surprise, those contracts aren’t of much 
interest to us anymore. Everybody’s got to go down by 3.5 per 
cent. Surprise, if you don’t go for it, you might not even have 
that job. 
 
So all of these big surprises, big surprises without any 
consultation, without any discussion. We saw an article in the 
Leader-Post yesterday from the editorial board describing the 
approach of this government as shoot first, ask questions later. 
They just throw things out, big surprises without any 
consultation, without any discussion. 
 
When they do consult — and I’ve certainly been part of 
consultations in the past — they ask the experts. They ask their 
own people within the government to come together and give 
them advice, and they take the opposite direction. They do what 
they felt like doing in the first place. 
 
Take the example of NORTEP and Northlands. There was a 
whole process set up by the Minister of Advanced Education to 
evaluate what should happen with NORTEP. That process gave 
a recommendation, gave an absolute, clear recommendation not 
to go down the road of using Northlands College. And well, 
surprise, we’re going to do what we felt like doing in the first 
place anyway. 
 
But today we’re talking about . . . In this motion we’re talking 
about one particular surprise, one giant change that nobody saw 
coming, which is this massive cut, this $35.8 million surprise to 
the cities and towns of this province. And we like to hear . . . or 
we hear the Premier and the Minister of Government Relations 
like to suggest that somehow this was discussed: a vague 
reference at SUMA of everything being on the table; a laundry 
list of possible options mentioned; oh well, maybe we’ll do 
something with grants-in-lieu. No discussion, no look at how is 
that going to happen, just all of it gone from one day to the 
next. 
 
And we’ve heard from mayors, from the leaders of SUMA that 
this was a shock, that this was an unprecedented drop in their 
budgets, a massive change for them and very, very difficult for 
them to respond to because this is a long-standing program. 



2340 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2017 

And we’ve heard some of the history and, you know, the fact 
that it is a bit of a perhaps an arcane model or an archaic model, 
something that is a bit odd, but it’s been there for years and no 
one saw its absence coming. 
 
[12:00] 
 
A 109 communities, 109 cities and towns around this province 
that have lost significant amounts of their budget, some seeing 
up to . . . well originally up to over 50 per cent. Then as it was 
scaled back, once again we see evidence of this government’s 
shoot first, ask questions later. Throw everything out there and 
then have to withdraw once they realize that their decisions 
didn’t make sense. But massive cuts to the budgets of some 
cities and towns, 109 communities. I think every one of us in 
this legislature, except maybe two, represent one of the cities or 
towns that have lost funding as a result of this. 
 
And this is on top of a budget that hit cities in numerous other 
ways. We saw cuts to supports for community rinks, cuts to 
support for linking highways to the roads of cities. We saw cuts 
to . . . massive cut and a change in the status of the Meewasin 
Valley Authority, saw the handing over of the Wascana Centre 
to the provincial government. 
 
And of course we’ve seen the increase in PST, which is a big 
hit for cities, cities that have capital expenditures that are going 
to go way up with the expansion of PST onto construction, 
estimated at a million dollars a year just for Saskatoon. That’s 
just from that increase in PST. 
 
So what has the Sask Party response been to the shock and 
surprise of the civic leaders of this province? Well it hasn’t 
been to say, yes, well this is something we need to discuss. No, 
it’s been really pointing at the cities, pointing at them and 
saying, you have too much money in your reserves. There’s too 
much money around, and you need to drain those reserves. 
That’s where you need to go. That’s where you need to go. 
 
Because that’s the favourite activity of this government. When 
they make an unpopular decision they blame the victim. They 
blame the people that are being hurt the most. And the other 
favourite response to all kinds of problems is to drain reserves. 
They’ve drained their own reserves. We have no rainy day fund. 
We have no plan to deal with, we’ve clearly had no plan to deal 
with what is obviously a fluctuating part of our economy, which 
is resource revenues. And yet here we are with no rainy day 
fund because this is a government that likes to drain reserves. 
And having drained its own reserves, it’s going after schools 
and cities and other institutions and telling them, you know, 
we’ve emptied our own pockets; it’s time for you to empty 
yours. 
 
So what is this actually going to mean for cities? What is this 
surprise cut, what is this big change going to actually mean for 
them? Well their options are very few. They can either . . . You 
know the province has all kinds of options. The province could 
run a deficit. The province could have chosen not to cut 
corporate income tax. The province could have chosen not to 
cut personal income tax on the wealthiest people of the 
province. Those are options we had. They didn’t need to do 
this. What do the cities and towns have for options? Very little: 
minimal tax options, most of it property tax; charging for 

services. So they’re either going to have to increase the cost for 
services, increase the property taxes, or decrease the services 
that they offer. 
 
So basically what you’ve done is you’ve . . . What this 
government has done, what we’ve seen happen is the passing on 
of the financial difficulties — which are the result of the 
financial mismanagement of this government — passing that on 
directly to the people in the cities and towns of this province 
and not taking any of the blame for what they’ve done, just 
forcing it on to Saskatoon. We’ve already seen Saskatoon and 
other cities have to increase property taxes — 1 per cent hike in 
Saskatoon — and wage freezes. We’ve got Regina musing 
about service cuts and facility closures. It’s clear that this Sask 
Party surprise will be passed on to Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Because this is already, this is already a levy that exists. It’s 
already a levy from ratepayers that’s been described. I was 
speaking to the Minister for SaskEnergy last night, and he 
described this, his official described it as a flow through from 
the ratepayer to the municipalities. And you know, we could 
discuss whether that makes sense, whether it’s right to have that 
flow through, whether this is the kind of program that needs to 
continue. Was it the right way? Should we remodel how those 
funds get to cities? 
 
But instead of doing that, instead of that discussion, it was just 
yoink, a big surprise, and it’s gone. But the flow through hasn’t 
gone anywhere, and my colleague from Saskatoon Nutana 
described this very well. They’re still paying the grants-in-lieu. 
SaskEnergy’s still paying the grants-in-lieu. SaskPower’s still 
paying them. They’re just paying it to the GRF now instead of 
to the cities. 
 
That just makes no sense. We have a model. We have a system 
by which funds can flow from Crown corporations, from the 
CIC to the GRF. But now you’ve established this permanent 
leak of funds just slipping out a side door from the Crowns to 
the GRF. It’s not sensible. It’s surprising and it’s strange. And I 
think we need to have a better consultation and not this kind of 
surprise in the future. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 
privilege to enter into this debate, the 75-minute debate. It’s 
been a while since I have entered into a debate like this, 
especially the 75-minute debate. They say that, you know, 
speaking in the House if you haven’t for a while — and I have 
spoken on different things — it’s like riding a bike. I don’t 
know if anybody has been off a bike for a very long time and 
tried to ride one again. It isn’t that easy. I tried this fall, to tell 
you the honest truth, Mr. Speaker. But it is a bit like riding a 
bike, I guess. 
 
When I think of the 75-minute debate and I think of different 
speeches that I’ve been able to give in this House, certain ones 
kind of stick out in your mind. Others you choose to forget, and 
I’ve got more that I’ve chose to forget than I do remember. But 
I do have to talk about the last time . . . not the last time, one of 
the very . . . It was the very first time that I had the opportunity 
to stand in this House and enter into a 75-minute debate. And 



April 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2341 

it’s a little ironic because that topic — and I remember it very 
well, sitting on the other side of course — it was about tax 
revolts. And some in this room may remember tax revolts, but I 
certainly had been elected right around that time, ’99, and those 
tax revolts were going on through ’99-2000. 
 
The interesting part about speaking and speaking now is the 
person that I followed with the tax revolt 75-minute debate was 
the member from Melville. And you know, although the person 
has changed, that voice is awfully familiar. There’s this 
booming voice that comes from Melville. It starts down here, 
and it’s really quite strong and loud when he talks about tax 
revolts in rural Saskatchewan. That used to be the member from 
Melville and still is the member from Melville. But it was tax 
revolts across the province because people were totally unhappy 
with the government of the day, which of course was the former 
government, the NDP government. 
 
And people were having town hall meetings, you know, and I 
went to a lot of them. In fact, I remember, talking of that 
particular speech, it must’ve been a memorable one because I 
still remember talking about the different ones. And it was like 
a notch in the belt. You’d go to another town, and there would 
be people from the rural, people from urban, all meeting in the 
town hall, whether it was in Lang that I was in; I was in 
Montmartre. I was in a lot of communities around that southeast 
part of the province, as people were so upset with the way the 
government was dealing with the education portion of property 
tax. 
 
Now we’re talking in this motion about grants-in-lieu, but it is 
about rural Saskatchewan, and some of the effects that 
governments have. And I remember at that time going to a, I 
believe it was a SARM convention, and the former premier, 
who I have a lot of respect for, Lorne Calvert, was the Premier 
at the time, standing up in front of the delegates at SARM and 
saying status quo is not on when it came to education portion of 
property tax. And every year we’d come in here, and it was the 
same old thing. So I don’t know what his definition of “status 
quo” was, and the rest of the province’s definition, but it wasn’t 
aligned because they never did do anything on the education 
portion of property tax even though there was tax revolt after 
tax revolt after tax revolt. 
 
And I think those tax revolts are evident in this House even 
today. When you look across the way and you see all of them 
looking down at papers and not engaging — I guess they 
shouldn’t be engaging in this debate — but all looking down. 
You know, there’s a reason why you look at every one of those 
members, and they either have a Saskatoon, Regina, or P.A. 
[Prince Albert] in front of their name, except for Cumberland 
and Athabasca, because they haven’t got a seat in rural 
Saskatchewan because they had turned their backs on rural 
Saskatchewan for 16 years, and rural Saskatchewan hasn’t 
forgot. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I hear the member . . . I also wanted, also 
compliment the member from Melville-Saltcoats, and the 
member from Cypress Hills. And to the members opposite, 
remember those two constituencies when you’re asking 
questions — the member from Saltcoats, Melville-Saltcoats, 
and the member from Cypress Hills. Don’t worry about Indian 
Head-Milestone. But, Mr. Speaker, they raise the point very 

well about, you know, what this government has done over the 
10 years that we’ve had. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even when I . . . and I’m not going to get into kind 
of what we’ve done because they’ve handled it very, very well, 
but I just want to look at the motion itself, and the wording of 
this motion. It’s really quite amazing. It’s only five sentences or 
five lines long, at about 14 font, so it’s not a lot of words. But 
when you look at what they’ve actually said, I can agree with 
the first part if I was in opposition, “That this Assembly 
condemns the government . . .” because that’s what opposition 
is supposed to do. But after that, there is not really not much in 
this motion that I really am surprised that any of those members 
could support either. 
 
It says deep cuts and unexpected cuts for towns and cities. Now 
deep cuts, I’m not so sure that when you look at the cuts to the 
grants-in-lieu . . . And I still think the term grants-in-lieu is 
really not a proper term for what this topic is about, because 
grants-in-lieu, most people think of grants-in-lieu of taxes. 
Those are still in place. In fact, Mr. Speaker, money going to 
the municipal sector is $434 million, a huge outlay to the 
municipal sector. But I don’t think what we’re seeing here is 
deep cuts. 
 
Now if we wanted to talk about deep cuts, I’m sure we could 
back a little ways. And if we wanted to talk about deep cuts, I 
think we should go to the municipal sector and say, you could 
do the revenue sharing that we’re giving you today, or we could 
go back to what the NDP had given. Now that would be a deep 
cut, Mr. Speaker. Because certainly what we’re dealing with 
isn’t a deep cut. 
 
We could go from $257 million is what is in this budget for 
revenue sharing, or we could go back to 130 or cut it by over 
half, not quite half, down to 130. That would be classed as a 
deep cut. What this is is certainly significant to municipalities, 
but you’re not seeing tax revolt after tax revolt. We’re hearing 
from some councils. We’re talking to mayors and councils. It 
has an impact, but it isn’t what I would call deep cuts. 
 
The other thing it talks about in this motion is it says 
unexpected cuts. Really? Really? Municipalities did not expect 
some sort of cut coming in this budget? That’s what the motion 
says. Now you support that, that municipalities didn’t see 
anything coming. Because quite frankly, I had talked to a 
number of people leading up to the budget and what people 
were saying from around the province is, would you guys hurry 
up and deliver the budget because we’re expecting something. 
We just want to know what it is so that we can operate. So it 
wasn’t unexpected cuts. They were expecting some form of a 
cut. 
 
Did they know it was this particular grant from SaskPower or 
SaskEnergy? Did they expect grants-in-lieu? Could have been. 
They didn’t know. Could it have been revenue sharing? Could 
have we done a deep, unexpected cut and go back to the way 
the NDP was at $130 million? 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this motion in itself, the wording in the motion 
in itself just is not accurate. It also says axing grants-in-lieu. 
Quite frankly, that is not right. It does not axe grants-in-lieu. 
Grants-in-lieu of taxes is still in place. And it took a long time 



2342 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2017 

for the minister, who has done a very good job, the Minister for 
Municipal Affairs, to educate. Even us, myself, didn’t know the 
difference between what we were talking about through 
SaskPower, SaskEnergy grants-in-lieu and other municipal 
sharing. I think people have got the idea now, although the 
members opposite never did really kind of cue into that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve only got a minute and 12. Ten minutes goes a 
lot faster after quite a few years in this House compared to 
when we first started. 
 
It talks about raising taxes . . . I’ve only got about a minute left 
here. It talks about raising taxes. The member from Prince 
Albert Northcote says in her own motion that this is going to 
force municipalities to raise taxes. I ask that member, what did 
Prince Albert do? It didn’t raise taxes because of grants-in-lieu 
or because of this change. It raised taxes by 1 per cent, but it 
was on their own doing not because of what the decisions of 
government. 
 
So even the member from Prince Albert Northcote who talked 
about . . . I was really amazed. She said, when she was going 
through the different communities . . . I know there are 500 
communities in this province; I didn’t know carrot knife was 
one of them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so this motion as a whole is completely wrong. It 
talks . . . The final one is a decade long of mismanagement, 
scandal, and waste. Mr. Speaker, absolutely wrong because, if a 
decade long of mismanagement and waste puts 51 members on 
this side and only 11 on that side, Mr. Speaker, I think the 
public know different. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I only have seven seconds left, so I will not be 
supporting the motion, Mr. Speaker, not any of the words in this 
motion. 
 
[12:15] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The time for debate has expired. 
Questions. I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the speeches opposite, 
we heard the members talk about how we are not valuing our 
municipal partners. Mr. Speaker, this couldn’t be further from 
the truth. Let’s look at the city of Prince Albert where revenue 
sharing in our 2017-18 budget is $6,769,998. That’s a 
whopping 126 per cent increase since 2008. Mr. Speaker, to the 
member from Prince Albert Northcote, simple question, yes or 
no: do you agree that revenue sharing is providing the cities the 
predictable funding that our municipalities need? Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Well I would challenge the member from 
Battleford to go and talk to the municipalities and the leaders in 
these municipalities that are affected and see what they think 
about their revenue sharing now that they’re losing all of these 
cuts, all the cuts that this government is doing to those 
communities. 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we know 
cities and towns in and near the city of Regina have been hit 
really hard. And this is a question for the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. We know Yorkton was hit hard, the highest 
per capita hit; Langenburg; many other communities. Melville’s 
cut of $400,000 represents about a 13.4 per cent increase in 
taxes. 
 
So communities have been left reeling and mayors are speaking 
out, Mr. Speaker. Why did the Sask Party hide this — ripping 
up these contracts — from communities, and what does he say 
to local mayors like Mayor Maloney of Yorkton, Mayor 
Streelasky of Melville, and Mayor Fogg of Langenburg? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — So we’ve had those difficult decisions with 
each of our stakeholders. Whether it’s villages, towns, cities, 
every one of them has various . . . [inaudible] . . . to their 
operational grants. We’ve had those discussions. We’ve had 
intimate talks. We’ve tried to find efficiencies with each one of 
the entities. We’ve had great discussions with them. 
 
They understand, they understand the situation that this 
province is in. They’ve been part of the benefits to what this 
province has had in the last 10 years. They’ve been able to take 
advantage of that. They’ve also been willing to take part in a 
little bit of what we’ve been asking to take back from them. 
They’ve found ways to get by. They’ve found different ways of 
saving efficiencies within their systems. What they want to do 
is they want to get back to business. They want to get back to 
work. They want to get back to running the province. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Lloydminster. 
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier was very 
clear that everything was on the table when it came to the 
provincial budget. We heard from municipalities that they 
wanted us to not touch revenue sharing. We listened. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the member from Prince Albert Northcote: we 
are meeting the challenge, but they offer no alternatives. In 
order to address the billion-dollar shortfall in revenues facing 
our province, what would that member cut instead? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — I would also challenge that member to go 
talk to the municipalities because my understanding is that they 
were going to sit down and come up with some alternatives, but 
the minister didn’t even allow that. And so consultation is not 
saying everything is on the table. That is ridiculous, and these 
are your municipal leaders that you should be working with as 
partners. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 



April 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2343 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, as we see, the way that this 
government has done this is they’ve clawed this money back 
from the municipalities. But where are they putting it, Mr. 
Speaker? Are they leaving it with our Crowns? Or are they 
putting it back in the GRF? That’s a direct runaround on what 
the Crown Investments Corporation is. 
 
So I want to know from the member from Cypress Hills is 
whether or not he agrees with this government’s approach to 
going around, going . . . Oh, the Minister of Finance is getting 
all excited here. He’s saying it’s for programs, but we know that 
CIC is responsible for those . . . [inaudible] . . . How can you go 
around CIC and do it this shortcut way? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress 
Hills. Order. 
 
[Interjections] 
 
Mr. Steele: — I couldn’t hear the statement. I couldn’t hear the 
member. Sorry, I don’t go around much here. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, thank you for the floor. I will ask 
the member the question again. How do you condone, how do 
you condone . . .  
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The Chair needs 
to hear the question and also the member that the question is 
being posed to. That member also needs to hear the question. So 
I recognize the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
To the member from Cypress Hills: how do you condone the 
direct end run around Crown Investments Corporation and why 
we have dividends coming out of our Crowns and just yanking 
that money and sticking it directly in the GRF? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress 
Hills. 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Will the member from Regina Walsh 
Acres come to order, and the other government members and 
opposition members, please? 
 
I recognize the member. 
 
Mr. Steele: — Communities, health care, speaks for itself. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. Our government takes 
the relationship of municipalities seriously. That is why we 
created a stable revenue sharing. Since we formed the 
government in 2007, Saskatoon has seen 161 per cent increase 

in municipal revenue sharing. Mr. Speaker, my question is to 
the member from Saskatoon Meewasin. Why have your 
members voted against every budget that has supported stable 
revenue sharing in municipalities? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to represent Saskatoon 
Meewasin and very concerned about the impacts of this budget 
on that community and on my home city of Saskatoon. When 
you look at cuts to the Meewasin Valley Authority, you look at 
this cut to grants-in-lieu, you look at all the other ways in which 
cities have been harmed in this budget, of course we would vote 
against this budget. This city . . . 
 
Every one of these budgets in which you have done damage to 
this province, we have been happy to vote against it. I’m happy 
to have voted against my first budget. This was my first budget, 
and I voted very happily against a decision, against all of the 
decisions in this budget, including the decision to cut 
grants-in-lieu without any warning to the cities who have now 
had to cope without any chance to plan ahead, no chance to 
cope. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Since the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone seems to have a good understanding of what 
grants-in-lieu are, or seems to think he does, can he explain why 
SaskTel was immune to the cuts through the grants-in-lieu 
program? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — You know, I don’t want to correct the 
member opposite, but I have to on a regular basis, in that 
SaskTel is not immune to grants-in-lieu. They pay grants-in-lieu 
of property tax in many communities across the province. Talk 
about not understanding, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you look at the revenue sharing and the 
money that’s gone into municipalities across the piece, urban 
and rural, over the last 10 years of this government, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ll put our record up to the NDP’s record of no 
revenue sharing, not being a consistent revenue sharing, Mr. 
Speaker, any day of the week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is difficult decisions, but what people are saying 
to us on a regular basis is a balanced budget in two years far 
outweighs any of the other provinces and especially the federal 
government, Mr. Speaker, because this government has a plan 
to get to balance, and they’re accepting of that. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Bonk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our government has 
been meeting the challenge since we took office. Although we 
have made some tough decisions, we value our municipal 
partners. In Prince Albert specifically, we have invested $8 



2344 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2017 

million in water treatment plant and reservoir upgrades and over 
$12 million in 12 different projects in the municipal economic 
enhancement program, only to name a few. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the member from Prince Albert Northcote: does 
she acknowledge that our government is providing the dollars 
for municipalities to build the infrastructure that they need? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Well I’d invite that member to come to 
Prince Albert. I’d like to show him our Victoria Hospital that’s 
overflowing with patients and oftentimes not even taking 
patients, where this government said they were going to do 
something about it. They spent $2 million evaluating the 
situation and that just went down the drain because nothing has 
happened. 
 
We don’t have another bridge. We always had this talk that 
you’re going to develop another bridge — nothing. So don’t 
like . . . Prince Albert needs more water reservoirs and now 
you’re getting gutted by these grants-in-lieu. And now we’re 
trying to figure out what we’re going to do, what we’re going to 
do to invest in our reservoirs. And what are we going to do 
about our health care crisis? And what are we going to do about 
our bridge? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The time for the 75-minute debate 
has expired. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 3 — Mining Investment in Saskatchewan 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Ms. Carr.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Doke: — Cut Knife, not carrot knife. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to support the motion put 
forward by the member from Estevan: 
 

That this Assembly commends the Government of 
Saskatchewan for having very attractive mining policies 
which has led Saskatchewan to be ranked the most 
attractive jurisdiction for mining investments in the world. 

 
According to the just released Fraser Institute 2016 annual 
global survey of mining executives, they gave Saskatchewan a 
gold star and declaring it the most attractive place in the world 
for mining companies to invest. 
 
Missing a good speech here. I don’t know. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes, they’re all leaving. 
 

Mr. Doke: — They attribute Saskatchewan’s competitive tax 
regimes and their effective permitting procedures, certainty 
surrounding environmental regulations, and land claims as 
some of the key reasons for the outstanding rating. This moves 
us up the inevitable position of being ranked second in the same 
category in 2015. I believe the minister summarized it well 
when he says: 
 

We are gifted with a variety of resources, and as a 
government we are doing our share to encourage the 
industry and to make sure we are competitive and friendly 
to investment. We have maintained a stable royalty 
structure over the last number of years, supported by clear 
government policies that have helped Saskatchewan 
remain a destination of choice for investors and business. 

 
He also added: 
 

Aside from having high-quality geoscience information, 
we place a high priority on collaboration with our 
stakeholders in the industry to . . . reduce red tape 
wherever possible. 

 
Mr. Speaker, making it easy to do business provides investment 
and opportunity for the residents of Saskatchewan. We will dive 
into the value of our opportunity in a minute; however, we must 
also note that our poor policy also results in reduced 
opportunities. Unfortunately, the fellow province to the west 
has seen their mining attractiveness rating become severely 
downgraded after their politics changed. They were once listed 
at 14th on the index and slid significantly towards 47th place 
overall on the attractive index, placing them with Russia, 
Guyana, Colorado, and California based on difficulties 
companies have existing, and attempted to develop new 
projects. Mr. Speaker, policy does matter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have recognized this 
potential since the province was signed into Confederation. 
Bear with me as I provide a little historical perspective on the 
Saskatchewan mining advantage. 
 
In 1880, the first commercial coal mine was open near Roche 
Percee. Commercial clay was produced in 1886 in the Estevan, 
Bruno, and Claybank areas. The Bienfait coal mine started 
production in 1905. Copper and zinc was discovered in 1910, 
gold in 1916, nickel, copper, platinum and palladium, gold, and 
silver in 1923; uranium in 1935. Potash was found in Radville 
area in 1942 with the first attempt to mine potash actually 
occurring in Unity area in 1951. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Were you there? 
 
Mr. Doke: — Actually a year later, thank you. 
 
Actual long-term potash production began in Esterhazy in 1961, 
which ushered in the great potash rush of Saskatchewan with 
mines being built in Belle Plaine, Saskatoon, Allan, Langham, 
Vanscoy, Colonsay, and Rocanville, all beginning in the 1960s. 
Uranium began to be aggressively mined in the early- to 
mid-’70s in the Athabasca Basin, found in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Diamonds have been found throughout the 1900s, but active 



April 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2345 

stakes were taken out in the early 1980s in the Sturgeon Lake 
area. Exploration for rare earth elements began north of 
Uranium City in 1990. Kaolin, or china clay, was produced in 
2008. 
 
Mr. Speaker, rounding out the broad range of commodities 
mined in Saskatchewan also includes potassium sulphate in 
Wynyard; sodium sulphate in Chaplin; salt in Saskatoon, 
Esterhazy, and Unity, which I will talk a little about in a little 
bit later; and bentonite in Wilcox. 
 
[12:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the benefits of mining are all around us every day. 
For example, 50 per cent of the power generated in 
Saskatchewan comes from coal mined in southern 
Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan is Canada’s third-largest coal 
producer, averaging about one-sixth of Canadian annual 
production, with hundreds of years of lignite coal resources at 
current production rates. No active proposals for new coal 
mines have been proposed since the 2009 economic downturn. 
Underground coal gasification and coal to liquids had then been 
proposed as alternate end fuels given the climate change and 
challenges of burning coal. 
 
Two of Saskatchewan’s three coal mines — Poplar River and 
Boundary dam — produce coal for sale under long-term 
contract to SaskPower for consumption at power plants near the 
mine sites at prices which attract a net for a profit margin. Due 
to climate changes, policies at the Bienfait mine, Canada’s 
longest lived mine, in operation since 1905, has lost its historic 
coal markets of Ontario and Manitoba power plants and faces a 
legislative ban effective January 1st, 2016 on sales to Manitoba 
hog barns. 
 
The Bienfait mine continues making char at the Bienfait char 
plant for barbeque charcoals and active carbon, as it . . . 
activated carbon plant. SaskPower now purchases Bienfait coal 
to supply for a supplement to Boundary dam mine purchases. 
 
Mr. Speaker, virtually everything around us — from computers, 
jewellery, cars, windows, cell phones, wallboards, cosmetics, 
medical treatments, vitamins, toothpaste — all contain some 
kind of mineral, a mineral that was brought up from underneath 
our Saskatchewan soil. Mr. Speaker, if we don’t grow it, we 
probably mine it. 
 
Saskatchewan is the largest potash producer in the world. Mr. 
Speaker, potash production in Saskatchewan has been 
continuous since 1962 when Mosaic completed its K1 mine at 
Esterhazy. The potash reserves in Saskatchewan are massive. 
By conservative estimates, Saskatchewan could supply the 
world demand at current levels for several hundred years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan potash industry typically 
accounts for approximately 30 per cent of the world production, 
directly employs about 5,000 people, and contributes to the 
livelihood of thousands more. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 
potash production reached a record in 2015 on the strength of a 
strong world potash demand and to make up for a large 
decrease in inventories after record sales in 2014. 
 
Mr. Speaker, expansions of product capability were completed 

at nine mines — Agrium, Mosaic Belle Plaine, Mosaic 
Colonsay, Mosaic Esterhazy, PCS [Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan Inc.] Allan, PCS Lanigan, PCS Cory, PCS 
Patience Lake, and PCS Rocanville in the past eight years — 
increasing the annual capability of the Saskatchewan potash 
industry to 18.4 megatonnes for 2017. It is estimated that 
Agrium Inc., Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, and Mosaic 
Company have committed 13.5 billion collectively to expand 
Saskatchewan’s production capacity by about 70 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition, K+S Potash is spending 4.1 billion to 
develop a solution mine in Saskatchewan which is scheduled to 
commence production, I believe, next week. And currently 
there are several other companies considering construction of 
potash mines, including global mining giant BHP Billiton. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, at the potash reception last night, it was 
noted that prices are starting to climb a bit and a new player in 
the game being the country of Brazil. Mr. Speaker, the United 
States typically accounts for approximately 45 per cent of 
Saskatchewan’s potash exports. Latin America and large Asian 
offshore markets of China, India, Japan, Malaysia, Korea, and 
Indonesia make up most of the remaining 55 per cent of 
Saskatchewan’s potash exports. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan uranium — I’d just like to 
give a few facts on that. And then I will close with the great salt 
mines of Unity. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan accounted for 22 per cent 
of the world’s primary uranium production in 2015 and was the 
second largest producer behind Kazakhstan. Saskatchewan has 
been producing uranium continuously since 1953 and is 
recognized as a long-term and stable source of uranium. 
Uranium production is from the Athabasca Basin in northern 
Saskatchewan which contains the largest high-grade uranium 
deposits in the world and has a significant geological potential 
for the discovery of additional deposits. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Easy, Bill, 
easy. Mr. Deputy Speaker, production in 2015 was from three 
operations: McArthur River, Key Lake, Rabbit Lake, and Cigar 
Lake. McClean Lake was about 13 310 tonnes of uranium. The 
Cigar Lake mine, which commenced processing of the ore at 
McClean Lake in 2014, produced about 4539 tonnes, and 2015 
will ramp up to 6924 tonnes per year. 
 
In April 2016, the Rabbit Lake mine, which produced 1.6 
thousand tonnes in 2015, was suspended due to market 
conditions. The Cigar Lake and McArthur River operations 
have announced a six-week production shutdown in 2017 but 
do not forecast reduced volumes, for a total forecast production 
for 2016 . . . was 13 483 tonnes. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to talk a little bit about the 
salt mine, salt mines in Unity, as soon as I find it here. I’ve got 
lots of info here. Mr. Deputy Speaker, salt was discovered in 
the Unity area in the mid-1940s while oil exploration was under 
way. Large pockets of natural gas were also discovered about 
10 miles south of Unity at the same time. 
 
In the late 1940s, the Dominion Tar and Chemical Company 
decided to close its salt works in northeastern Alberta near Fort 



2346 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2017 

McMurray in favour of a more strategic location. Our plant was 
built in 1948 with production . . . and was started under the 
name of Prairie Salt Company. The Compass Minerals Canada 
Corp. plant located at Killsquaw Lakes, about two miles east of 
Unity, has been in continuous production since 1949. The site 
was picked because it had the ingredients for a successful 
operation, that is: a good bed of salt, a water supply, a 
commercially viable natural gas supply, and rail facilities for 
transportation. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, using a process known as solution mining, 
the plant injects water into the salt deposit about 1200 metres 
underground. The salt bed is then about 120 metres thick in this 
area. It starts in the Northwest Territories where it outcrops and 
slopes downward as it extends through parts of Alberta, 
Saskatchewan, and the southwest parts of Manitoba into North 
Dakota. Since the start of the operation, eight brine wells have 
been drilled in an area of about 400 metres south and west of 
the plant. 
 
The plant currently operates on brine wells numbers 7 and 8. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, salt dissolves into water injected into the 
well and then results in saturated brine is returned to the surface 
where it is evaporated, basically boiled, to recover the salt. The 
salt is filtered and dried, then processed. The original capacity 
of the plant was about 65 000 tonnes a year with the three 
10-foot diameter evaporators operating in a triple-effect system. 
In 1963 production capacity was increased to about 100 000 
tonnes per year, expanding the heating surfaces of three 
evaporators, and have been operating that way ever since. The 
plant now does about 150 000 tonnes a year. 
 
Just a couple other notes here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This plant 
employs about 60 people from the Unity area and supports and 
uses many local businesses for its supplies. As well the 
company attempts to be a good corporate citizen by supporting 
many of the activities within Unity and district, and is probably 
one of the reasons why Unity has always had a strong ball team, 
hockey team, because of the jobs created. 
 
During the 1980s, over $2 million was spent on the Unity plant 
on pollution abatement and environmental controls. And, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, another couple of points of note are that since 
1997 the company’s been selling their used brine wells to 
Tervita. They fill these holes. The fill holes were made from the 
waste from the upstream oil industry — and a nice revenue 
stream for Tervita, a great way of handling an environmental 
issue, and the town of Unity gets a number of new, good-paying 
jobs. 
 
2017 is not only Canada’s 150th birthday, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s also the trademark of Sifto Salt’s 150th birthday. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, last time I was on my feet I talked about a 
possible way of handling those people that don’t comply in this 
Assembly, those who don’t want to withdraw and apologize or 
those with tardiness here, whatever. I have talked with John 
Goschok, manager of the salt mine, and he is prepared to have 
these people come and work there to pay off their offence. If 
that works for you, I would gladly deliver these people on the 
Thursdays when I go back and that . . . [inaudible] . . . Mr. 
Speaker, I thank you for the time. I’m done. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress 

Hills. 
 
Mr. Steele: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I support the 
attractive mining policies of the government, and now I further 
move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cypress Hills has 
moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that this House does now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 
until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:41.] 
 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2321 
COMMEMORATIVE STATEMENTS 
 National Day of Mourning 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2321 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2321 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2322 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 2322 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2322 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2322 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2322 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2323 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2323 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2323 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2323 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2324 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2324 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2324 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2324 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 2017 Provincial 4-H Public Speaking Competition Winner 
  Bonk ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2325 
 Day of Mourning 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2325 
 Moose Jaw Business Excellence Awards 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2325 
 Regina Ukrainian Co-op’s 80th Anniversary 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2325 
 Merit Awards of Excellence 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2326 
 University of Saskatchewan and Northlands College 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2326 
 Key Economic Indicators 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 2326 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Details of Land Transactions 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2327 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2327 
 Crown Corporations and Intent of Bill 40 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2327 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2327 
 Role of School Boards and Intent of Bill 63 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2328 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2328 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2329 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2329 
 Provision of Teacher Education Programming in the North 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2330 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2330 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2330 
 Reporting of Political Donations 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2331 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2331 
POINT OF ORDER 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2331 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2331 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2331 
 



 

THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 48 — The Education Property Tax Act 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2331 
 Bill No. 49 — The Education Property Tax Consequential Amendment Act, 2017 
 Loi de 2017 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Education Property Tax Act 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2332 
ROYAL ASSENT ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2332 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2332 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Budget Cuts 
  Rancourt ........................................................................................................................................................................ 2332, 2342 
  Steele .............................................................................................................................................................................. 2335, 2343 
  Sproule ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2336, 2342 
  Kaeding .......................................................................................................................................................................... 2337, 2342 
  Meili ............................................................................................................................................................................... 2339, 2343 
  McMorris ....................................................................................................................................................................... 2340, 2343 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2342 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2342 
  Dennis ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2343 
  Bonk ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2343 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 3 — Mining Investment in Saskatchewan 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2344 
  Steele ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2346 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


	PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS
	ADJOURNED DEBATES
	PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS
	Motion No. 3 — Mining Investment in Saskatchewan
	PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS
	ADJOURNED DEBATES
	PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS
	Motion No. 3 — Mining Investment in Saskatchewan

