






















































Hansard: May 18, 2017


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 91A  THURSDAY, MAY 18, 2017, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 

 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 

Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 

 

 

 
 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 

Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 

Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 

Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 

Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 

Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 

Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 

Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 

Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 

Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 

Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 

Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 

Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 

D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 

Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 

Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 

Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 

Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 

Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 

Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 

Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 

Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 

Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 

Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 

Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 

Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 

Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 

Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 

Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 

Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 

Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 

McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 

Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 

Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 

Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 

Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 

Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 

Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 

Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 

Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 

Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 

Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 

Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 

Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 

Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 

Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 

Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 

Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 

Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 

Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 

Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 

Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 

Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 

Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 

Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 

Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 

Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 

Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 

 

 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 11 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2569 
 May 18, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would ask leave 
for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In your gallery, I 
would like to introduce someone well known to all of us: senior 
administrative assistant Jane Johnston, although she really 
needs no introduction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — West gallery. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — The west gallery, I’m sorry. It was she who 
introduced me to life in Advanced Education that first day I 
rolled my bag of I’m not quite sure what into my new office a 
year ago this August. It was quite something to have this very 
accomplished administrator suddenly organizing my days, my 
priorities, in some degrees, my life. I’ve never been the same. 
 
Really it should be another minister, former minister Ken 
Krawetz, standing here introducing Jane. She came over to the 
Legislative Building in heady days, on November 22, 2007, to 
work with minister Krawetz in Education, then Finance, until 
May 2015 when he retired from office. Over those years, a 
lifelong friendship between Jane and her husband, Dean, and 
Gail and Ken was formed. Jane would also work with Minister 
Kevin Doherty in Finance, then in Advanced Ed with Minister 
Scott Moe and, I’m fortunate to say, with me until now. 
 
Jane will be retiring on June 30th, and this building will be 
poorer without her, Mr. Speaker. She loves her farm, her 
family, her grandkids, and would like now to spend more time 
with them. Thank you, Jane. We wish you all the best in your 
retirement. We will miss you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 
you and through you to all members of this legislature, I want to 
join with the Minister of Advanced Education in thanking Jane 
for all of her service throughout the years. In the short time that 
we had to work together, Mr. Speaker, she always ensured that I 
had the right material in front of me when I showed up in front 
of the appropriate people. And it was greatly appreciated, the 
care and the detail that she took in her work each and every day. 
 
And I know if there was another member that was here today, 

the previous member from Canora-Pelly, Ken Krawetz, he 
would be . . . They formed a long-standing friendship with Jane 
and Dean and Ken and Gail. But he would also be very, very 
thankful for the years of service and extremely competent 
service that Jane has provided him in his service to the people 
of Saskatchewan as well. 
 
So I want to join with the Minister of Advanced Education in 
inviting everyone in this House to wish Jane and Dean all the 
best in the time that they’ll have to spend together with their 
family and grandchildren in the years ahead, and I hope to see 
you often. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join 
the Minister of Advanced Education and the Minister of the 
Environment in paying homage to Jane on her retirement 
coming up at the end of June. I was very fortunate when I went 
into the Ministry of Finance in that office that Jane was there. I 
equate her to like Radar, if you recall Radar from the show 
M*A*S*H. Every time Colonel Potter asked for something, 
Radar already had it on his desk, so to speak, with respect to not 
even having to be asked for it. So Jane really brought a calming 
influence to my office when I moved into that portfolio. 
 
And I wish her all the best. And she continues at the farm and in 
her curling travails over the wintertime and her many golf 
outings and what have you with her husband, Dean, and their 
family. And just all the best, Jane. Thank you for everything 
you’ve done for various ministers in this government, but more 
importantly for the people of Saskatchewan. I wish you the 
best. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to you and through you, I would also like to make an 
introduction of my senior admin assistant, Jean Watts. Jean has 
only been with me a short time, but her and I have developed a 
very good friendship, Mr. Speaker. 
 
She’s been working in government here on the government side 
since 2008, and she’ll be retiring here in mid-June, Mr. 
Speaker. She’s worked in a number of ministries: the Minister 
of Labour, the Minister of Justice, Advanced Education, 
Education. But she does assure me that she has most enjoyed 
working for the Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 
Corporation, and I do believe her because she is very honest. 
And like I say, we have developed that friendship, and despite 
what the Deputy Premier might think, I know that she’s telling 
the truth.  
 
Jean’s retiring next month, as I said, and is excited to relax with 
her husband, Morris, and visit her five children and spend even 
more time with her six grandchildren. And she assures me that 
she’s going to stay off ladders. And she and I both know what 
that’s about, yes. 
 
We’ll miss Jean. I’ll miss Jean because she’s been excellent 
with me, and I do appreciate it and wish her the best in her 



2570 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2017 

retirement. And we thank her for her many years of service, and 
I’d like all members to join me in thanking Jean for her many 
years of service. Thank you, Jean. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the 
minister in thanking Jean Watts for the years of service that 
she’s had, given to this building. She was my senior admin for 
nine years, and she spent the last year working for the Minister 
Responsible for CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan]. And she’s been very open about saying that had 
she known how nice it was to be here, she would have stayed a 
lot longer had she been able to work for the Minister for CIC 
before she worked for me. Early on I was quite disorganized, 
had papers all over place. And I remember her getting me ready 
for a question period one day, and she told me that she had a 
new puppy that was a lot easier to paper train than I was. 
 
In any event, she has been wonderful to work for, will be 
missed around the legislature. I want to wish her and Morris the 
very best and encourage them to spend some time travelling, 
enjoy the grandkids, and whatever else. I note that recently 
Morris has gone back to work part-time driving a school bus 
and want to wish both of them the very best. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to join with the ministers who have already introduced these 
two excellent employees, public servants in the province of 
Saskatchewan. We have been served mightily and in very, very 
. . . in the most constructive, positive ways by administration 
professionals throughout the building. 
 
My mom was an administration professional in the school 
system in Swift Current for years, so I have understood from an 
early age who actually runs things in an organization, Mr. 
Speaker. I understand that in my office as well. 
 
But I just want to join with ministers in the introduction to 
thank both Jane and Jean for their service. If it were up to me, 
in Jean’s case, if it were up to me to bestow the Saskatchewan 
Order of Merit, we would confer one on her immediately, after 
nine years with the Deputy Premier, but that’s not my decision. 
 
But I just want to say, on behalf of all of us and on behalf of a 
grateful province, thank you for being professional servants of 
the public interest. Thanks for all your help and guidance for 
our ministers and to me as well. We appreciate it very much and 
wish you all the best. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I want to take a moment to introduce a member of my 
office staff, Mitch Graw. Mitch is seated in the west gallery. 
With him is summer student, Troy Buechler. 
 
Now Mitch has been with the government for a number of 
years, serving in a number of offices including Justice, policing 
and corrections, as well as House business. He has been in my 

office for a year now and has been a tremendous asset to our 
team. He’s a hard-working individual, and it’s rare that he’s not 
the first person in the office every morning. Sadly, we are 
losing Mitch this summer. He’s going to continue his schooling 
in Ottawa. He says he’s also going to straighten out a few things 
out there, so we wish him well. 
 
I’m glad to have the opportunity to work with Mitch, and we 
are sad to see him go. I wish him all the best and wish to ask all 
members to extend their wishes to Mitch as he travels to 
Ottawa. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too would 
like to join with my colleagues and welcome Jean Watts to her 
Legislative Assembly. Jean is a constituent of mine so I’ve 
always enjoyed the opportunity to follow Jean’s escapades in 
her backyard, on Facebook, and also just knocking on doors and 
visiting with her. She’s got an absolutely incredible backyard 
and I know she’s going to have a little more time to enjoy it. 
And good idea of having your husband get a part-time job 
because two retired people at the same time probably doesn’t 
quite work so well. 
 
You know, I must say that both Jean and Jane have been 
absolutely incredible. As an MLA in the city having quite a few 
requests for help with issues from a minister’s office, both of 
these two fine women have been very responsive and have done 
an exceptional job in serving the Government of Saskatchewan. 
So thanks to both Jean and Jane for your work and your 
dedication to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure again 
today to welcome a group of Spartans to their Legislative 
Assembly. We have the grade . . . it says grade 12, but grade 11 
and 12 leadership class, I believe, from Sheldon Williams 
Collegiate here with us today. And they’re accompanied by 
their teacher Ms. Samantha Taylor and Ms. Kim Anderson 
Cobb. 
 
Some members may remember that last year the leadership 
group from Sheldon was here to announce their very successful 
campaign to raise funds to ensure additional English language 
classes for refugees for the Regina Open Door Society, Mr. 
Speaker. And this year, this group has set their sights on raising 
awareness and raising funds around the issue of mental health. 
And I just want to commend them. 
 
We have lots of groups that come here, Mr. Speaker, and we 
have, you know, great groups of kids from around the province 
who are engaged in their communities, who ask great questions, 
who are involved. This is a group of kids that sees needs in their 
community, and they go about changing it in very meaningful 
ways. 
 
I was able to attend the One Life kickoff earlier this month 
where they had just a full room in the assembly. They had the 
mayor there; they had dignitaries from the school board, and a 



May 18, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2571 

really great video presentation. They had student leaders who 
spoke about their experience with mental health. And these kids 
are going to change the province and they’re going to change 
the world, and I want to thank them for that dedication. 
 
This year they’ve set their sights on raising funds for mobile 
crisis here in Regina, to provide them with some GPS [global 
positioning system] units and upgrade the radios so that they are 
more able to find those who are in crisis and respond to them. 
 
And I just want to welcome you and thank you, and I couldn’t 
be prouder to welcome you here today. So I would invite all 
members in this Assembly to join me in welcoming this group 
to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As they’ve always 
said that you save the best till last, my first school group of the 
year is also the best school group of the year. I have 18 grade 5 
students from the town of Naicam, the Naicam School. Of 
course Naicam being a Norwegian community well known for 
its lutefisk, I don’t go around there often when they’re serving 
it. 
 
But these young grade 5’s had to be on the bus very early this 
morning. They had to leave by at least 7 o’clock so they could 
be here this morning. I’m very pleased with them. They’re 
accompanied by their teacher, Ms. Gail Zenner, and chaperones, 
Karyn Crone, Christina Hutchison, Brandy Woolsey, and Brian 
Ungar. I’d like the Assembly to welcome these young people to 
their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you I’d like to introduce an individual seated in your gallery. 
It’s my dad, Owen Sarauer. He’s here today to watch the 
proceedings. He hails from the Lake Lenore area where he grew 
up on the farm, moved to Moose Jaw and went to STI 
[Saskatchewan Technical Institute] at the time. And I’m sure he 
studied very hard but I think it was around that time when he 
mastered the art of the air guitar and the gainer — I think it’s 
called gainering. I don’t know, the ’80s was a really weird time, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
[10:15] 
 
He served at SaskPower. He’s been working at SaskPower for 
35 years now. He’s celebrating his 35th year anniversary there. 
And at the same time, at the tender age of 55 he also announced 
his retirement, so his last day of work will be in June sometime. 
And I know he’s looking forward to spending more time at the 
lake, fishing and spending more time with his incredibly 
charming two daughters. 
 
He also taught me the value of working hard and playing hard. 
He’s a lover of live music. I think he’s seen Trooper live more 
times than anybody should ever admit publicly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m incredibly proud to be his daughter. I’m very proud to have 
him here today and I ask that all members join me in 

welcoming him to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I too have a few introductions. The team from 
visitor services is joining us today in the Speaker’s gallery. 
 
On Saturday, May 20th, the summer season officially begins. 
Tours of the Legislative Building will be offered every 
half-hour from 8 a.m. until 5 p.m., seven days a week. The tours 
are available in both French and English. The information 
officers will welcome visitors from all over the world to the 
Legislative Building this summer. They will be conducting 
factual, informational, and interesting tours for them. 
 
Our front-line staff are the face of the Legislative Building. The 
visitors’ experience is in their hands. 
 
Please welcome our team, six new employees this year — 
please give a quick wave when I mention your name — Ross 
Zimmermann, Annabel Asselin, Brittany Lougheed, Gabby 
Demmans, Ava Tomasiewicz, Caleb Roberts-Winter, and the 
director of visitor services, Lorraine deMontigny. Please 
welcome them to their Assembly. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Westview. 
 

Canada Celebrates 150th Anniversary of Confederation 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When the 
Fathers of Confederation joined together more than a century 
and a half ago to plan, dream, and strategize how they would 
stitch a country together, I can guarantee they could have never 
imagined what an amazing nation the Dominion of Canada 
would become. 
 
On July 1st of this year, Canada will celebrate officially 
becoming a nation for 150 years. This celebration, which started 
on New Year’s Eve, will include festivities that stretch from sea 
to sea. From the party that will take place on Parliament Hill 
and every community, large and small, it is sure to be a 
showcase of everything Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we take part in some sort of Canada 150 
celebration, whether back in our constituencies with our 
families or travelling to other parts of the country, we should all 
take time to appreciate the nation which we all call home. 
Canada is a place we can be proud of regardless of our political 
stripes. From our history to where we are today and the bright 
future ahead of us, we can be proud to be Canadian. 
 
Most importantly, Mr. Speaker, let us not forget that one would 
not be able to celebrate a national milestone like this without 
recognizing all the women and men, past and present, who wear 
our nation’s uniform and have fought for our freedom. For their 
sacrifice, we are eternally grateful. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in celebrating 
Canada 150 this coming July 1st and all year. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 



2572 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2017 

Centre. 
 

Saskatoon Pride Festival’s 25th Anniversary 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, across the globe June is 
celebrated as LGBTQ [lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, 
queer and/or questioning] Pride Month, and in Saskatoon this 
June marks the milestone 25th anniversary of our city’s annual 
Pride festival. Hosted by the Saskatoon Diversity Network, the 
Saskatoon Pride festival is an opportunity to celebrate 
queerness, foster pride, and raise awareness of queer culture 
within the larger community. 
 
This year’s festival will kick off at the raising of the Pride flag 
at city hall on June 12th, and accumulate in the annual Pride 
parade on June 24th. The parade is expected to have record 
attendance, and for the first time in Saskatoon’s history, our 
mayor, Charlie Clark, will be leading the parade as grand 
marshal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, although our country has made great strides in 
LGBTQ2 [lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, transsexual, 
queer, questioning or two-spirited] rights, Pride month and the 
events like the Pride parade are still so necessary. In more than 
70 countries, homosexuality is still illegal, and tragic acts of 
intolerance still happen in our backyards. 
 
I, along with the members from Saskatoon Riversdale, Nutana, 
Meewasin will be walking in solidarity with the LGBTQ2 
people in this year’s Pride parade, and I’m pleased to say our 
Regina MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] will be 
doing the same here in the Queen city, as well as our Prince 
Albert member in her hometown. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing June 
as LGBTQ2 Pride month right across this province, including 
Moose Jaw, Yorkton, Estevan, Weyburn, Swift Current, and 
many other communities raising positive awareness of queer 
culture throughout the year. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 

Lumsden Team Wins Gold at Hoopla 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
is my pleasure to stand in this Assembly today to acknowledge 
a school in my constituency who won the 3A Hoopla gold 
basketball championship. The Lumsden High School Angels 
won their second straight title this March and fourth 
championship in seven years. The Angels defeated Regina 
Christian’s Grizzlies 69 to 58 in a great game that both sides 
won’t soon forget. Everyone on the team had a great game. 
Emma Ulmer scored 25 points for the Angels, and all the 
graduating players played exceptionally well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Coach Exner had this to say, and I quote, “I don’t 
think we could have written a better script for the season.” The 
coach recognized every player, from the seniors to the rookies, 
as well as Nicole Squires, who managed the team, and assistant 
coach Lisa Ulmer, and all the parents and volunteers that 
supported the team throughout their winning season. 
 
Mr. Speaker, sports always have the ability to bring a 

community together, and the Angels from Lumsden High are no 
exception. Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members join me in 
congratulating the Angels for their big win and for an amazing 
season, and join me in wishing the graduates success in 
whatever comes next. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Government’s Fiscal Management 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
With a projected debt of over $18 billion — double 
Saskatchewan’s debt in 2013 — more cuts to the province’s 
vulnerable and no investments to build a better future, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s clear the Sask Party can’t manage the tough times 
and has no vision to build a better future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has forgotten who they’re working 
for. It seems with each day a Sask Party promise is broken 
whether through tax hikes or cuts to Saskatchewan families 
trying to get ahead. The Sask Party arrogantly and recklessly 
spent the people of Saskatchewan’s money, and now it’s those 
people, those families, and those workers that are being forced 
to pay for that government’s mismanagement, scandal, and 
waste. 
 
The Sask Party promised to not raise taxes, yet here we are: 
standing up against a budget that hikes taxes on families, the 
middle class, and the job creators in the construction business. 
To put it simply, the Sask Party broke their word. On top of tax 
hikes, everything from power bills to children’s clothes, fishing 
licences, and a case of beer will cost the people of 
Saskatchewan much more. 
 
The Sask Party has made it plain as day how arrogant and out of 
touch they have become. Rest assured, Mr. Speaker, this 
government will be held to account. The Sask Party’s 
short-sighted attack on families, workers, and the vulnerable 
has only sharpened our resolve to fight for a better future for all 
Saskatchewan people. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 

Constituent Inducted Into Saskatchewan 
Agriculture Hall of Fame 

 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Agriculture 
serves as one of Saskatchewan’s primary industries and, for 
many of us, it’s a part of our past and our current character. It’s 
important to recognize those producers who have made 
significant contributions, innovations, and improvements within 
our province’s agriculture industries. 
 
Since 1972, the Saskatchewan Agriculture Hall of Fame has 
recognized and honoured a number of diverse producers across 
the province. The most recent induction ceremony was held on 
April 22nd at Saskatoon’s Western Development Museum. The 
ceremony honoured a very deserving and hard-working 
constituent of mine, Mr. Tim Oleksyn. Mr. Oleksyn also 
happens to be my former classmate, friend, neighbour, and 
fellow 4-H leader. Mr. Oleksyn holds a long list of 
accomplishments and volunteerism within the agriculture 
industry, but his dedication, research, and expertise in the cattle 



May 18, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2573 

industry has earned him a place within the Saskatchewan 
Agriculture Hall of Fame. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Oleksyn has dedicated his career to ensure 
“the values of the beef and grain industry are retained,” which 
can attest to his passion, his character, and strong Saskatchewan 
work ethic.  
 
I would ask all members to join me in congratulating Mr. Tim 
Oleksyn and all inductees to the 2017 Saskatchewan 
Agriculture Hall of Fame. It’s people like Mr. Oleksyn who 
contribute to keeping Saskatchewan strong. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 

Khalsa Day Parade 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Waheguru Ji Ka Khalsa. 
Waheguru Ji Ki Fateh. In the next coming week, the Sikh 
Society will be celebrating with a Khalsa Day parade, which 
includes celebrating Canada’s 150th anniversary in both Regina 
and Saskatoon. This will be Regina’s second parade and 
Saskatoon’s first. The parade will be an open opportunity for all 
ages to come out, participate, and enjoy one another’s culture 
and tradition, together as one community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is a province for all, and we are 
grateful for our new neighbours we are gaining and thank them 
in sharing their faith and celebrating with us. I encourage all 
who are in this area to attend the parade, participate, and share 
in harmony, and celebrate diversity together. This government 
is committed to fostering this diverse atmosphere, and I look 
forward to more events put on by the Sikh Society. 
 
This Saturday is Regina’s parade day, beginning at the Sikh 
temple at 11 a.m., arriving at the Legislative Building. There 
will be free food and fun for all ages, and then going back to the 
Sikh temple. The Saskatoon parade will be on May 27th, 
beginning in Wallace Park. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all the members to please join me in 
thanking the Sikh Society and its organizers for putting on this 
event and wish all participants well, in advance, on parade day. 
Thank you. Thanks. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 

Habitat Saskatchewan Day 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Recently I had the 
honour of celebrating Habitat Saskatchewan Day in Saskatoon 
alongside some very special volunteers, partners, and families. 
Here in our province, Habitat for Humanity assists 
hard-working and committed Saskatchewan residents to build 
safe, affordable, and quality housing. 
 
Over the years, our government has been fortunate enough to be 
a part of a number of Habitat projects. Since 2009 we have 
committed a total of $9.8 million to Habitat. This includes the 
announcement made on May 5th of $1 million in joint funding 
from the federal and provincial governments to support Habitat 
for Humanity Saskatchewan affiliates and chapters. Mr. 

Speaker, by supporting Habitat, our government is empowering 
families to build stronger communities. This record is revealed 
in the 13 communities across the province where Habitat has 
constructed housing developments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask my colleagues to join me in congratulating 
the volunteers, partners, and staff who are a part of Habitat for 
Humanity. These individuals dedicate countless hours of hard 
work and craftsmanship. Habitat’s continuous support, 
leadership, and collaboration helps numerous families across 
the province achieve their dreams of owning a home. Their 
mission, vision, and values help keep Saskatchewan strong. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I’d like to thank members for the improved 
decorum over the last couple of weeks. We should have 
vigorous debate in this Assembly on policies and on ideas, but 
we shouldn’t question the character and motives of hon. 
members. Let’s have a respectful day. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Security of Personal Email Account 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday, instead of 
hearing the Premier take some responsibility for his private 
political email server, we heard the same lines and nonsense 
from the Premier. Well I guess the Minister of the GTH’s 
[Global Transportation Hub] lips were also moving but it was 
clearly the Premier’s words. 
 
They seem so sure that the former minister, who is plagued by 
scandal, did not use the private political server to discuss the 
GTH. Mr. Speaker, how do they know that with such certainty? 
And if they’re able to know that, why does the Premier still 
know nothing about the key phone calls that minister plagued 
by scandal took with regard to this scandal, and how is it 
believable that he was so unaware for so long of the former 
minister’s relationship with the original seller of land that made 
off with $6 million? 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the reason we’re so 
sure is because the minister told us he has never used his Sask 
Party account at any point. So that would be a fairly good 
indication that there was no business done on that server, if he 
never had an account on it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With regard to the email account question, members opposite 
well know that we all have party accounts. We all have MLA 
accounts. We all have government accounts. We have caucus 
accounts. We have personal accounts. We all do. And you 
know, Mr. Speaker, we can all endeavour to ensure that we use 
the appropriate account for the appropriate piece of business, 
but it can be a challenge when emails are sent to an account, a 
personal account or a party account or a caucus account, in 
terms of responding. I think people and the public know that 



2574 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2017 

could be very much the case. 
 
We will endeavour to ensure that we do our best to use the 
appropriate account for the appropriate piece of business. And I 
would encourage members opposite to do the same, who have a 
long history of using personal accounts for government 
business as well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Government’s Fiscal Management 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, on budget day that Premier 
said he was happy with their budget. As usual, he took and still 
takes no responsibility for his decade of mismanagement, 
scandal, and waste. That’s how arrogant and how out of touch 
he and they have become. Mr. Speaker, they’ve forgotten who 
they’re working for. From their GTH scandal to their $2 billion 
mismanaged bypass and its massive overrun, the $1.5 billion 
CCS [carbon capture and storage] debacle, $100 million in 
giveaways to corporations, the wealthy, and the well connected, 
and on and on and on. But they’ve refused to take any 
responsibility. 
 
They’ve refused to take a 20 per cent pay cut on their 
ministerial bonuses. They’ve refused to walk back adding more 
seats to this legislature or work to cut five more MLAs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with all of this, how can the Premier justify the 
Sask Party’s arrogance and going after the most vulnerable in 
Saskatchewan? It’s as heartless as it is damaging. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, not only am I happy to defend what the government 
has done over the last 10 years, we’ve campaigned on the 
record. Mr. Speaker, we’ve campaigned a year ago on that 
record. We didn’t have a lot to promise because the fiscal 
situation was obviously very tight, and so in that campaign we 
pointed to what we had done in government. 
 
So let’s revisit that, Mr. Speaker, what the government chose to 
do with 10 years of some increased revenues. Mr. Speaker, we 
reduced taxes for Saskatchewan families . . . [inaudible] . . . by 
$6 billion. Six billion in a reduction in taxes for families, for 
farmers, and for businesses, including small businesses, in this 
province. Twenty billion dollars in infrastructure investment 
over those 10 years, Mr. Speaker, a more than doubling of the 
amount of infrastructure investment in this province under our 
government than we saw in the same period when members 
opposite were in government and had a lot of money. They had 
a . . . sitting on a lot of money at the end of things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But you know what we didn’t have when they were sitting on 
that money? We didn’t have a children’s hospital. Just 
Saskatchewan and PEI [Prince Edward Island], the only two 
places in the country that didn’t have one. We didn’t have 
adequate long-term care. Now there are 13 new long-term care 
facilities, 14 when you count the one in Swift Current. Now 
those exist in the province. The Sask Hospital in North 
Battleford was just talked about by members opposite while it 
fell down around itself. Now that’s getting built. There’s the 

Moose Jaw Hospital. There’s 40 new schools and replacement 
schools in the province. There’s less operating debt and lower 
taxes and, most importantly, 1.15 million people who are living 
here now because Saskatchewan was the place to be from, and 
it’s still now the place to be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Intent of Bill 40 and Ownership of Crown Corporations 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier can make as 
much noise as he wants, but neither he nor any of their 
candidates ran on the cuts and sell-offs that we see here today. 
Just a year ago, they swore to the people of our province that 
they would never sell off SaskTel or our Crowns. Then came 
Bill 40 to chop up and sell off potentially all of our Crowns. A 
full sell-off of STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company]. 
A complete betrayal of Saskatchewan people. Mr. Speaker, the 
cabinet are so busy setting up meetings with their corporate 
friends, who are looking to buy up our Crowns, that they can’t 
even figure out what a meeting or an offer is anymore, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s clear the Sask Party’s plan has been to sell off 
our Crowns despite all the promises and pledges otherwise. 
That Premier has broken his word and broken trust with 
Saskatchewan people. Will he not at least admit that this will 
result in hundreds of millions of dollars of Saskatchewan 
people’s dollars going to pay taxes in Ottawa? And will he 
explain why he has not had the decency nor the backbone to 
bring his plan to Saskatchewan people, the real owners of our 
Crown corporations? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the minister . . . the member has mischaracterized Bill 
40. Bill 40 defines privatization so that it cannot happen. Let’s 
be very clear. It defines privatization using the World Bank 
definition so that the government cannot privatize the Crowns. 
Now, Mr. Speaker, though I think he’s mischaracterized it, I 
don’t call into question his decency. I just think he’s wrong. 
And I just think this characterization is incorrect, but if that’s 
his tactics, if that’s what he wants to continue to do, I’ll leave 
that to him. That’s a decision he’ll want to make. 
 
What we have done in the Crown corporations through Bill 40, 
though, is prohibited in perpetuity the privatization of those 
Crowns even as we allow for a partnership. Now, Mr. Speaker, 
when the NDP [New Democratic Party] were in office, they 
thought these partnerships, so long as majority control rested 
with the people of the province, they thought they were a pretty 
good thing. We’ve introduced emails . . . well sorry, they’re not 
emails. They’re memos. They’re memos from SaskEnergy 
whereby the NDP government of the day had talking points, 
and the talking points said this. 
 
For SaskEnergy, for example, they were going to sell part of 
that off, but it was a partnership. They said, any business 
arrangement we undertake will have two conditions. First, it 
will grow this company and keep jobs in Saskatchewan . . . 
Well the member for Nutana doesn’t like these answers because 
it demonstrates that they say one thing and did one thing when 



May 18, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2575 

they were on this side, but now that they’re on that side of the 
House, they say completely different . . . Mr. Speaker, people 
see right through that. This particular deal is exactly the kind of 
opportunity that Bill 40 would allow. What Bill 40 will not 
allow, will not allow, is the privatization of the Crowns. 
 
The Speaker: — Let’s continue to have a respectful question 
period. I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s Saskatchewan people 
that are questioning the decency of that Premier for attacking 
the most vulnerable . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Whoa. We should have vigorous debate in 
this Assembly on ideas and policies, but not on the character 
and motives of hon. members. I caution the Leader of the 
Opposition. I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that Premier has absolutely 
no mandate to sell off SaskTel, STC, SGI [Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance], or any of our Crowns. They’ve put 
history in a blender and are playing with words, but these are 
Saskatchewan people’s Crown corporations, not that Premier’s. 
Their services, their lower rates, their innovation, their 
dividends, their local jobs are all being placed at risk. 
 
The Sask Party of course aren’t being straight with 
Saskatchewan people. These sell-offs and cuts are heartless and 
will be felt for generations. They’re gutting our province. Cuts 
to health care, to education, the most vulnerable in our 
hometowns. Mr. Speaker, on top of all of this, their arrogance is 
being taken to a whole new level as they’re taking over 
everything, silencing local voices in health care, in education, 
and even ripping up contracts with our cities, towns, and 
villages. 
 
Mr. Speaker, from where does the Premier get the gall? From 
where does he think he gets the mandate? Why doesn’t he trust 
in Saskatchewan people and local leaders to do their job? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it was a very, very long 
preamble and touched on a number of issues. I’ll do my best to 
try to answer each of the issues in the preamble, the first one 
with respect to Crowns. 
 
Let me be very clear. Bill 40 prevents privatization, period. Mr. 
Speaker, much like the NDP, if we were to entertain a 
partnership in the Crowns, what would be paramount for the 
government would be jobs here in Saskatchewan, would be 
revenue for Saskatchewan people who own the Crowns. All of 
those things, all of those things would be the parameters around 
which any partnership was considered. What will not be 
considered is a privatization, and Bill 40 prevents privatization. 
And I know that doesn’t fit with the member’s talking points, 
but that is the case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to the budget, we made some difficult 
choices. Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty apparent now — although 
forecasters were not forecasting this just years ago — that oil is 

going to be lower for longer. Resource revenues have been off 
by more than a billion dollars. This is the third year of that 
happening with no immediate relief in sight. 
 
The good news is the industry’s adjusted to lower commodity 
prices and people are going back to work at 50-bucks West 
Texas, but it doesn’t help the government revenues. The most 
important part are the jobs, so that’s good. But we have to make 
a decision then around how do we deal with structurally lower 
revenue in the province. And so we’ve made some difficult 
decisions to do that. We made some decisions to shift away 
dependence from resource revenues. We’ve made some 
decisions to shift away from taxes that hurt job creators in 
favour of tax policies that will incent new jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We want to continue the momentum that has seen 
Saskatchewan move from the second worst place in Canada for 
job creating . . . sorry, the worst job-creation record in Canada 
under members opposite, in the country, to second best in 
Canada. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Carbon Pricing 
 
Ms. Sproule: — With all the programs they’ve cut and all the 
taxes, fees, and fines that they’ve hiked, after all of their 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste, it’s no surprise, Mr. 
Speaker, that this province wants to change the subject to make 
anyone else look like the bad guy. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this is on them. Of course we’re against 
having the federal government impose their scheme on us. We 
oppose it now; we opposed it when they first threatened it, and 
we’ll continue to oppose it. But we also oppose that Sask Party 
government because the whole thing is their fault. It’s because 
of the Sask Party’s inaction and their refusal to even enforce 
their own price on carbon, which passed through this Chamber 
six years ago, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan people are 
vulnerable to the feds’ scheme. 
 
And it’s because of them that our trade-exposed producers are 
worried. So will they finally take an effective step to stop 
Ottawa? And will they finally enact and enforce their own price 
on carbon and investment in the future of this province through 
their green tech fund? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — So now the critic — interesting that the 
Leader of the NDP didn’t suggest this — the critic is saying that 
now is the time, when the economy is showing signs of 
recovery, signs of recovery, she and the NDP, not surprising, 
are advocating a carbon tax. 
 
They are arguing that now is the time for a levy on heavy 
emitters. Do you know who the heavy emitters in this province 
are? Agriculture, Mr. Speaker. Do you know who else heavy 
emitters are that she would want to tax now, Mr. Speaker? 
Mining, potash mines in the province of Saskatchewan. Do you 
know what other sector is a heavy emitter that she wants us to 
tax right now? Oil and gas, Mr. Speaker, that is just slowly 



2576 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2017 

recovering, suffering from fifty dollar . . . 
 
And this is the truth. Now we see it. It took until the last day of 
session for the NDP to finally show its true colours. They want 
to tax the three most important sectors that drive jobs in this 
province. Agriculture’s one of them. Mining’s one of them. Oil 
and gas is one of them. 
 
And it shouldn’t surprise us. She said, well of course we’re 
opposed to the federal carbon tax. Oh, Mr. Speaker, but not the 
next leader of the NDP. The future of the NDP, the . . . leader of 
the NDP, the member from Meewasin said, “. . . we applaud the 
federal government’s recent announcement of a minimum price 
on carbon.” Mr. Speaker, these are the true colours of the NDP 
opposite, Mr. Speaker. Dangerous for this economy, Mr. 
Speaker, dangerous for working families right across this 
province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Government Support for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, that’s more of the same. At every 
turn they attempt to distract and deflect, but the fact is that their 
cuts are hurting Saskatchewan families and they’re waging an 
all-out attack on our schools. Parents don’t want more lists and 
spin from the Education minister. They want, they need more 
clarity. 
 
And they want and need to know that the supports and care that 
their kids need and rely on will be there when they go back to 
school in the fall. Mr. Speaker, in Regina, children living with 
special needs could lose their preschool. Children in Chinook 
School Division will see their class sizes grow and their 
teachers cut. Before the minister stands up and talks more about 
his Facebook trolling, will he consider how he’s going to 
explain to people across this province why he cares more about 
social media than he does about the education of our children? 
 
[10:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite talks 
about Facebook trolling. Well the real issue is, what position 
are they taking on things? Where are they at? What’s their 
position on this? What’s their position on that? And you never 
know. But, Mr. Speaker, occasionally the window opens up a 
little bit and we can see into the heart and soul of where the 
NDP really are on some issues. And, Mr. Speaker, one of the 
best people to show us where the NDP are is the member for 
Athabasca, because he stands up and is often the most open and 
the most candid ever. Mr. Speaker, when Bill 63 was 
introduced, he got up on April 10th, and this is what he said: 
 

. . . through rules and regulations, is they’re now stripping 
those school divisions of a lot of authority. 
 
Let us not forget that’s exactly what this bill is all about, 
Mr. Speaker. [Then he goes on to say] And those 
provisions are great. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure that I agree that anything’s great, but 
we do want things that are workable and things that will support 
the students and teachers of our province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan deserve 
better. In every corner of this province, people want answers. 
They are concerned about what our classrooms will look like in 
the fall, and that’s what they get. It’s incredible, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We now know that Saskatoon Public will have one . . . $11.5 
million in shortfall. Almost 40 jobs have been eliminated, 
including 10 educational assistants, librarians, and support staff. 
Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister and the deputy minister have 
been clear that a further 3.5 per cent pay cut is coming, but the 
Education minister has offered zero clarity when it comes to 
how this will roll out. He says that teachers should just trust 
him. Mr. Speaker, they don’t. 
 
So will the minister finally tell Saskatchewan families how 
many teachers will be laid off, how many schools will they 
close, and which programs do they plan to cut? 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
wants us to talk about school closures. I have a number for 
them. The number that I have for them is 176. Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve talked about that almost every day in this Assembly, their 
record on school closures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I’d ask the member opposite to do is take a 
drive down through her own constituency, take a drive down 
Elphinstone. She doesn’t have to take my word for it, just needs 
to take a drive down. As she goes down Elphinstone, she’s 
going to see the new Scott Collegiate under construction. She’ll 
see the new Sacred Heart School under construction. And you 
know what she’s going to see? She’s also going to see the new 
Connaught school, something which she is still proudly on 
record as opposing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would say to the member opposite, she better 
change her position on Connaught, stand up, and publicly say, 
I’m glad to see they’re getting a new school. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 

Closing of Saskatchewan Transportation Company 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, so many people are speaking 
out about the Sask Party’s plan to shut down and sell off the 
STC. Mayors, chiefs, Métis leaders, business owners, and the 
list goes on and on. I’ve heard from so many people, who voted 
for the Sask Party, who now feel betrayed because the Sask 
Party didn’t mention the sell-off during the last election. And 
it’s the seniors, the poor, and the vulnerable who will be paying 
the price. 
 
This is about safety, and it’s about connecting our communities. 
It’s not too late for the Sask Party to do the right thing like they 
did with the libraries. Mr. Speaker, will the Sask Party stop 



May 18, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2577 

their plan to scrap STC today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
you know, as tough a decision as it was to wind down STC, and 
the 224 employees that were affected, Mr. Speaker, who we 
thank them for their service, Mr. Speaker, again I’ll mention to 
the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, that the subsidy was 
increasing dramatically and, Mr. Speaker, that’s . . . was the 
reason for the decline. You decline 18,000 riders in one year, 
Mr. Speaker, then that’s substantial. The subsidy, Mr. Speaker, 
goes up from $25 all the way up to $94, Mr. Speaker. You 
know, Mr. Speaker, that’s 85 to $100 million. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I’ll mention it. Over the next five years, 
that 85 to $100 million could be used in social services, could 
be used in education, could be used for health care, Mr. 
Speaker, to help the most vulnerable in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, STC is a public service. And 
yesterday, twice, the minister responsible for scrapping STC 
refused to answer why. While BC [British Columbia] works to 
address the tragic reality of the Highway of Tears, the 
Saskatchewan Party government is going in the opposite 
direction. 
 
Twice, Mr. Speaker, he also said that the funding saved from 
STC was going to other departments. Well they’ve done no 
value-for-dollar audit. They didn’t look at the consequences 
before budget day, and now they’re claiming that they’ve used 
STC money to shrink cuts to other departments. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, we know that they’re making it up as they go along. 
Exactly how much are the Sask Party expecting to save? And, 
most importantly, what price do you put on the lives of missing 
and murdered indigenous women? 
 
The Speaker: — I’d caution the member on his 
characterization of his last question. Next question. I recognize 
the Opposition House Leader. 
 

Deficit Reduction Measures and Public Sector 
Compensation 

 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, at the close of last session we all 
stated our thanks to the many people that make this Assembly 
work. One of my colleagues opposite said something quite nice 
about a custodial staffer here at the legislature. It was said, and I 
quote, “She’s just got a special hello and a bright smile to all 
members, and I want to thank her for her job in making our job 
easier.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, can you imagine that woman’s shock earlier this 
spring, and the shock of the 230 cleaners working for 
government, when they were told that they were to be fired, 
though they could apply for their old job back with something 
like a 25 to 30 per cent cut in wages? 
 
In paying for the bad choices of this government, one of the 

first moves of that Premier wasn’t to reduce the number of 
MLAs. It wasn’t to hold off on making a $100 million corporate 
tax cut that they didn’t even promise. No, Mr. Speaker, it was to 
fire some of the hardest working and lowest paid people in the 
entire public service. 
 
To that government, Mr. Speaker, what does that say about the 
choices they made in this budget? What does it say about their 
priorities? What does it say about their values? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We understand that 
this impacts jobs and impacts people. This was not a decision 
about quality of service we were receiving from these 
employees, Mr. Speaker. We are encouraged that some of these 
employees will now be business owners. Five of the 13 
businesses are employee owned, the ones that have been 
chosen, and the remaining are Saskatchewan-based companies 
who have all agreed to hire existing employees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is nothing new in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Thirty government buildings in the North are 
being cleaned by the private sector over the past 20 years, Mr. 
Speaker. Again this is not about quality of service, Mr. Speaker. 
Difficult decisions needed to be made. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, when it comes to making others 
pay the price for that government’s bad choices, this 
government seems to have it in for the public service. 
 
When the Premier announced plans to cut public sector 
compensation by a total of $250 million, he did not say how 
that would be achieved. To date, it would seem that the 
government has accomplished cuts of $480,000, leaving only 
two hundred and forty-nine and a half million dollars to go, Mr. 
Speaker. What is the combination of job and wage and benefit 
cuts that would be forced on public servants to pay for the bad 
choices of this government? And will this government be 
imposing a quarter of a billion dollars of cuts to public servants 
through legislation? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
what we have said time and time again is we’re asking our 
public servants across the entire public sector here in the 
province of Saskatchewan to share in reducing our deficit of 
$1.2 billion because of our resource revenue downfall over the 
course of the last three years, Mr. Speaker, to share in this 
across the entire province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s interesting that the Opposition House Leader gets up and 
talks about firing public servants or taking this out on public 
servants, Mr. Speaker. I just hearken back to the days when he 
was a cabinet minister. In 2004-05 budget, Mr. Speaker . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Oh they don’t like to hear this when 
we get into their record. They don’t ever want to hear about 
their record in office, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In 2004-05, when they ran an $844 million surplus in their 



2578 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2017 

budget that year, Mr. Speaker, it says right here in the budget 
speech, Mr. Speaker, “It is with great regret that I announce that 
approximately 500 seasonal, temporary, and permanent staff 
will be impacted by this budget.” They fired 500 people, Mr. 
Speaker, in the public service when they ran an $844 million 
surplus, Mr. Speaker. That’s the record of that Opposition 
House Leader. 
 
They say one thing when they’re on that side of the House and 
do something completely different when they’re on this side of 
the House, Mr. Speaker. It’s NDP doublespeak. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answer to question 436. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered the 
response to question 436. I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to question 437 and 438. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled answers to 
questions 437 and 438. I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answers to questions 439 through 441. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered the 
answers to questions 439 to 441. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Request leave to make a statement 
about the end of session, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Expression of Thanks 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don’t want 
to be between everybody and getting out of the Chamber for the 
last day, but I do have a couple of quick thank yous that I want 
to go through, Mr. Speaker. 
 
First off, after the Premier appointed me to be House Leader 
last summer, I spent a lot of time with the Clerks, and I really 
have to thank all of them for their guidance. Every Monday I 
came down, for probably about four or five weeks, and they 
spent two hours with me going through what I should know and 
what I need to know and what I have to know. And after they 
gave me the volume of Erskine May, Beauchesne’s, and 
Canadian Parliamentary, about probably 2,000 pages to read 

on parliamentary history, I had lots of questions. So I have to 
thank you very much for all of your guidance. And before 
session, during the fall session, and during this session, I 
touched base with them on a regular basis. So thank you very 
much for instilling probably about 2 per cent of your wisdom on 
me. So thank you very much for that. 
 
I want to thank the Committee Clerks. Thank you for staying 
with us late at night. It is probably a very long evening for a lot 
of them, as it is for our members, but I want to thank them. 
 
The Sergeant-at-Arms, I want to thank you for providing, you 
and your team, for providing security for us. We feel very safe 
in this building. This is the people’s Legislative Assembly, and 
you certainly make everybody welcome into this. But on behalf 
of all of the members here, I want to thank you for making us 
feel safe here and back at our constituency offices. So thank you 
very much for that. 
 
I have to thank my colleague Deputy House Leader for his 
wisdom. He has read all of those Erskine May and 
Beauchesne’s several times, Mr. Speaker, and he is a wealth of 
information. And it is absolutely amazing the depth that my 
Deputy House Leader has in such a young age. He knows more 
than most people do in a lifetime about the proceedings and has 
the utmost respect for this Chamber and for the members that 
serve in this Chamber. 
 
I want to thank Exec Council. They are behind the scenes. 
These are Premier’s very close advisers: Reg Downs, Kathy 
Young, Joe Donlevy, Tim Highmoor, and all the staff that 
support them for us to be able to do our job. 
 
[11:00] 
 
I want to thank the Premier for his wisdom, his guidance, and 
his presence and leadership that he brings to this side of the 
House and represents Saskatchewan, not just across our 
province — and you see him standing there talking to 
everybody about what is going on in their world — but not just 
here, but across Canada, certainly in Ottawa, and around the 
world our Premier is known as a very respectable man and a 
very intelligent man on the process of putting Saskatchewan on 
the map. 
 
And a person that came from Ontario to Saskatchewan — I 
thought I’d fallen off the face of the earth coming to 
Saskatchewan — nobody knew about us, Premier. We were 
very one of those provinces that flew under the radar, but our 
Premier has put us on the international map several places 
around the world. And I want to thank you, Premier, for all of 
your wisdom that you have installed on myself and on the rest 
of our caucus. 
 
To cabinet, thank you very much for working with me. I know 
I’ve been very difficult at times in working with you, getting 70 
pieces of legislation through this Chamber, Mr. Speaker. But I 
want to thank cabinet for working with myself. I also want to 
thank my caucus colleagues in keeping myself aware of what’s 
going on in their constituencies and all of the guidance that 
they’ve provided for me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to thank the Legislative Assembly 



May 18, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2579 

staff and the building staff, Mr. Speaker. I very much appreciate 
that they keep everything working for us behind the scenes 
again. I want to thank the people that I get to work with, which 
is Jarred and Annie. Again wisdom beyond belief at such a 
young age — we’ve got a 25-year-old and a 30ish-year-old, 
Jarred — and just being able to get the knowledge from them 
that they provide for myself and for the rest of the team. 
 
I want to thank my colleague on the other side of the House, the 
member from Elphinstone. We have had a very good working 
relationship. Lots of handshake deals on how things operate in 
this House. I thank him for always keeping his word to me. We 
disagree on some things that happen in this Chamber, but when 
the member tells me that he’s going to do something, that’s 
what happens, Mr. Speaker. And it is very honourable to have 
that. 
 
One of the exchanges we had at the end of the Table where the 
mace was . . . We were having a discussion back and forth, and 
my comment to him was, don’t worry; we’ll work this out. And 
one of the Clerks, Kathy, said, wow, I really like to hear that 
between the House leaders that we’ll work this out. And we 
have, Mr. Speaker, to be able to get this legislative session 
through. 
 
A couple of other people that I want to thank is Hansard. Thank 
you very much for being the quiet eye in the sky up there. I’m 
sure that the debate is lively, and I’m sure sometimes it is a 
little slow. But we very much appreciate you being up there. If 
you can pass that on to your colleagues, I would certainly 
appreciate it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank you. There have been many times 
where you have corrected me, and this is a learning curve for 
me as House Leader. I want to thank you for all of your 
guidance that you have provided in this Chamber and in your 
office for me to be a more effective House Leader. 
 
And lastly, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank all of our families. 
Without our families being able to support us from home, 
especially those that have to travel, that are outside the Regina 
area, they keep everything going at home when we are down 
here occupied in what’s going on in the dome. And when we 
get back to our houses, usually our spouses will give us a reality 
check of nobody is talking about that issue, but it is the big 
issue of the day inside this dome. 
 
So again myself . . . Leane and my kids, I want to thank them 
for being able to be there for me on multiple levels and 
understanding that I do miss, as all members do, we miss a lot 
of events back at home. 
 
So saying that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to conclude my 
remarks by thanking everybody that I get the privilege to 
represent in Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland and all of my 
colleagues for allowing me to make this statement. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — With leave to respond, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Given that my hon. colleague has taken, you 
know, the meat of my speech, of course mine will be greatly 
shortened and made more compact, Mr. Speaker. But I’d 
certainly attach myself to many of the remarks that the 
Government House Leader’s made. And I guess just to expand 
on those a bit in my own way, I always think of all the people 
that work within this Assembly so that we might do the 
people’s business here in this Chamber and in this building, and 
all the people throughout the province that help us to do these 
jobs that have been set out for us by the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So I guess I’ll start at the top with members opposite. And it 
certainly is the . . . As the member from Silverspring has 
reported, he’s as good as his word and I think has been a great 
student. And certainly I go to the same school. I usually go for 
prayers, usually after question period, to get absolved of my 
various sins by the Table, and then go forth to sin some more. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, certainly this is an individual that’s taken on 
the job and done it very well, and I think subscribes to the same 
belief as myself in that the procedural part of the job is . . . If 
you can get that clear, then you can focus on the issues that the 
people set out before us, Mr. Speaker. And you know, I don’t 
think it’s his life’s ambition to be off to the procedural 
wrangling rodeo and it’s certainly not mine, Mr. Speaker, which 
makes me wonder sometimes why this is the job that’s been 
given me on this side. 
 
But I guess . . . But I do want to say thanks to the Government 
House Leader and to all the folks on the House business team 
over there for again being as good as their word and having a 
handshake that means something, which means a lot, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Again I want to say thank you to the folks on our side in terms 
of the, you know, sometimes the response is, you’re asking me 
to do what? And for them powering through that, it’s much 
appreciated. But again I appreciate the responsibility that’s been 
entrusted in me and the opportunity to do this work. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, to yourself and to the Clerk and everyone 
that works on behalf of the Legislative Assembly Service 
through the, you know, the myriad of jobs that are there to be 
done, we say thank you very much. 
 
And as well, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say at this point a very 
special get well and we hope to see you back here soon to Linda 
in the cafeteria. And may her healing journey be a good and 
successful one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But again you spend so much time here and it’s in such a 
compressed and condensed, passionate, energetic, engaging 
fashion that it’s sort of like dog years, Mr. Speaker, and the 
time that we spend here together. So again it isn’t too much to 
say that it’s sort of like your legislative family in a lot of ways 
and that’s something that I feel very privileged to be part of, 
and thank you to all those folks that do that work. 
 



2580 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2017 

And again, Mr. Speaker, to yourself, Bob’s your uncle. I 
haven’t seen that in the rulings before but I like it. I like it, 
coming to, you know, Bob’s Beauchesne’s . . . Anyway, thank 
you for the work that you do, Mr. Speaker, in terms of being the 
guardian of this Assembly and of the rights and privileges of all 
of us as members of this honourable Assembly. 
 
To those without, Mr. Speaker, in terms of those outside of the 
building, in terms of the public servants, in terms of — and 
we’ve seen this here today — the different constituency folks 
that were here earlier, and the folks that work in different 
offices, it’s work that we all count on as members of this 
Assembly. So to that, I add my voice in thanks. And you know, 
you can’t do this work without the folks that are out there 
across the countryside. 
 
And of course, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about our family 
families. And I know that all members come here part of a 
family, and we’d seen that today with my colleague from 
Douglas Park, and you know, that’s . . . We owe so much to our 
families, and we’re thankful to them for enabling us to do this 
work.  
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s often referenced in this Assembly, the motto 
of the province is “from many peoples, strength.” And certainly 
the work that we do to serve those people, it’s a tremendous 
privilege, and you know, maybe you forget that sometimes 
when it’s getting a little late in committee or when the member 
from Elphinstone’s going on and on in a speech. But, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s to the people of Elphinstone-Centre I say thank 
you for enabling me to do this work, and I know that that is a 
thanks and a gratitude that is shared by all members of this 
Assembly. So “from many peoples, strength.” 
 
 As we’re able to do the people’s business here, Mr. Speaker, 
and to focus on the issues and hopefully work to ensure that the 
procedure enables a good, vigorous discussion about the issues 
and the decisions of the day or a year, Mr. Speaker, we say 
thank you. And may we do our part to build that strength for 
this province of ours, Mr. Speaker. So with that I say, thank you 
very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I too would like to add quick remarks. I’d like 
to thank all members. I believe we’ve made some 
improvements in here. I think this last week has been probably 
one of the best in a few sessions, and I thank all members for 
striving to be the best parliamentarians possible. 
 
This procedural rodeo that we’re in . . . I didn’t start out in my 
political life thinking that I would become Speaker, and it 
wasn’t the driving force for me to be re-elected, but it is 
something that I am truly enjoying. And I’d like to thank all 
members for their confidence they place in me in hoping to 
improve the decorum and improve everyone’s debate in this 
Assembly. 
 
Quick thank yous to our Sergeant-at-Arms. Thank you for him 
and his team and for his efforts in improving the security in this 
building. It is noticed. Thank you to the Clerks. I’m very 
appreciative of their wise wisdom and sage advice. To the 
Government House Leader and Opposition House Leader, I do 
appreciate what we’ve been able to improve on and work on. 
It’s ongoing, and I know when we return, we’ll have to continue 

to be vigilant on improving our Assembly. To our Pages, thank 
you very much for your work in the Assembly, including 
Chase. 
 
And to our CAs [constituency assistant]. We do important work 
down here in the Assembly. You’ve got to remember when we 
leave, you may say it’s probably even more important the work 
we put in back in our offices, listening to the people we 
represent. And when we’re down here in the Assembly, our 
CAs are our eyes and ears back home. So I’d like to personally 
thank Helen and Conni in my office, and to all CAs that may be 
watching right now. In my office, in the Speaker’s office, I have 
Sheila, Irene, and Cherrise, and I’m very thankful for their 
patience and ability to keep me on track. It’s much appreciated. 
And with that, I’d just like to conclude remarks and to thank all 
members once again for their willingness to serve in public 
office. Thank you. 
 
I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 
leave to move a motion. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

House Adjournment 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
move the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly adjourns at the end of sitting day in 
accordance with the parliamentary calendar. It shall stand 
adjourned until 10 a.m. on October 25th, 2017, unless 
earlier recalled by Mr. Speaker upon the request of the 
government. And if recalled, Mr. Speaker will give each 
member seven days clear notice if possible of such date 
and time. 
 

I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved a 
motion. We’ll take it as read. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. It has been moved that this Assembly 
do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



May 18, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2581 

The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly stands adjourned 
until the call of the Speaker. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 11:15.] 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2569 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2569 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2569 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2569 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2570 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2570 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2570 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2570 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2570 
  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2571 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2571 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2571 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Canada Celebrates 150th Anniversary of Confederation 
  Buckingham ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2571 
 Saskatoon Pride Festival’s 25th Anniversary 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2572 
 Lumsden Team Wins Gold at Hoopla 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2572 
 Government’s Fiscal Management 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2572 
 Constituent Inducted Into Saskatchewan Agriculture Hall of Fame 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2572 
 Khalsa Day Parade 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2573 
 Habitat Saskatchewan Day 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2573 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Security of Personal Email Account 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2573 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2573 
 Government’s Fiscal Management 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2574 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2574 
 Intent of Bill 40 and Ownership of Crown Corporations 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2574 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2574 
 Carbon Pricing 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2575 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2575 
 Government Support for Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2576 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2576 
 Closing of Saskatchewan Transportation Company 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2576 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2577 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2577 
 Deficit Reduction Measures and Public Sector Compensation 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2577 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2577 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2577 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2578 
STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 Expression of Thanks 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2578 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2579 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2580 
MOTIONS 
 House Adjournment 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2580 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


