






















































Hansard: October 30, 2017


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 3A  MONDAY, OCTOBER 30, 2017, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Nicole Sarauer 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Hon. Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Hon. Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Kindersley 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2621 
 October 30, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Bonk: — I ask leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Bonk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you and to all members of the Legislative Assembly, 
it’s my pleasure to introduce a special guest in the House today, 
Dr. Eric Grimson. Born in Estevan, Dr. Grimson is a professor 
of computer science and engineering, as well as the chancellor 
for academic achievement at the Massachusetts Institute for 
Technology, or MIT, in Cambridge, Massachusetts. 
 
He currently holds the Bernard Gordon Chair of Medical 
Engineering at MIT and is a joint lecturer on radiology at the 
Harvard Medical School and Brigham and Women’s Hospital 
in Massachusetts. He is a leader in the field of computer vision, 
using computers to understand human movement. His research 
group pioneered state of the art systems for many areas in this 
field, including image-guided surgery, activity and behaviour 
recognition, and object and person recognition. 
 
This morning I met with Mr. Grimson to discuss some of his 
innovative work with new technologies and their economic 
impact, including the use of artificial intelligence and robotic 
sensors in agriculture and mining. He will also be meeting with 
other federal and provincial groups to share his knowledge in 
projects they are working on. We are glad that he can take time 
to share his insight in these different areas. 
 
Dr. Grimson attended high school in Regina and is an alumnus 
of the University of Regina where he received his Bachelor of 
Science with high honours in mathematics and physics in 1975. 
He also received the institute’s Alumni Lifetime Achievement 
Award in 2011. He obtained his Ph.D. [Doctor of Philosophy] 
in mathematics from MIT in 1980 and served as the chancellor 
of that institute between 2011 and 2014. A Fellow of The 
American Association For Artificial Intelligence, he has 
received a number of awards in recognition of his work. I invite 
Dr. Grimson now to stand up, while I ask everyone here to join 
me in welcoming him to the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d just 
like to join with the minister in welcoming Dr. Grimson to his 
Legislative Assembly. You know, as long as he’s gone away 
from home and as many accomplishments as you make, this 

will always be your home. And we’re proud of you, proud of 
the work you’re doing, and we welcome you here and 
acknowledge all these accomplishments that you’ve racked up 
in fine style. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition, I’d like to 
welcome Dr. Grimson to his Legislative Assembly. And of 
course, Mr. Speaker, in fine or in typical Saskatchewan style, 
I’m dying to know if he’s related to Stu Grimson, but we’ll find 
that out. Yes? I note that he is. So all the more the 
accomplishments, Mr. Speaker. Anyway, on behalf of the 
official opposition, welcome, Dr. Grimson, to your Legislative 
Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
to reopen the Buffalo Narrows Correctional Centre. 
 
We, the undersigned residents of the northern village of Buffalo 
Narrows, Saskatchewan wish to bring to your attention the 
following: that the closure of Buffalo Narrows Correctional 
Centre left 15 persons out of work and their families and 
businesses feeling the financial crunch. Many seniors and elders 
use the inmates to do odd jobs in their community to help out. It 
also gave inmates and their families a chance to visit, which 
now they will have no opportunities for many of them to travel 
such a far distance to visit their loved ones. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to 
immediately reopen the Buffalo Narrows Correctional 
Centre to better our community for future generations. 

 
It is signed by many good people of Buffalo Narrows. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Mr. Nerlien: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of Porcupine 
Plain, Chelan, and Prince Albert. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 



2622 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2017 

Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to stand 
in my place today to provide a petition to stop the Sask Party 
plan to sell off Saskatchewan housing units. 
 
The individuals that signed this petition would like me to draw 
the attention . . . these points to you: that the Saskatchewan 
Party plans to sell off affordable housing units in over 30 
Saskatchewan communities; that the Saskatchewan Party have 
broken their promise to seniors and instead of making life more 
affordable, they’ve cut supports, hiked the rents in long-term 
care, and are desperately selling off public seniors’ homes; and 
that those desperate sell-offs come at the same time that the 
Saskatchewan Party is eliminating a provincial support for 
seniors living with disabilities, many of whom would require 
supportive housing like the units the Saskatchewan Party are 
selling off. 
 
I will read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to immediately stop their 
plan to sell off housing units in rural Saskatchewan, and 
ensure that Saskatchewan seniors across the province have 
access to affordable and supportive housing. 

 
The individuals signing this particular petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
from the community of Prince Albert. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition calling on the government to stop the cuts to our kids’ 
classrooms. Those who have signed this petition wish to draw 
our attention to the following: to the fact that the Sask Party has 
cut at least $674 in government funding for every student across 
the province; that the Saskatchewan Party hiked education 
property taxes by $67 million but cut an additional $54 million 
out of the classroom, and even though the Sask Party is making 
us all pay more, our kids are actually getting less; and that these 
cuts mean that students will lose much needed supports in the 
classroom, including funding for buses for kindergartners as 
well as programs to help children with special needs. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, call upon the 
government to reverse the senseless cuts to our kids’ 
classroom and to stop making families, teachers, and 
everyone who works to support our education pay the price 
for the Saskatchewan Party’s mismanagement, scandal, 
and waste. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those who have signed the petition today reside in 
Saskatoon and Archerwill. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition on behalf of concerned residents that have 
been shut out, or have had their emergency access shut out in 

Balgonie by the Sask Party’s mismanaged bypass, Mr. Speaker. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan take the necessary 
steps and actions to leave the west-in, west-out driving 
access for vehicles into and out of Balgonie, Saskatchewan 
at the intersection of Highway 1 and Main Street, 
Balgonie, Saskatchewan. 
 
We also respectfully request that the Government of 
Saskatchewan put up a locked gate on the apron between 
the eastbound lanes and the westbound lanes of Highway 
No. 1 and Balgonie, Saskatchewan Main Street 
intersection. This gate would allow emergency services 
access to the eastbound lanes of Highway 1 at Main Street, 
Balgonie, Saskatchewan intersection, but would not allow 
the public access to cross east- and westbound lanes. 
 

These petitions are signed by concerned residents from 
Balgonie, McLean, Yorkton, Kronau, and Vibank. I so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Breast Cancer Awareness Month 
 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 
today in recognition of Breast Cancer Awareness Month. Many 
Saskatchewan families are affected by breast cancer. I’m sure 
that every member of this Assembly has a friend, family 
member, or a constituent who has been touched by this terrible 
disease. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan this month, several events were 
held throughout the province for Breast Reconstruction 
Awareness Day on October 19th. BRA [Breast Reconstruction 
Awareness] Day events provide women with the opportunity to 
learn about breast reconstruction options from plastic surgeons, 
hear survivors’ stories, and get answers to their reconstruction 
questions. 
 
BRA Day began about four years ago when physiotherapist 
Tracy Gardikiotis saw a need for survivors to have this type of 
support and education. She started putting women in contact 
with one another so they could build networks. Unfortunately, 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan there is limited access to 
information about reconstruction options for survivors. These 
options must be improved so that these brave cancer survivors 
can make as full a recovery as possible and make informed 
choices that best serve them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with important initiatives like Breast Cancer 
Awareness Month, I hope that we can continue to increase 
awareness, fund the critical research, support our loved ones 
when they need us, and eventually create a future for all women 
and girls that is free from breast cancer. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 



October 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2623 

Agriculture Month 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. October has been 
proclaimed as Agriculture Month in Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, this year’s theme is Our Food Has a Story. The theme 
tells the story of our food, why we produce it, and how it moves 
from farm to table. It will also tell the story of the thousands of 
dedicated individuals in our province who work hard to deliver 
healthy, affordable, safe, and sustainable products. 
 
Mr. Speaker, agvocates have been selected as the faces of 
Agriculture Month, and they have been sharing their connection 
to food and what agriculture means in their lives. The agvocates 
represent many communities in our province and include a 
blogger, a rancher, and a registered dietitian. Individually they 
are able to share their own personal story; however, collectively 
they all have a shared passion for agriculture. 
 
Throughout October, Agriculture Month was being celebrated 
province wide with government, commodity groups, 
agribusiness, and producers. The month-long event focuses on 
four weekly subthemes: health and nutrition, affordability, food 
safety, and sustainability. These stories and themes can all be 
found on ourfoodhasastory.ca. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s agriculture sector has a lot to be 
proud of. Our farmers, ranchers, scientists, and agribusinesses 
work passionately to provide healthy and affordable food to 
consumers all around the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Legislative Assembly to 
join me in showing our appreciation of our agriculture industry 
and encourage everyone to share their food story. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Women’s History Month 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
recognize Women’s History Month. In Canada, Women’s 
History Month is celebrated in October to coincide with the 
anniversary of the Persons Case, a landmark in the history of 
the women’s movement in Canada. 
 
Five Canadian women, known as the Famous Five, were behind 
the monumental ruling that overturned the Supreme Court of 
Canada decision that in the BNA [British North America] Act, 
the term “persons” did not include women, paving the way for 
women to participate equally in all aspects of life in Canada. 
Eighty-eight years later, women in Canada have come a long 
way, but there’s more work to be done as women continue to 
face sexism, structural barriers, and work disproportionately in 
precarious, low-paying jobs. Women continue to be affected by 
sexism, discrimination, and continue to be targets of violence. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that government has a responsibility to 
make lives better for women in our province. It’s unfortunate 
today that on Women’s History Month we see that the Status of 
Women’s office in our government has, until recently, operated 

without any staff in that office. They have filled one position 
responsible for the Status of Women in a province of over 1 
million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that women’s issues are everyone’s 
issues. We need to do more. We need our government to reflect 
the communities they serve. Striving to reach gender parity has 
to be a priority and would truly make our government more 
representative and responsible to the people we serve. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 

Lakeland’s 2017 Citizens of the Year 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
acknowledge and thank two deserving and friendly volunteers 
from the district of Lakeland, north of Prince Albert, in my 
constituency. Wayne Bartel and Wayne Hyde were the 
recipients of the 2017 Lakeland Citizens of the Year Award. 
The event was held on September 30th. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is known all across this country for 
its strong volunteer base; in fact our province has the highest 
rate of volunteerism in Canada. Volunteering is a virtue that has 
its own reward. It strengthens a community, offers an 
opportunity to socialize, and enables experienced people to 
share their knowledge and expertise with future generations. 
 
The award winners, Wayne Bartel and Wayne Hyde, have spent 
a long time volunteering at the Anderson Community Centre at 
Christopher Lake over the years. They have become known to 
the community as Waynes’ world. They both have dedicated 
their time and expertise to enrich their community and are 
leading examples for all future volunteers in our parks. 
Community centres rely on the commitment of their volunteers, 
as they serve as ambassadors and representatives to the 
residents of the area and those visiting for the first time. 
 
I would like to congratulate both Wayne Bartel and Wayne 
Hyde on receiving Lakeland’s Citizen of the Year award and 
thank them for their long-term commitment and passion for 
volunteering. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 

Constituent Turns 104 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 
stand in this Assembly today to acknowledge a constituent of 
mine, Pearl Skorobohach, who turned 104 years old this 
August. 
 
Born a year prior to the start of the First World War, she was 
raised on her family’s homestead 7 miles south of Goodeve. 
She came from a family of four children and 13 stepchildren. 
She married her husband, William, in 1933, and together they 
ran a successful grain and cattle farm. Pearl contributed in every 
aspect, from raising chickens and pigs to milking cows and 
hauling grain. They lived on the farm until 1991. Pearl and 
William were blessed with five children, which in turn led to 14 
grandchildren, 22 great-grandchildren, and 6 
great-great-grandchildren. William passed away in 2005, Mr. 



2624 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2017 

Speaker, but Pearl continues to be active both physically and 
socially, including walking a quarter of a mile every day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, through feast and famine, peace and war, political 
upheaval, technological revolution, 72 years of marriage, and 
68 years of farming, Pearl has led an incredible life. She 
attributes her longevity to hard work, a good sense of humour, 
and maintaining close relationships with family and friends — 
truly a humble, Saskatchewan answer. Pearl has served and 
continues to serve as a great ambassador for this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members join me in wishing 
Pearl a happy belated birthday. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 
 

Constituent Awarded Medal for Water Rescue 
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past month, 
Raquel Schreiner, a constituent of mine, was awarded the 
bronze medal by the Royal Canadian Humane Association for 
her act of bravery. Mr. Speaker, last October a couple was 
kayaking at Sandy Beach without life jackets. The woman had 
fallen out of her kayak and her boyfriend was unable to help her 
out, eventually tipping his kayak as well and leaving them both 
stranded in the water. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Raquel was near the scene of the emergency and 
immediately took action to help the couple. She gathered extra 
life jackets along with her own kayak and headed out towards 
them. Her neighbours Rita and Ronald McCaw followed behind 
with a canoe for extra support. Once reaching the couple, she 
noticed that the woman was unresponsive. Mr. Speaker, Raquel 
feared the worst but was able to pull the couple out of the water, 
keeping them calm and relaxed all the way to the shore. The 
couple was transported to hospital for recovery. 
 
The bronze medal is awarded to our everyday heroes who 
would risk their lives to save another, and Raquel is very 
deserving of such recognition. Raquel is feeling a sense of hope 
and trust in her community, as she knows if anything were to 
happen again, her neighbours would be there, as they’re always 
looking out for each other. The McCaws also received an 
honorary testimonial certificate for their roles in the rescue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members, join me in congratulating 
Raquel Schreiner on her award and thanking her for her selfless 
act of bravery. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 
 

New Computerized Tomography Scanner at Battlefords 
Union Hospital 

 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On September 29th I had 
the privilege of accompanying the Minister of Rural and 
Remote Health to the official unveiling of our new CT 
[computerized tomography] scanner at the Battlefords Union 
Hospital. This was a great day for all those involved in 
diagnostic imaging at our hospital, and certainly even more 
exciting for those patients who are in need of a CT scan. 
 
This new 160-slice scanner replaces the old 16-slice scanner, 

allowing for more information to be captured, and at a faster 
speed. And it also allows for more complex scans and will have 
less maintenance downtime. Equally important, Mr. Speaker, 
because this scanner can complete the procedure faster, it 
performs with much less radiation exposure than the previous 
machine. 
 
The purchase of this new scanner was made possible by 
$600,000 of funding from our government and a matching 
amount of $600,000 raised by local businesses and individuals. 
The local fundraising efforts were greatly assisted by the Jim 
Pattison Broadcast Group that hosted a radiothon which brought 
in a good portion of that funding. 
 
The first patient to be examined with the new CT scanner was 
on September 18th, following six weeks of work to renovate the 
existing space and install the new equipment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since 2007-2008, CT scan capacity in 
Saskatchewan’s health system has increased by 48 per cent to 
more than 110,000 patients in 2016-17. During that same 
period, overall health system spending on medical imaging has 
increased by 70 per cent to $143 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this new CT scanner in The Battlefords is just one 
more example of what we can accomplish by working together 
with government and local communities. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: —I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Global Transportation Hub 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, no matter how much the Premier 
and the rest of them try to sweep it under the carpet, the Sask 
Party’s GTH [Global Transportation Hub] scandal continues to 
grow. Let’s be clear — our sitting Premier was interviewed by 
the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police]. In most 
provinces and in most parties, that news would be shocking. 
But the Sask Party is trying to act like it’s business as usual. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I asked the Premier a simple question last week 
but he refused to answer, so let me try another angle. When he 
spoke with the RCMP, did he stand by his statement that he was 
there “through this whole process,” or did he repeat his office’s 
claim that he was “not involved in any of the negotiations . . .”? 
Mr. Speaker, what did he tell the RCMP about his involvement 
with their GTH scandal? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t agree with the hon. 
member’s characterization of the GTH issues. Mr. Speaker, I 
will remind the House that it was this government that referred 
the matter to the Provincial Auditor, an independent officer of 
the Legislative Assembly. And more than that, Mr. Speaker, we 
were asked if the Provincial Auditor could access all cabinet 
documents related to any decisions made with respect to the 
GTH issue and we certainly made that possible. It’s not always 
the case, Mr. Speaker, that cabinet documents are made 
available to an independent review of a matter done by an 



October 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2625 

independent officer of the Legislative Building. It’s an approach 
that we took though in the interests of transparency, and now 
the matter is part of an RCMP review, Mr. Speaker, and we 
await the results of that work. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier can try to spin his 
way out of these questions, but the Saskatchewan people 
deserve real answers. Do you know what? You don’t have to 
take my word for it. Just ask the member for Meadow Lake. 
During his cameo appearance in their leadership race, he even 
threw the Premier under the bus. He said he would have fired 
the minister plagued by scandal, and he would have fired the 
senior Sask Party operative as well. 
 
Let me remind you: far from firing the minister, the Premier let 
Bill Boyd ride off into the sunset. He said he’d be missed and 
that he was in the DNA of the Sask Party. And the Sask Party 
operative at the centre of the scandal, well he still has a 
high-paying job just down the hall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the Premier still stand by the former minister, 
and does he agree about that senior operative as well? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
questions that have been asked by members opposite with 
respect to the GTH are certainly reasonable questions to be 
asked in this place. The bottom line is that this matter has been 
investigated by the Provincial Auditor. The Provincial Auditor 
report was something that members opposite called for. It’s 
something that we asked the Provincial Auditor to do. Her and 
her team did an exhaustive report on the GTH, made 
recommendations about mistakes the government made. None 
of them would meet the test of scandal — a word that members 
opposite throw around — but certainly they were serious, 
serious recommendations. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we have responded to those 
recommendations. The GTH is now ensuring that the 
recommendations have been implemented and we’re also 
implementing them across the government as well, Mr. 
Speaker. And we know that the matter has been the subject of 
review by RCMP. I welcome that and I look forward to the 
results of that work. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, why can’t anyone over there 
bring themselves to take this issue more seriously? Last week 
instead of answering a serious question about how he really 
feels about the GTH scandal, the minister started boasting about 
land sales. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, 300 of those 700 acres were given to the 
CPR [Canadian Pacific Railway] for free, and when Bill Boyd 
was the minister of the GTH and SaskPower, they swooped in 
at a key time and bought 145 of those acres. Now that he’s 
gone, apparently they don’t want it anymore and are 
considering selling. And the SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority] even bought 15 acres, Mr. Speaker. Or 
maybe we should go back to the 204 acres at the centre of the 
scandal that he’s trying to avoid. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll just ask the minister the same question I asked 
last week and last month: will he tell the people of 
Saskatchewan how he really feels about the GTH and the 
scandal, or is he just sticking to government lines? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment, 
GTH, and SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I certainly believe the government has taken concerns 
that have been raised around the Global Transportation Hub 
very seriously. That’s why the government took the steps of 
affording information to the Provincial Auditor and 
co-operating fully with the Provincial Auditor. And that’s why 
we take seriously, obviously, the fact that the RCMP have 
reviewed the matter in question. 
 
But I can also say that we certainly — and I certainly — view 
this as a generational opportunity for the people of 
Saskatchewan, to the province of Saskatchewan. The Global 
Transportation Hub, I believe, has considerable merit in terms 
of advancing the interests of the province. We are an 
export-based province; we are a province that is largely 
dependent on, obviously, transporting goods outside of this 
province. And so, Mr. Speaker, what I know that the board and 
the management and all the staff of Global Transportation Hub 
are focused on are ensuring that it is a success going forward. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s lines don’t match 
up with the facts. Even with them using our Crowns to bail out 
the GTH, the GTH is losing millions. In fact, the GTH line of 
credit grew from less than $3 million to $7 million in just one 
year. And they haven’t made a single payment in three years on 
the $24 million loan that they have with the Royal Bank. That 
loan has cost Saskatchewan people over $1 million in interest, 
and that’s not even counting the cost of the infrastructure and 
the legal costs for all the settlements over the land dealings. 
 
So if the minister refuses to directly answer about the Sask 
Party’s GTH scandal, can he at least accept responsibility for 
the millions of dollars the Sask Party’s mismanagement has cost 
Saskatchewan people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 
GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well, thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I think the member opposite should 
know, as I said last week, nearly $500 million in private 
investment has been invested at the Global Transportation Hub. 
This has created nearly 1,000 full-time jobs, and on top of that, 
1,800 jobs in construction. 
 
Nearly 5,000 trucks move in and out of the Global 
Transportation Hub every week, and this has generated — 
leaving the land sales aside for a moment — this has generated 



2626 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2017 

$17 million in diesel tax fuel and $15.2 million in provincial 
personal income tax for an organization that has been around, 
Mr. Speaker, for five years, six years. This is at the infancy of 
the Global Transportation Hub. Certainly this is an organization 
that is going to continue to sell land and attract additional 
tenants to the Global Transportation Hub over the coming 10 
and 20 and 30 years. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Water Management Project in Quill Lakes Area 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, since I’m not getting any 
answers from the minister on the GTH, let me see if I can get 
some answers on a different file. Last month a project to divert 
water from the Quill Lakes got a green light. They’re rushing 
ahead, saying no environmental impact study is necessary. Mr. 
Speaker, this project is a 25-kilometre channel that diverts 
salinated water into Last Mountain Lake. People are very 
concerned about the environmental impacts, about wildlife, 
about fish, and about their properties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Water Security Agency themselves reported 
that the diverted water has a much higher salinity level than in 
the lake. So how did the Environment minister determine that 
this project would not cause the emissions of any pollutants and 
therefore not trigger the Act? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, there was so much wrong 
with the preamble of that question, I don’t even know where to 
begin. First and foremost, the government has not approved a 
plan for construction and operation of a diversion channel. 
What has merely been done is the government has determined, 
the ministry has determined that it is not a development under 
the Act and therefore does not require an environmental 
assessment. 
 
For a project to have approval, which there is not a project in 
front of the government, we would have to be satisfied with the 
following: hydrological analysis, hydraulic modelling, water 
quality analysis, water quality monitoring program, land 
control, and public consultation. That all needs to continue, and 
that needs to be provided to the proponents before approval is 
ever given. There has not been approval given to any project 
with respect to the member’s question. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the minister should tell that to 
the fish who will be drinking those higher salinated waters. I’m 
asking what experts were consulted, not to repeat the lines. But 
I’m going to move on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Act could also be triggered . . . and this is right in the 
Environment letter. The Act could be triggered if, and an 
assessment would be required, if there was “widespread public 
concern because of potential environmental changes.” Mr. 

Speaker, a 25-kilometre channel into Last Mountain Lake? 
People in communities around the lake and across the province 
are concerned. Why is the minister saying that their concerns 
don’t count, that they don’t count at all? 
 
The urgency of this project was actually allayed a little this 
year, so why is the minister rushing forward, unwilling to give 
the Saskatchewan people a full hearing and ensure that an 
environmental assessment takes place to make sure that the 
project is safe? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, again, approval has not been given to a project. In 
order for the government to approve a project, hydrological 
analysis would have to be not only complete but also agreed to 
by the government. Hydraulic modelling would have to be 
agreed to by the government. Water quality analysis would 
have to be agreed to by the government. Water quality 
monitoring program would have to be agreed to by the 
government. Land control and consultations would have to be 
agreed to, all which still has to take place and produce to the 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The members opposite should know that many projects go 
forward without a full-blown environmental assessment. Many 
projects go forward without reaching that standard and having 
to achieve this. Mr. Speaker, I have over 60 pages of projects 
that went forward under the former government from 1997 to 
2007 that didn’t require an environmental assessment, but they 
still required the proponents to provide to the satisfaction of the 
government, regardless of the agency, regardless of the 
ministry, the questions that are asked in that process. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this is an issue we take very seriously, and no 
project would be approved until all of those questions are 
satisfied. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

Intent of Bill 40 and Ownership of Crown Corporations 
 
Mr. McCall: — You know, typical, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 
not taking responsibility for their own actions. They’ve always 
got to point, be pointing somewhere else, Mr. Speaker, but 
never looking in the mirror taking responsibility. And it figures, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
On another front, during the election, this government promised 
that there would be no sell-off of our Crown corporations. But 
they scrapped STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company] 
and are auctioning off the assets. And then they had dozens of 
secret meetings they claimed were chance encounters on the 
sale of SaskTel and SGI [Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance]. 
 
So when the Premier took to Facebook to declare that they were 
finally listening and would repeal Bill 40 — you’ll forgive us, 
Mr. Speaker — we were a little skeptical. Two days later, he 
admitted that they were only repealing parts of it, and I quote, 
“We think definitionally that a wind-down should be available 
to this government or future governments.” Mr. Speaker, either 



October 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2627 

they’re repealing Bill 40 or they’re not. Which is it? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m grateful for the question 
from the member opposite. This announcement and the Speech 
from the Throne has been well received by people across the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the efforts of Bill 40 were to define privatization 
because the previous government failed to do so in the Crown 
protection Act. And so, Mr. Speaker, we used the World Bank 
definition of privatization which would have meant that 
partnerships or partial sale up to 49 per cent would have been 
allowed by the government. We heard very clearly from 
Saskatchewan people that they didn’t agree with that definition. 
Their definition, the people of the province’s definition of 
privatization was the sale of any stake, of any amount of a 
Crown, or the partnering of any amount of a Crown. And so, 
Mr. Speaker, our MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 
reported that back to ministers, to myself. I heard it directly 
from Saskatchewan people. Bill 40 will be changed to reflect 
that fact, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know the NDP [New Democratic Party] have said they’re 
going to reinstate and start the bus company over again. Mr. 
Speaker, it was a difficult decision but $100 per-passenger 
subsidy, we don’t think that’s the appropriate use of public 
funds going forward. So we disagree with them on that front, 
Mr. Speaker. But as for the Crown corporations, no stake in the 
Crown corporations are subject to sale or partnership going 
forward. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, definitionally it’s not 
complicated. Either they’re repealing Bill 40 — as the Premier 
said they would on Facebook the night before the Throne 
Speech — or they’re not. But apparently, they’re not. And it’s a 
big deal, Mr. Speaker, because last May that Premier contended 
that they needed Bill 40 to scrap STC. So what will they wind 
down next, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan people are sick and tired of this 
government playing games with their Crowns over a decade 
now, Mr. Speaker. And they’re sick of this government trying 
to shove secret deals through the back door that they know they 
wouldn’t be able to get through the front. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what was the point of the Premier’s video if 
not a commitment to the Saskatchewan people to repeal Bill 40, 
as he had said? Will they commit to changing the law to get rid 
of all of Bill 40, or are they going to keep playing the games? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the member who has asked 
the question is the House Leader for the NDP, and an able 
House Leader and one who is no stranger to this place. And I 
know that he reads legislation carefully. He will also note 
within Bill 40, which was a miscellaneous statutes Act . . . 
That’s the kind of bill that comes forward that covers off any 
number of elements of the government. I think in that particular 

bill — I’m looking over at the former attorney general — I 
think we also moved to make the change with respect to 
Queen’s Counsel and King’s Counsel. There was a number of 
miscellaneous things that happened. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just fundamentally and categorically reject the 
member’s opposite contention that after all that we’ve been 
through on this side of the House on the Crown corporation 
issue, and after the change that we’ve made indicating clearly 
that no portion of any Crown corporation is up for sale, that any 
government, either this one or some future government, would 
ever move ahead with any changes. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we know that members opposite have said 
that they would move to reinstate the bus company for the 
province. We know that. They have indicated that. There were 
several resolutions passed at their convention and you know, 
Mr. Speaker, I would just point out that we’ve looked carefully 
at that issue. We fundamentally believe that subsidizing per 
passenger, $100 per passenger, is not in the interest of 
taxpayers. The tens of millions of dollars of taxpayer subsidy to 
subsidize the bus company is not in the interests of public 
service or the taxpayers, Mr. Speaker, and so we will not go 
down that road. 
 
However, when it comes to the Crown corporations listed in the 
NDP’s Act that members on this side of the House voted for, 
there will be no sale of any portion of those Crown 
corporations, neither a partnership involving any share of those 
Crown corporations. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Support for Municipalities 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party is 
attacking our Crowns and they’re attacking Saskatchewan 
people too. Some people saw their property taxes increase by 
250 per cent. From Estevan to La Ronge, people are paying 
more and getting less. Commercial businesses are worried about 
keeping their staff on the payroll and even their doors open, and 
families are finding it harder to make ends meet. 
 
Before the minister starts hiding behind SAMA [Saskatchewan 
Assessment Management Agency], let’s be clear. The Sask 
Party knew the assessment issues before the budget. They could 
have done something to help. Instead they did nothing. 
 
So will the minister stop pointing fingers, take responsibility for 
the Sask Party tax hikes, and take steps to help the communities 
that were the hardest hit? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And the member 
opposite knows that every four years there’s reassessment. And 
of course under this last 10 years of growth, assessment has 
gone up. I think that’s something to be proud of in many 
instances. It wasn’t that long ago, it wasn’t that long ago when 
you went to sell your house, you were worried about how much 
you were going to lose, not what you’re going to make. 



2628 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2017 

So, Mr. Speaker, EPT [education property tax] was established. 
And this year EPT will be collected by the government and 
reported straight to the GRF [General Revenue Fund]. And, Mr. 
Speaker, this will be to respond to the request from the school 
divisions, and we’re supporting it strongly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, no matter how they spin it, the 
fact is the Sask Party raised taxes, including educational 
property taxes. It’s an assessment year, and they knew exactly 
what the new assessments were when they went down and 
wrote down the budget. And they made sure they could get 
another $67 million. 
 
But instead of putting that back into education, they took $67 
million for the General Revenue Fund to pay for their 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste. On top of that, they cut 
millions from funding for municipalities across the province. 
How can the minister justify the cuts to education and 
municipalities while still hiking the taxes? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think I 
would agree with the member when she says that municipalities 
were cut on revenue sharing. I guess she wouldn’t remember 
the days from the ’97 to 2007 where the NDP gave nothing. 
You never knew until halfway through your budget if you were 
going to get anything at all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, EPT, like I said earlier, is going to be collected 
now by the municipalities and transferred straight to the 
government and go into the GRF, and that will support anything 
that the school divisions need. Mr. Speaker, I think I would also 
say that . . . I think I have to say this, is that since we took over 
the change in the EPT, there has been a billion dollars in 
savings to property owners. So, Mr. Speaker, I’ll leave it at that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Support for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Unbelievable, Mr. Speaker. They’re forcing 
Saskatchewan people to pay more and they’re ensuring that our 
children get less. Forty-five hundred more students were in 
Saskatchewan schools this year over last year, and that should 
be great news. But on top of cutting other resources, Mr. 
Speaker, the Sask Party’s cuts also resulted in there being 181 
fewer teachers in this province. I’ll say that one more time, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s 4,500 more students but 181 fewer teachers in 
our classrooms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask: how can that minister possibly defend these 
deep cuts to our kids’ classrooms? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 
opposite is basing some of these numbers on the STF 

[Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation] numbers that came out 
over the weekend. But the staffing profile for this year is still 
preliminary, and we’re not aware of where those numbers are 
coming from. At least one division, Mr. Speaker, at least 
one . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At least one 
division has yet to report, and it appears we have roughly 2,500 
more students this year. That’s absolutely true. It appears that 
educator numbers, however, that are being bandied about 
include administration numbers, which is a problem. We’re 
going to wait for those final numbers to come in, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Last week I referenced Saskatoon Public Schools, the 
province’s largest urban division and a quote by its director that 
teachers and EA [educational assistant] numbers had in fact 
“gone up a little bit.” And last week we learned that Saskatoon 
Public is investing $1.2 million in furniture, which is great. But 
it suggests that front-line hardships cannot be overly extreme. 
 
Mr. Speaker, bottom line, with growth comes higher 
enrolments. In contrast, closing 176 schools as the members 
opposite did, Mr. Speaker, that creates staffing challenges in the 
opposite direction. Eight hundred and seventy-five more 
teachers, Mr. Speaker, 173 more student support teachers since 
’07, more specialized staff overall than have ever been in this 
province, Mr. Speaker — that’s growth. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, front-line hardships cannot be 
overly extreme. I suggest that minister get her nose out of those 
notes and get her body into the classrooms and see what’s going 
on. Those lines won’t do anything to change the reality that 
teachers across this province are facing. 
 
That government cut millions, millions from education. They 
think this is funny, but it is not funny. As a result there are 181 
fewer teachers to teach our kids. And now the teachers that are 
left are being left to fill the gap. And remember, there are 4,500 
additional students. Mr. Speaker, why is that minister forcing 
our kids’ teachers to do so much more with so much less? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
quite clear that the member opposite is challenging our 
commitment to education, and I fundamentally challenge the 
premise, Mr. Speaker. For one, total funding to education in this 
province has increased from $944 million in ’07 to 2.2 billion 
10 years later, an increase of 114 per cent. 
 
When the opposition was in power — let’s say it one more 
time, Mr. Speaker — they closed 176 schools. That takes effort. 
That takes effort. School buses literally got stuck in . . . 
 



October 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2629 

[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Mr. Speaker, school buses literally got 
stuck in potholes on highways that had become a national 
disgrace. There was no emergent fund to address emergency 
capital demands. There was no preventative maintenance 
renewal fund. 
 
In contrast, we’ve renovated; we’ve repaired; we’ve built. Our 
18 new joint-use schools are the latest in a chain of investments 
for students. And we listen to them, Mr. Speaker. We listen to 
parents and community members and teachers about what they 
wanted to see, what the school of the future looked like to them. 
And you know what it was, Mr. Speaker? Chief Whitecap 
School. Or the mâmawêyatitân centre right here in Regina 
which has been called one of its kind, the first of its kind in the 
country. École Connaught, whose own students, Mr. Speaker, 
called it a dream. Take a walk through those schools and then 
come and talk to us about commitment. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Carr, seconded by Mr. Nerlien, 
and the proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Ms. 
Sproule.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s good that I get 
to stand up and finish my reply today. And today’s a special day 
on top of that. One of the people I didn’t get to thank was my 
mother, and it’s her birthday today. So happy birthday, Mom. 
I’m sure she’ll be happy I let everybody know. 
 
My last point I was talking about was the new bakery opening 
up on South Hill. And that’s actually a bakery that is opened up 
through some folks through our Saskatchewan immigrant 
nominee program. They moved into the province, came and 
took over the bakery that had closed months prior, and have 
opened it up. And the folks that I visit and take baking to really 
appreciate that. 
 
So with my thanks then, I just want to hit a few high points on 
the Speech from the Throne. 
 
So one of the things that was near and dear to my heart, that a 
lot of us on both sides of the House put in a lot of time and 
work on, was to improve the rates of organ donation throughout 
the province. And we are doing this through donor physicians. 
It’s something we heard loud and clear, both sides of the House, 
that donor physicians would be needed to actually improve this. 
And we’re not done with that file yet, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
continuing taking a look at how we can do a better job, how we 
can educate the people of Saskatchewan to make sure that we 

all step up when we’re able to with organ donations. We’re 
moving away from just allowing organs from brain death, so to 
say, to also allowing organs from cardiac patients, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the other things that I know the member from Moose 
Jaw North and myself, we met with our Catholic school board 
earlier this fall, right before session started. And one of the 
things they made a point of thanking us for was for standing 
behind them, standing with them to protect parents’ rights for 
choice, to protect students’ rights for choice, of where they get 
to decide to go to school, albeit whether it’s a Catholic school 
or a public school, both funded through the government. 
 
And I don’t think that the members opposite have told the 
Catholic school boards — I could be wrong — but have told the 
Catholic school boards that they’re behind them with this. So 
what we’re going to do to protect their rights for the time being 
is invoke the notwithstanding clause. Sounds like I hit a nerve 
over there. So they’re kind of getting loud, so maybe they are 
paying attention a little bit. 
 
Another thing we’ve heard across parents when it comes to 
education is going back to taking a look at our math outcomes 
and going back to a common sense approach when it comes to 
teaching the math curriculum. So we’re going to take a good, 
close look at that and work with folks from across the province 
on that. 
 
And I know it was brought up from the Opposition House 
Leader on the repeal of Bill 40, I, like many of my other 
colleagues, have heard loud and clear that people don’t agree 
with any portion of the Crowns being sold off. So we’re 
repealing Bill 40 . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes. Right, we 
did vote in favour of it. Contrary to popular belief, as opposed 
to the opposition, we actually listen to what the people of 
Saskatchewan say. So if we’d made a decision that is onerous 
. . . I can speak directly to Moose Jaw. When the hospital was 
first designed, it was designed without the oxygen chamber 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The hyperbaric chamber. Thank 
you, the hyperbaric chamber. 
 
And the people of Moose Jaw, along with the firefighters, and 
with some really good supporters and friends of mine met with 
us over and over and over again to change the government’s 
mind on that. To change . . . We listened to the experts. The 
experts said, no, no, no, it’s not really necessary. However we 
listened to the people of Moose Jaw, the people of Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. They were loud and clear of their support of the 
hyperbaric chamber. 
 
We actually had a businessman donate his time, his equipment 
to build the foundation for that building. That’s how important 
it was to the people of Moose Jaw. And we listened to them, 
contrary to what the opposition did when they were in power. 
There’s a reason there’s so few of them over there; they forgot 
how to listen to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
We also want to focus on business tax reductions for small 
businesses. Although it’s small business, they are, if not the 
largest, one of the largest employers of people across the 
province. So what we’re doing is we’re raising that cap from 
500,000 to 600,000. And we’re going to do that to make sure 
that they’re able to hire more people, staff more front-line 



2630 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2017 

services here in the province, and they can keep more of their 
own money to put back into their business. 
 
We need to protect them from, you know, maybe some people 
down east that have a different mindset when it comes to 
business people. We want to make sure that our business people 
know that they have our full support. 
 
Last but not least, we’re going to help our seniors. So one of the 
bills we’re introducing is a seniors’ education property tax 
deferral program that will give our seniors with household 
incomes under $70,000 the option to defer the portion of 
property tax on their home, the education property tax on their 
home. So that allows our seniors to keep more of their money in 
their own pocket. 
 
I know that contrary to some governments . . . Like when the 
opposition was in power, they always wanted that money out of 
your pocket, you know, through higher PST [provincial sales 
tax] and the highest PST across Canada. Although we had to 
increase the rate of PST in our province and expand it because 
we had a $1.2 billion hole in the budget from resource revenue 
shortfall, it is still much lower than it was under the NDP when 
they were in power. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to speak in support of the Throne 
Speech and against the opposition’s motion. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
University. 
 
Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m really 
proud to support the ambitious plans outlined in the Speech 
from the Throne. After a decade of being in power in this 
province, through some very good economic times and also 
some challenging ones, it is clear that we are still a party with 
good ideas and continued enthusiasm for this province and its 
promise in the federation. 
 
You know, it was remarked last week by the interim Leader of 
the Opposition on the Speech from the Throne that it was really 
an attempt to, and I quote, “protect the Premier’s legacy,” and 
that it, I quote, “doesn’t help people,” Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well for one thing, if yesterday’s Speech from the Throne was 
designed to protect the Premier’s legacy, I applaud it. But what 
does it say? Well it says that the Premier has always been, Mr. 
Speaker, a passionate advocate about helping improve the lives 
of people with disabilities in this province. We created the 
SAID [Saskatchewan assured income for disability] program in 
2009, and across all of our ministries we have spent more than 
$3.7 billion to help people with disabilities. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, one of my first jobs in my former role 
as the minister was to visit a family in Warman, Saskatchewan 
to announce the introduction of a self-directed funding model so 
people with disabilities could choose the people and supports 
they want in their life, something the rest of us take for granted. 
I’m never going to forget how that mother cried at the kitchen 
table talking about how empowering it was for her son to make 
these decisions for himself and how that has fundamentally 
changed his behaviour for the better. It struck me then just how 
much decisions like this matter for everyday people. 

Individualized funding for pre-school children under the age of 
six was something that we campaigned on, and when we were 
tasked with a $3 billion shortfall, we had to put that on hold, 
Mr. Speaker. But last week, ladies and gentlemen, that 
commitment was reaffirmed. It was not forgotten. As a result of 
that, young children with autism across this province and across 
the spectrum will be able to access the appropriate supports for 
their unique needs at a time when their development for those 
supports are the most critical in helping them establish a 
fulfilling life. 
 
We also committed to the seniors’ education property tax 
deferral, Mr. Speaker, which gives seniors with household 
incomes under $70,000 the option to defer the education portion 
of the property taxes on their home. This helps provide financial 
security for low- to moderate-income seniors, giving them the 
opportunity to stay in their homes longer. Contrary to the 
comments made by the interim Leader of the Opposition, these 
efforts, Mr. Speaker, do help people. It definitely helps those 
who are vulnerable. And yes, that is part of the Premier’s 
legacy, and I think we would all agree that is a good thing. 
 
[14:30] 
 
I would be remiss not to also mention that the Ministry of 
Social Services had a record budget at a time when we have 
been challenged with a serious revenue shortfall and increased 
utilization in that ministry. That protected things like respite for 
families whose kids have serious medical needs. 
 
Jacque Tisher from Hope’s Home has shared with me that if 
they get a child when they are under the age of 10 with high 
medical needs, that family has an 80 per cent chance of staying 
together, Mr. Speaker. When that family can only get respite 
after that age or later in life, 80 per cent of those families are 
already broken apart by the strain of caring for a child with 
complex medical needs. That helps people, Mr. Speaker. In 
very important ways, that helps people. 
 
We also heard about “increased taxes for families” in the 
interim leader’s scrum, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, under this 
government and under the leadership of our Premier, we’ve 
removed 114,000 low-income people off the tax rolls. Even in 
this last budget, a very difficult budget, we’ve tried to protect 
low-income families. We have included a low-income tax credit 
to try to protect them. 
 
In addition to that, we have a competitive corporate tax rate and 
we have the highest small-business tax threshold in the country, 
Mr. Speaker. This means that all of our small-business owners, 
those entrepreneurs who are creating jobs and spurring 
innovation and building vibrant communities in this province 
cannot just survive, Mr. Speaker, but they can thrive here. 
 
And if we head out to rural Saskatchewan farms or even to any 
Greek restaurant here in Regina, those are families, Mr. 
Speaker. That is something that clearly neither our federal 
government in Ottawa or the opposition party members on the 
other side of this Assembly seem to understand. 
 
Another thing I heard in that scrum, Mr. Speaker, was a 
reference to the east bypass, and I quote, “scandal.” Let’s talk 
about that for a minute. You know, I live in the east end of 



October 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2631 

Regina. That area has seen tremendous growth over the last 
several years, in The Creeks, The Greens on Gardiner, and then 
in the bedroom communities of Pilot Butte, Balgonie, White 
City, and Emerald Park. Victoria Avenue and Arcola Avenue 
are two of the busiest roads in Regina. About 21,000 vehicles 
use those roads every single day. The increased vehicle traffic 
combined with the increased heavy truck traffic has resulted in 
a very dangerous situation for motorists’ and pedestrians’ safety 
in those areas. 
 
Residents of Balgonie and Pilot Butte know well the danger of 
trying to access those main access points. That area saw a 
reported 100 collisions per year, Mr. Speaker. We need to get 
trucks off that road. The east bypass will help us do that, which 
improves the lives of people who live in those areas. But it will 
also facilitate the efficiency, Mr. Speaker, of transporting goods 
for truckers and the economies who rely on them for those 
goods. This is the largest transportation infrastructure project in 
the province’s history. 
 
Okay. Mr. Speaker, it is a $1.2 billion project that will include 
12 new overpasses, 40 kilometres of four-lane highway, 20 
kilometres of resurfaced four-lane highway, and 55 new 
kilometres of service roads, Mr. Speaker. There will also be the 
twinning of about a 5-kilometre stretch on Highway No. 6. The 
entire project, Mr. Speaker, is going to be done by 2019. The 
three overpasses on Highway No. 1 East alone will dramatically 
improve safety and efficiency. And most importantly, doing this 
using a P3 [public-private partnership] model will save $380 
million compared to building it through traditional methods. 
 
The projected economic impact of this project is 8,200 
construction jobs, Mr. Speaker — 8,200 construction jobs. That 
helps families, Mr. Speaker. That kind of economic growth 
helps us provide a quality of life not just for those families, Mr. 
Speaker, but for all families. Again, if that is the legacy of 
Premier Brad Wall, I’m good with it. 
 
On the issue of the Theodore decision, Mr. Speaker, we heard 
last Thursday that we should just let the court process work 
itself out. Mr. Speaker, I disagree. I disagree because if we just 
sit on the sidelines and let the court process work itself out, we 
are only bystanders on this issue. That means we would be 
bystanders on the fate of Mother Teresa Middle School, which 
provides an incredible opportunity for vulnerable kids and 
families, Mr. Speaker. It means we would be bystanders on the 
Huda School, and on the Regina Christian School, Harvest City 
Academy, and every separate high school and elementary 
school in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Regina Christian School, LeBoldus High School, Luther 
College, and Campion College are all in my constituency, Mr. 
Speaker. We will not be bystanders when it comes to protecting 
choice for schools, Mr. Speaker. We will speak up and we will 
advocate for all of these because that is what the people that we 
represent asked us to do, and they will get it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the Premier’s legacy is standing up against the 
carbon tax, against the federal tax changes which affect family 
farms and small businesses — 34,300 of which are owned by 
women, by the way — and against the Theodore decision which 
would deprive us of choice for schools, then I am good with it 
because those things help people, Mr. Speaker. We don’t wait, 

Mr. Speaker. We don’t hesitate. We speak up. 
 
And yet it has been said by the members opposite that we are 
out of touch. Out of touch? At the NDP convention this 
weekend, Mr. Speaker, the NDP voted against Uber and Lyft. 
Yes, you heard that right. They voted against Uber and Lyft. I 
guess it’s because Saskatchewan cities should stay behind. We 
don’t believe that. We want Saskatchewan cities to have all of 
the amenities that people enjoy when they travel elsewhere, Mr. 
Speaker, because we believe we can. And therein lies the 
difference between us. 
 
They also have a leadership candidate that is campaigning on a 
$15 minimum wage at a time when our unemployment rate is 
already challenged by a stuttering resource economy and 
utilization pressures in our human services are also up. These 
two facts have been mentioned by the members opposite, Mr. 
Speaker, but this candidate doesn’t seem to get the connection. 
And let’s never mind the fact that the federal government is 
already threatening those small businesses, who are the largest 
employers in this province, at the same time. 
 
This is so tone deaf I don’t even know where to start. By 
contrast, Mr. Speaker, we have kept the corporate tax rate 
where it is to be competitive and increased the threshold for 
small businesses. That is called paying attention, Mr. Speaker. 
We also committed in this Speech from the Throne to scrap Bill 
40. Saskatchewan shareholders in our Crowns want those 
Crowns to stay where they are, so that’s what we’re going to 
do. However the status quo is not enough for that same NDP 
leadership candidate. No, he wants to create another Crown 
corporation. I guess that’s because he believes that government 
should compete with business. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard about our moral compass. 
And on this I will only say this, that I suggest that the NDP 
needs to look internally at its own moral compass. I submit that 
the messages that are being sent to you that are so tone deaf, 
stuck in the past, and too busy navel-gazing at their own 
self-righteousness to stand up for the things that actually matter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I support the Speech from the Throne without 
amendment and I definitely support the fact that it speaks to the 
legacy of this Premier and his leadership of our party. It helps 
people. Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is going to keep moving 
forward. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for providing the 
opportunity to speak to the 2017 Speech from the Throne while 
representing the good people of the constituency of 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is another great day in Saskatchewan with 
another convincing win by the Riders on Friday, the 
extraordinary harvest we’ve all got in the bin for 2017, and the 
multitude of resources that we have here being developed in 
this province, and the exceptional people around us. We can 
only grow stronger. 
 
I too must acknowledge the many people who have supported 



2632 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2017 

me in what I believe to be really one of the best jobs a person 
could have. Certainly my wife, Carla, deserves special 
recognition. As a municipal employee — she’s a town 
administrator for Churchbridge — she certainly deserves 
recognition for what she and other community councillors and 
administrators do. 
 
I know as I have heard so aptly described, a municipal official’s 
role can be likened to a fire hydrant at a dog convention. It’s for 
her and other municipal servants that we are motivated to 
improve our communities and ensure their sustainability. 
 
Thanks to my mom, Phyllis Kaeding, who proudly gathers her 
fellow senior apartment residents together around the big screen 
whenever her son gets his 10 minutes of fame on the legislature 
channel. It’s for her and all seniors that I want to work, that we 
want to work, to ensure that they can retire and serve the rest of 
their time in dignity and respect. Whether it’s the seniors’ 
education property tax deferral program or other senior benefits 
programs that have been improved over the last number of 
years, we will continue to do more for our seniors. 
 
I’d like to recognize my oldest son, Michael, who is a 
mechanical engineer at Brandt Ag, and my daughter-in-law 
Laine, who many of us know here at the legislature, who are 
two of the approximately 70,000 graduates who have taken 
advantage of the graduate retention program since it was 
introduced in 2007 — the 70,000 graduates we have kept and 
retained in this province. 
 
Michael and Laine have also provided a precious granddaughter 
whose name is Brynn, who is my motivation for being here and 
ensuring that we have an environment and an economy that she 
can be proud of and can sustain her into her future life here. As 
Halloween is fast approaching, I’ve been trying to introduce her 
to carbon taxation through a working analogy of a candy tax. 
But like many of our supporters, she’s not a big fan of taxation, 
whether it comes to chocolate or carbon. 
 
And kudos to our youngest son, Matthew, an aerospace 
engineer working in Toronto, who often complains he’s really 
the lone conservative out in the wilderness of others in the GTA 
[Greater Toronto Area] . . . for him that we are a government 
that is creating a positive environment for business that, who 
knows, may even one day support an aerospace industry in this 
province that he can come home to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank our Melville-Saltcoats 
constituency executive made up of men and women, millennials 
to boomers, urban and rural, business people, the civil servants, 
who work tirelessly to ensure that our party is represented fairly 
through the constituency. We haven’t always made it really that 
easy to defend some of our decisions, especially when it affects 
them personally, but they ask questions and they provide 
thoughtful and productive discussions whenever we get 
together. For that I want to express my respect and admiration 
of you and what you do every day. Every day I get to represent 
you is a good day. 
 
To constituents of Melville-Saltcoats, I want to acknowledge 
and thank you for your support. It’s the day-to-day 
conversations and discussions we have that provide 
encouragement and support to what I enjoy doing each and 

every day, and that is to represent you. There is nothing more 
rewarding than a constituent sending you a note or a card 
thanking you for all the help that we have given them to help 
solve a problem. Mr. Speaker, when that happens, it’s a very 
good day. 
 
In the one and a half years that I’ve been at this job, I have 
worked with many remarkably, incredibly wise and ambitious 
people who have committed themselves to public service in this 
building. I don’t know how many times I’ve written an email, 
sent a note, or left a message with caucus staff, chiefs of staff, 
or ministerial assistants at any hour, day or night, throughout 
the weekend or on a holiday — really only because if I don’t 
write it down right away, I’m never going to remember what I 
was going to ask them for to begin with — but really, the 
minute I do that, I receive an acknowledgement. Mr. Speaker, 
every day that we get to work with extraordinary people in this 
building, that is another good day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to provide my final acknowledgement and 
recognize my CA [constituency assistant], Rick McIntyre who 
has represented me and this government at functions and with 
our constituents. He has been providing this service since we 
started, while being preoccupied with personal family matters. 
 
His wife, Shannon, a friend of mine since grade school, has 
been on the urgent kidney donor list during this entire time, but 
I’m very pleased to report she had a successful transplant and is 
in recovery mode since early October. But I’d like to publicly 
recognize the excellent care and attention that she experienced 
all the way through the process, from diagnosis through surgery 
and into recovery. Rick and Shannon also wanted me to 
acknowledge the amazing post-surgery experience that they had 
at St. Paul’s Hospital at the sixth floor kidney transplant 
recovery ward. Mr. Speaker, when you hear of success stories 
and positive experiences like that with our health system, it’s a 
great day in Saskatchewan. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is one of the reasons why I’m very supportive 
of this government in the last Throne Speech. This 
government’s willingness to implement a new organ donor 
program shows our willingness to tackle some of the very 
difficult decisions in front of us. Public service announcement 
— by registering your consent to be an organ donor, you can 
save a life and you can be the hero that someone needs. End of 
service announcement. 
 
The Kidney Foundation of Canada indicated recently of the 
4,585 Canadians on the transplant list, more than 75 per cent 
were waiting for a kidney. Unfortunately, the demand far 
exceeds supply. Although 90 per cent of Canadians indicated 
that they would be willing to be a donor, the actual registry 
recognizes the number’s a lot less than that, and Saskatchewan 
unfortunately is on the lower end of that donation spectrum in 
the country. One registered organ donor could help up to eight 
people, so instead of listening to me, start texting your family, 
letting them know your intentions to be an organ donor. 
 
Committing to individualized funding for children under age six 
diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder is a game changer. 
Shannon Hill, president of the Parent Advocates for Autism 



October 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2633 

Treatment in Saskatchewan, said when the initial announcement 
was made, that it was a landmark day for autism treatment in 
Saskatchewan: “. . . families will be able to choose the 
treatment and care that will most help their child. This is proof 
the government listens,” Ms. Hill was quoted as saying. 
 
Mr. Speaker, contrary to what the opposition has attempted to 
portray, the government is indeed supporting education in this 
province. The first week of September this year was a good 
week in Saskatchewan. The first week of September saw over 
21 new schools, home to 11,000 students, open their doors for 
the first time. Eighteen of these were joint-use schools built 
under the P3 model that had reduced construction costs of over 
$100 million. During the last decade, we have renovated or 
improved or built over 65 other schools. Langenburg, a town in 
my constituency, opened a brand new school last September. 
Esterhazy and Melville schools have had significant upgrades 
not experienced since they were constructed in the ’60s, ’70s, 
and ’80s. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there has been an unprecedented $17 billion 
investment in kindergarten to grade 12 education in this 
province over the last decade, which has helped pay for 875 
more teachers and the creation of nearly 6,000 new child care 
spaces. Government operational funding of our children’s 
education over this time has increased over 32 per cent in the 
last 10 years, while the total school populations have increased 
maybe 10 per cent during this time. More can be done, and 
more will be done for education in this province. But let’s not 
buy into the opposition cries that we haven’t done anything for 
our kids here in Saskatchewan. 
 
In addition, we are supporting our separate school system in 
invoking the notwithstanding clause to ensure the rights of 
parents and students to choose schools and environments that 
work best for them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, part of our Growing Forward plan was to invest 
heavily in Saskatchewan’s infrastructure. Part of that 
investment was into our extensive highway network. In 
Saskatchewan, we have over 26 000 kilometres of highways, 
with over 5000 of those being a thin membrane type. Over the 
last 10 years almost 50 per cent of those roads have seen 
significant upgrades and improvements, in addition to the 
significant investments we’ve made in adding passing lanes and 
the Regina bypass. 
 
The bypass alone is a $1.8 billion project, including 12 
overpasses, 40 kilometres of new four-lane highway, 20 
kilometres of resurfacing four lanes, two bridges, 900 000 
tonnes of crushed gravel, and to date, over 3.1 million 
man-hours without a lost-time accident. That’s involving 
employees that come from every corner of this province, 
including our constituency. 
 
The $400 million that the NDP budgeted for their 2004 bypass 
plan would provide no relief from the hazardous intersections at 
Balgonie, White City, and Pilot Butte, as well as not 
significantly reducing the number of semis — approximately 
5,000 a day — that were going to enter the city on a daily basis, 
or accounting for over the 4,600 semis that enter or leave the 
GTH in any week. There would be no connection to the divided 
highways of No. 11, and it would still require truck traffic 

coming in and out of the northwest industrial park through the 
city. The NDP were not planning for the future or thinking for 
future growth, again proving that they’re not believing in the 
potential of this province. 
 
Small business in Saskatchewan is big business, Mr. Speaker. 
Over 99 per cent of businesses here are small businesses. With 
the tax threshold changes announced in the Throne Speech, we 
will now have the highest small business tax threshold in all of 
Canada. More disposable income in the hands of our small 
business owners will allow them to reinvest in their business 
and to grow and to expand. 
 
During Small Business Week last week, I was honoured to 
welcome some of the many small businesses in the constituency 
of Melville-Saltcoats. They included Terissa Prince at Nailed It 
in Churchbridge, or Jonas and Candase St. Marie at Red 
Beard’s Bar and Grill in Bredenbury, Jennifer and Oryan Duff 
of Whippletree Coffee in Esterhazy, and Vahagn and Gohar’s 
Independent Grocer in Melville. 
 
These people come from both within and from without, outside 
of Saskatchewan, and they have shown us that it is a good time 
to invest in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again we must thank our good Lord for the 
blessings he has provided agriculture this year in our province. 
It has been a good year in Saskatchewan. Yields experienced by 
most really confounded the experts. 
 
However, I firmly believe, with the investments that this 
government and the ag sector have made in our Crop 
Development Centre at the University of Saskatchewan, we 
have realized improvements in nutrient and water efficiency as 
well as improved the ability of our forages and crops to 
withstand most environmental issues. We have experienced this 
in our cereal and pulse varieties, varieties that have been grown 
across Western Canada and marketed throughout the world. In 
fact, in 2016 Saskatchewan shipped more than $14.4 billion 
worth of agricultural products. 
 
However, if we continue to struggle in establishing oil pipelines 
in this country, rail capacity out of the Prairies will continue to 
be taken up by oil. We will need to reduce the amount of raw 
product that we ship out when we continue to support our 
value-added food industry. 
 
There are more than 300 food companies operating in the 
province, generating more than $4 billion in revenues, 
employing over 5,000 people. Grain Millers in Yorkton and 
Northern Quinoa in Melville are just two examples of local 
processors found in Melville-Saltcoats. The agriculture 
value-added new-growth incentive will enhance these 
operations and create new opportunities throughout this 
province in both rural and urban locations. 
 
We will continue to encourage and quantify our agriculture 
producers’ livestock and crops’ ability to store carbon and 
contribute to our made-in-Saskatchewan carbon plan which will 
be announced shortly. It comes as no secret that we will 
continue to ensure our ag, resource, and manufacturing sector 
are not handcuffed with the federal job-killing carbon tax. 
 



2634 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2017 

Mr. Speaker, the retirement of our commander-in-chief, Premier 
Wall, was a surprise to us all, and I feel extremely fortunate to 
have had the opportunity to serve under his guidance and 
direction. Modern history is going to show him as a political 
game changer across the country. Premier Wall has changed the 
attitude of this province in a short time to be one of optimism, 
opportunity seeking, self-assured and pride in what we are and 
what we can be. Although his banjo-picking abilities may have 
riled up the Bomber faithful, his good-natured and fair-minded 
approach to governance will ensure he will be remembered as 
one of the best premiers of all time across Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been a great day to be from Saskatchewan. 
I’ll be supporting the 2017 Speech from the Throne and will not 
be supporting the amendment put forward by the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise and enter into the Throne Speech of 2017. It’s 
indeed an important opportunity for us all to reflect on what’s 
important to this province, where we’ve been, and where we’re 
going. 
 
But before I get going too far in my remarks, I want to make 
sure I acknowledge some things that have been happening in 
my constituency. And I would like to just take a moment and 
acknowledge the opening of the newest addition of downtown 
Saskatoon, the Remai Modern art gallery, on October 21st. And 
what an honour it was to be at the opening and many great 
speeches talking what this landmark in our province really 
means to the people not only of downtown Saskatoon but all of 
Saskatchewan and all of Canada. The coup of getting the 
Picasso prints is a fantastic opportunity to bring people here to 
Saskatchewan and Saskatoon to look at the art of the world but 
also the art of Saskatchewan. And I think that’s very important. 
 
I want to take a moment and do this one quote. Chief Bobby 
Cameron was speaking at the occasion, and he was speaking 
about the inclusive nature of art. And he said, “Art knows no 
colour when it comes to race.” And I just think that’s 
phenomenal. It’s a really nice way of thinking about art and 
how inclusive it is. And it is not an exclusive process, but it 
actually brings us all together. So art knows no colour, and I 
will remember that. 
 
Of course like many of us, we want to thank many, many 
people. And I do want to thank my family — Dawn and my 
kids and now four granddaughters. I’m so pleased to say that 
over the summer we had a couple of additions to Felix and 
Frances. Now we have Georgia, little Georgia and little 
Isabelle. So that really makes our family so special. 
 
I do want to take a moment and just recognize the member from 
Estevan. The speeches the other day, the member from Estevan 
was so kind to talk a little bit about some other things that are 
happening in our family, which is kind of odd. In fact she was 
the one who told me about this. So I have to have this verified 
later on that in fact her daughter is marrying my nephew, 
Jonathan Forbes. And I’ve not heard that from our side of the 
family, but I trust this is all accurate. I’ve had the opportunity to 

meet Miranda and she is a fine young woman. She’s a teacher 
in Saskatoon, and I would be pleased to be related to her for 
sure. So I guess, as the member said, we’re all one big happy 
family, at least for now we are. I’m sure we will be. But it was 
really nice to meet Miranda, and I think this was great and I 
appreciate the member making that public announcement the 
other day. So thank you very much for that. 
 
But I have to say this, Mr. Speaker. I was reading my last 
Throne Speech in 2016 when we all gathered together, and at 
that time I said welcome to the three new caucus members we 
had on our side, and that was great. You know, we had the 
member from Lakeview. That was a previous riding of ours. 
But we also gained two other, Prince Albert Northcote and 
Regina Douglas Park, two new ones that we got. And here we 
are at the next Throne Speech and I’m welcoming two more 
new members, and isn’t that great? That is really good. That’s 
the member from Meewasin and the member from Fairview 
who weren’t with us last time. So it seems to be a kind of nice 
trend that we have going on, that every Throne Speech we take 
a couple or more from their side and bring them over here. That 
is pretty, pretty neat. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, it was a real pleasure to be out 
knocking on doors during that campaign. The weather was 
great. But people had a lot of concerns, a lot of concerns. They 
were concerned about the scandals, the GTH, the bypass. Even 
in Saskatoon they’re hearing, what is happening about that 
bypass down in Regina? What’s the deal with that? They’re 
very concerned about the education cuts. And as much as the 
government on their side, using their math, which I find very 
interesting they’d bring this up in the Throne Speech that they 
think we need more attention in Saskatchewan to math skills . . . 
I wonder what the scores over there would be when it comes to 
math. I think that’s a good question. 
 
[15:00] 
 
But here you have people talking about the PST. These are real 
things people are seeing when they go down to the store or 
when they go down to city hall to pay their property taxes. And 
these guys are saying, you should be proud of it, proud of it. It’s 
a new day. Somehow when you pay more you should be 
happier. I don’t know where that . . . I mean that’s an interesting 
way of approaching math. 
 
But this is a thing that I found very interesting. And I was 
saying, some of the members that we usually see out on the 
doorstep weren’t out there. We did see a couple of members on 
the very last day. We saw them trying to pull their vote, and 
obviously they weren’t very successful. But they had a real 
problem. They had a real problem because their narrative . . . 
And some of them over there are even been on school boards so 
they know this to be a fact, but they say all we did, we closed 
schools. The NDP never opened a school at all in 
Saskatchewan, never opened a single school. All we did was 
close them. In fact we bused everybody out, bused everybody 
out. 
 
But you know, in Fairview that narrative doesn’t work so well 
because we had opened two new high schools in 2007. We 
opened Bethlehem and Tommy Douglas. Now we know 
members over there — some of them were actually on the 



October 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2635 

school boards — would have been at the opening. So how can 
they be going around knocking on doors and saying the NDP 
just closed schools? They only have to look out the door and 
see Tommy Douglas and Bethlehem and say that’s not working. 
I know they opened schools; I know they opened schools. 
 
In fact if you go back to the ’70s, Bishop Roborecki was opened 
by Tommy Douglas in 1974. So here you have something . . . It 
doesn’t work with their doomsday narrative. It doesn’t, and it 
just doesn’t add up. These guys couldn’t go out to that riding 
because you know what, we had a couple of new schools. 
Because you know what, we had people living in this province 
and you know what, they had families. And you know what, 
they had kids going to school and they needed new schools, and 
we built those schools. It didn’t quite fit with your story, did it? 
 
And I see some of the members over there, and this is what I 
like . . . The king of Kool-Aid, the king of Kool-Aid is not in 
the building. And so here we had a lecture here last week when 
the member from Fairview got up, and the king of Kool-Aid got 
up and gave his line about how we had drank from the 
Kool-Aid. Well I love these guys over here when they celebrate 
Billy Boyd, the very DNA of that party, the very DNA of that 
party, and that’s to quote the Premier. That’s to quote the 
Premier. It’s not even the Kool-Aid. It’s the DNA of the party 
And people are asking about, where was Billy Boyd out on the 
doorstep in Fairview? Where was he in the August and 
September days of that by-election? Nowhere to be seen. But he 
was the very DNA of that party, so it just didn’t fit their 
narrative at all. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think about the speech and I think about, is 
this a legacy speech? Because I too, like that member, was very 
surprised to see that the Premier had resigned over the summer. 
I thought, you know, everybody has to acknowledge that these 
are tough times for the province and we would see the test of 
how well this Premier and his plans would stand, would stand 
these tests. And instead we see the Premier resigning. Instead 
he’s throwing the challenge to the other five, and we’ve seen 
some of the comments the other five have said. And as we’ve 
talked about the member from Meadow Lake in his cameo 
appearance in the leadership race, it didn’t last long, but he had 
enough time to talk about how, the way the GTH scandal that 
was . . . He would do that very differently, very differently. And 
how quick his tune had changed now that he’s out of cabinet. 
We see the others up there very quiet about what they think 
about these scandals that are plaguing the Sask Party. 
 
Now the Premier is a real booster of the province — we won’t 
deny that — and every chance he gets, he does that. But here’s 
an opportunity for him to stay and see if his program can 
withstand the tests of the challenges of our economy. And he’s 
not hanging around. He’s heading out the door. And in some 
ways, this Throne Speech, instead of being a legacy Throne 
Speech, it’s really a kitchen sink of all throne speeches. There’s 
a lot of concerns I have with this. There’s not really an 
overriding message in this Throne Speech. 
 
You know, I’ve got to say, a couple of things that we heard over 
the summer, particularly . . . And we’re hearing all the changes 
in Bill 40. Here was one that talked about the Crowns and how 
important the Crowns were to the people of Saskatchewan and 
how, on just two days before . . . It’s almost like Christmas Eve 

or Halloween. Two days before, we hear the Premier saying it’s 
going to be repealed, Bill 40, that they heard from the people 
two days before. We always hear from these guys but, you 
know, I have to say, since my time in opposition, their record of 
consultation with the people is really something else. 
 
And when I heard the Minister Responsible for Crown 
Investments Corporation talk about how they have . . . All of a 
sudden we’re talking to real people. So as opposed, there are 
fake people out there? There’s two kinds of people — real 
people and fake people — in Saskatchewan? Is that what the 
minister is really saying? And now they’re chirping and saying, 
of course, it’s like real news and fake news, isn’t it? I think they 
must . . . The alt-right is coming here to Saskatchewan — real 
people and fake people. Mr. Speaker, that is so insulting that 
those people who actually ride the bus, who actually support 
people who ride the bus, are somehow lesser than those who 
might not, I think that’s insulting and shows a real lack of 
understanding. 
 
And here again is the issue. I want to talk a little bit about math 
when it comes to STC. And the Premier and other ministers will 
stand up and quote their numbers. We don’t know really where 
those numbers come from. I’d like to see them show their work. 
You know, I’m an old math teacher, and that’s often what we 
say is show your work. 
 
But the one thing we’d do, I think most of us, if we’re going out 
to buy something, if we’re going to go look for a car, a new 
washing machine, a dryer, we think about value for money. We 
just don’t look for the cheapest thing around. Now maybe they 
do over there. I don’t necessarily believe that, because you look 
at the bypass and it looked like they went for the most 
expensive thing in town. 
 
And then the question really is, are they getting value for 
money? And that’s a real audit process. That is a real process, 
and yet they refused to do that when it came to STC. And it was 
a simple request. What is going to be the impact? What is the 
value for money when it comes to this kind of action? And they 
refused to do that. 
 
And so when they raised concerns about math in our schools in 
Saskatchewan, you know, we can always do better. And I’m 
glad that they’re focusing on education but . . . and we’ll get to 
some other questions. 
 
Here we have an issue. This new bypass on the highway, there 
are questions about whether it can fit modern farm equipment. 
Now what is that all about? What is that all about? Or large 
semi-trailers, can they actually do the turns there? This is a real 
question. 
 
The PST, the PST, this is very interesting. I think this is . . . 
And then we even had, you know, the former House Leader and 
his funny math last spring when we had the questions where he 
was talking about the cuts and all of that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have some real questions. And I do want to 
talk a bit about the issue around Uber and taxi drivers, and we 
see the Minister Responsible for SGI is going to raise that issue. 
This is one that I really want to see what they bring forward. 
We have some real deep concerns. I know the member from 



2636 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2017 

Fairview has talked about it but, you know, last Christmas we 
had a situation here in Regina. And I’m not sure if you’re aware 
of this, Mr. Speaker, but I’ll just read part of the headline from 
CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation]. That was 
December 23rd last year. “Regina taxi driver out of ICU a 
month after brutal attack.” And this where Iqbal Singh Sharma 
was stabbed multiple times and taken to hospital with 
life-threatening injuries to his brain and neck after a cab ride 
gone bad. 
 
And so here we have the government, in their answer to drunk 
driving, to use Uber and other forms. Now are they going to 
make sure that these people are protected? Here you have 
actually very vulnerable situations where people are drinking, 
and they’re saying this is where we actually want them to work, 
where people are drinking. Are they going to have their 
protection either through SGI or WCB [Workers’ 
Compensation Board], either-or, but can they get personal 
insurance themselves? We understand that they can’t. They can 
get personal insurance where they have liability for the 
passengers, but not for themselves if they’re injured in their 
workplace. 
 
And so this is what happened to Mr. Sharma. He was out of any 
kind of compensation for his personal injury because of this . . . 
this type of injury was deemed to be a criminal injury not 
related to a car accident type of thing. If he’d crashed the car he 
might have got some insurance that way, but he didn’t crash the 
car. He was attacked, and therefore there was no insurance 
available. So these are the kind of issues that I hope they’re 
considering. 
 
I hope that they think about all drivers that are doing . . . 
whether they be taxi drivers or Uber, that they all have a level 
of protection and that it’s a level playing field. That they follow 
regulations to make sure, they make sure that they’re safe. And 
we often say this — and I don’t want to just say this on April 
28th every year — that we hope people come home from work 
safe. It’s an issue that happens every, every day. And every day, 
whether you’re a driver in a taxi or an Uber, if you’re coming 
out there and doing work, let’s make sure they have their 
protection whether it’s through SGI or WCB, all right? There’s 
got to be a level playing field. 
 
And I hear many of them saying, we will, we will. Then that is 
going to be good news because, I tell you, the past year it has 
not been easy working with SGI, and WCB has not been very 
co-operative. So if that’s what they’re saying, that’s very good 
news for that. I appreciate that and that is a concern, one of the 
concerns, but . . . [inaudible] . . . somebody who’s very 
concerned about occupational health and safety, very concerned 
about that. 
 
The other issue I have that I want to just talk briefly about — of 
course it wasn’t mentioned in the Throne Speech — was around 
domestic violence and the work that we’ve got to do in 
Saskatchewan. Because unfortunately we are the worst province 
when it comes to that, and we need to do better. And we need to 
look at all sorts of approaches and tools that we can make sure 
people are safe at home. And we know predominately this is a 
women’s issue, but we know . . . and my colleague from 
Douglas Park raised the issue around making sure that if we can 
make workplaces safe and making sure that there’s a way to 

take a leave when you’re fleeing domestic violence, that’s very, 
very important. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know my time is going very quickly. I want 
to talk health care. And I know my colleague will talk a lot 
about health care, but I just want to say — and I support her 
fully when it comes to the issue around mental health — mental 
health is a huge issue, a huge issue in this province, and it’s one 
that we cannot ignore. And we need to put resources to that, and 
particularly when we come to suicide prevention. And that is so 
critical to the people in the North, but it’s critical to us all, right 
across the province, you know. And we hear . . . And it hurts us 
all when we hear of particularly the young people who’ve 
decided that they have no hope in their life and the only option 
they have is suicide. I just think that’s . . . that is . . . We just 
need to do so much more work. And the other area is around 
addictions and the opiates that we’re facing, a crisis right across 
North America and I think it is here in Saskatchewan, and I 
think that we need to do much more around addictions work. 
 
I was shocked to see or hear not a mention about truth and 
reconciliation. I think this is something that we need to keep in 
the forefront, and understand that this is really unfortunately 
part of the fabric of who we are in Saskatchewan. And as many 
people say, we are all children of the treaty. And clearly, truth 
and reconciliation, we need to keep that as part of our 
perspective, always thinking about that. 
 
I was disappointed to see, and this could have been a real legacy 
piece around the Sixties Scoop, that it was not mentioned at all. 
And I know we keep hearing it that we put it off to the side 
because FSIN [Federation of Sovereign Indigenous Nations] is 
not ready to meet, but clearly with the announcement from the 
federal government around their willingness to come to the 
table, particularly with First Nations folks that . . . But the 
absence of recognizing the Métis is huge, and I think this is a 
part where the government could really show some leadership, 
and I really do think we need to do more about that. 
 
Of course I do want to . . . and I just want to echo what my 
member, the Education critic, my member from Lakeview 
talked about. We talked about, and the member from Northcote 
talked about the increase in property taxes, and yet we see that 
those . . . There were cuts in funding to education. And that’s 
just unbelievable, unbelievable kind of math that they’re 
throwing out there. But this one . . . and where the minister 
today could not give a satisfactory answer. Yes, 18 new 
schools, or 21 new schools, 4,500 more students, but 181 
teachers lost from last year to this year. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Now they can throw out all the records and numbers from the 
past 10 years. But this is something . . . The math just doesn’t 
add up here. How can you have that many more students and 
that few more . . . few less teachers. And, you know, where the 
minister . . . And she loves the term, “a little bit.” I don’t know 
how that pans out in the math scores, but that’s not a little bit of 
a problem. That’s a huge problem. That means there’s kids who 
are without teachers or teacher associates. Something doesn’t 
add up there, and we need to do more about that. And we will 
wait to see what the numbers are that the minister is talking 
about, but if I’ve got to believe somebody I think the STF is a 



October 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2637 

credible voice. They are the people in the classroom. If these 
are the real numbers, this is a real problem for this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the critic for ethics, I was hoping — and this 
was the Premier’s last chance to do it right; this was his last 
chance — and that was to get big money out of politics. But he 
has chosen to leave big money in politics, and we see that with 
the leadership candidates. They’re all silent on that. In fact I 
understand one of them may have gone out of province to fund 
raise. Here we have an opportunity to do the right thing. We see 
BC [British Columbia] is doing the right thing now. We see 
Alberta has done the right thing, and we are the last, worst west 
when it comes to big money in politics. And this is something 
we need to get right. And it was so disappointing for the 
Premier when they had an opportunity to actually get it right 
and he’s chosen not to. He’s going to leave the fundraising rules 
in place, and this is unfortunate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to end on this last note, and this is one that 
is very important for us all. And I appreciate the good work that 
agricultural people are doing on the export front, but I’m not 
sure if this government is aware of this, but as we all know — 
and this has actually been happening for several years — but of 
course in Myanmar we see a situation where over 500,000 
refugees have fled the country. And that’s really a human rights 
issue that we can’t ignore, can’t ignore. 
 
So the question is, what has this got to do with Saskatchewan? 
And I look at people who are involved in trade, export and all 
of that. Well interestingly, when I looked up to see where’s 
Myanmar in terms of Saskatchewan trade, it’s actually a very 
important partner when it comes to peas. Myanmar is the 
sixth-best customer of Saskatchewan peas. Am I right on that? I 
am right on that. I’ve checked the records. It might be even 
better. But since the regulations have loosened in 2012 by the 
federal government, Myanmar has become a really strong 
partner with Saskatchewan. 
 
So I hope, and I call on this government to step up and instruct 
their officials to make sure when trading with Myanmar that 
they do ask for human rights, the following of human rights, 
that they do step up and ask the Government of Canada to make 
sure Myanmar respects Rohingya people. And I know people 
over there say, well we can’t get involved with that. We can. 
We can. We can do the right thing, and when we have trade, we 
trade ethically. And this is an opportunity to do the right thing 
and say, hey listen, Myanmar, we know that there are issues in 
your country that are not right. You’re treating a huge segment 
of your population . . . They call it even ethnic cleansing. We 
are willing to trade with you, but you’ve got to be on the right 
side of democracy. So I implore the government to take a look 
at that. Who are they trading with, and are they following the 
human rights code passed by the United Nations and doing the 
right thing? 
 
I know sometimes we aren’t all aware of who we’re trading 
with. We have people out there doing good work for us, and 
that’s good. But when these kind of issues come to the 
forefront, like Myanmar, do the right thing and make sure you 
send a message that they follow the human rights code, human 
rights. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that clearly the 

government is not up to the challenge that we see in facing the 
people here in Saskatchewan. All people, not just what some 
would call the real or fake people, but everyone. They’re paying 
much, much more. There is a crisis out there in terms of 
affordability. We see a crisis in health and we see a crisis in 
education that we can’t sweep under the rug. And ethically we 
have so much more work to do here. 
 
So therefore I do support the amendment put forward by my 
colleague from Nutana most strongly, and I will be supporting 
that. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I stand up and 
support the Throne Speech and reflect on the last 10 years of 
the government of the province. 
 
But before I do that, I’d like to send out a few thank yous back 
to my Canora-Pelly constituency. First of all I’d like to thank 
my wife, Lorri, for all her support and dedication over the last 
two and a half years. Not only did she help me putting up signs 
and going door to door on the campaign, but now she is side by 
side with me at different events, and my voice of reason. She 
has also been for many years in the . . . She’s a nurse 
practitioner and a nurse RN [registered nurse] for 27 years, so 
she gives me a lot of insight into the health that’s going on in 
our great province and how our changes have affected our 
province in a positive way. I cannot thank her enough. 
 
To my kids, Jasmine and Shane Ostapowich who live in 
Regina, provided me with my only grandson and my little 
treasure, Lewis. He’s two and a half years old and just a bundle 
of joy. He enjoys wrestling with Grandpa, playing ball, and 
playing hockey, and he enjoys driving the golf cart out at the 
lake. Jasmine works for Walker engineering projects here in 
Regina, and Shane is working too as well with SGI in Regina. 
 
My other daughter Jade also works and lives in Regina. She is a 
guard who works at the Regina Correctional Centre. And she 
has a degree in social work and is hopefully going to put it to 
work some day in other areas, but she is really enjoying this. 
She’s a great athlete, played hockey for the U of S [University 
of Saskatchewan] and is still playing hockey today in the rec 
men’s league. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also have a son, Carson, who lives and works in 
Melville. He took his turf management in Olds, Alberta but 
came back home to work and manage the Melville golf course 
for over the last five years. This year he’s added to his resumé. 
He’s the icemaker at the Melville Curling Club, and I’m sure 
I’ll end up taking him curling with my dad some day. Mr. 
Speaker, those three of my kids took advantage of the school 
retention program and came back to Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to thank my CA, Carol Sleeva, and 
my new student, Abby Gulka, who worked for me this summer, 
for their dedication and office help and taking care of my 
constituents. I’d also like to thank my executive and my 
constituents for all their support over the last couple of years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech continues to show our 
dedication to the continued growth in our province over the last 



2638 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2017 

decade. Our province has grown by 160,000 people, while 
under the previous two decades under the NDP, we’ve declined. 
We had recorded the second-best job creation record, and we 
had second-highest growth in weekly average income. Our 
government debt is $400 million lower than forecasted at 
budget time. Saskatchewan debt is down, $1 billion lower than 
it was in 2007, and our economy is expected to grow by 2.1 per 
cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, education continues to grow in our province. We 
are continuing to meet the challenges with 21 new schools this 
year; 18 of those are joint-use facilities with the P3 model that 
has reduced our cost by $100 million. Over the last decade, our 
government has built 40 new schools and renovated 25 more 
schools. There has been an unprecedented $17 billion 
investment in K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12], and over the 
last decade we’ve hired over 875 more teaching jobs and 
opened 6,000 new child care spaces. Seventy of those new 
spaces are right in Canora. Mr. Speaker, under the NDP, they 
closed 176 schools and laid off 400 teachers.  
 
Mr. Speaker, during this session we will introduce legislation to 
protect the right to school choice by invoking the 
notwithstanding clause to allow our kids and families the choice 
to attend their choice of schools, and work with the school 
teachers and their divisions to work on the province’s first 
education sector plan to continue higher graduation rates. There 
will also be work done to improve math scores and new 
international models will also be explored. Mr. Speaker, we will 
also be working with other provinces and Quebec to enhance 
our French language. We will also begin developing computer 
curriculum to help students prepare for careers in science, math, 
engineering, and technology. 
 
Mr. Speaker, education operating and funding has increased by 
40 per cent over the last 10 years to over $8.3 billion. We’ve 
created the graduation retention program in Saskatchewan, one 
of the most aggressive programs in Canada. Nearly 70,000 
students have taken advantage of this program and have chosen 
to begin their careers and live in Saskatchewan. Government 
has also provided the Saskatchewan Advantage Scholarship 
offer, offering grade 12 students up to $500 a year to help with 
tuition costs up to a maximum of $2,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the last 10 years the number one nation, the 
First Nation and the Métis students enrolled in post-secondary 
institutions has grown by over 34 per cent. Last year First 
Nations and Métis students have graduated from Sask 
Polytechnic is up 20 per cent over the previous year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the last 10 years our government has done 
some great things in health care, and we will continue to do 
more. We have recruited 750 doctors and over 3,400 nurses of 
every designation. There has been 13 new long-term care 
facilities opened for our seniors. And under the NDP, they 
closed 1,200 beds. New hospitals have and are being built like 
the Jim Pattison Children’s Hospital in Saskatoon, the 
Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford. And under the 
NDP, what did they do? They closed 52 hospitals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the last 10 years our government has made 
vast improvement in delivering health care. We’ve gone from 
the longest surgical wait times under the NDP to among the 

shortest in Canada. The two-for-one approach the government 
has implemented has helped patients to get care sooner. Since 
March of 2016, over 900 people have purchased MRIs 
[magnetic resonance imaging], which have allowed 1,800 scans 
provided to others at no expense to the taxpayer. Mr. Speaker, 
accountable care units were opened in Pasqua in Regina and St. 
Paul’s in Saskatoon this year to provide prompt, effective care 
to our patients. We will continue creating more of these units in 
the future and enhance our care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will be implementing a recommendation of an 
advisory board, a panel and be moving from 12 health regions 
to one health region, the Saskatchewan Health Authority, and 
we’ll be opening it in December. This will over time reduce 
administration and improve our health care system. We will 
also be implementing a new organ donation program. This will 
be led by donor physicians and provide education and support 
to champion organ donations across this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government will fulfil its commitment to the 
ASD, the autism spectrum disorder for children under six-years 
old and add funding of $4,000 per year. This is an additional 
$2.8 million investment on top of the $8 million that we already 
provide to our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the last years I’ve been involved in developing 
and improving health back home in Canora We had doctor 
shortages and bypasses and closures on a regular basis. Then 
about three years ago we implemented the CEC, the 
collaborative emergency centre. It is a centre where we have 
24-hour emergency care for our doctors, but our doctors are not 
on call from 8 p.m. to 8 a.m., allowing them a quality of life. 
Since this method has been implemented, we’ve retained four 
doctors and a nurse practitioner, and we’ve had no closures and 
no bypass. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was five years ago the government introduced 
STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society] air ambulance to 
Saskatchewan. Since then we have transported over 3,000 
emergency patients, saving numerous lives over this time. This 
kind of hits home to me and is special to me as my son, Carson, 
was in a truck rollover by Canora and was one of the patients 
that was airlifted and is doing well today. And that was in 2012. 
And just to think that the NDP would not even consider 
bringing STARS into our province, showing that they have little 
or no care for rural Saskatchewan 
 
[15:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, with growth in our province comes problems with 
increased crimes and other problems protecting our families and 
communities. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has had the highest 
rate of impaired drivers in Canada. In the past year we have 
introduced a number of changes to prevent this. We have 
increased zero tolerance from 19 years old to 21 years of age. 
We’ve also introduced a three-day vehicle seizure for drivers 
over 21 with a blood alcohol of .04 to .08. We are also making 
Saskatchewan interlock laws some of the toughest in Canada. 
This fall we’ll be introducing legislation to SGI to offer 
insurance to drivers to create ride-sharing options in smaller 
communities like mine and a safe ride home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ll also deal with the federal government 



October 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2639 

intention to legalize marijuana by 2018. Our government will 
review four objectives: preventing the growth of the 
underground market, restricting access to minors, ensuring road 
and workplace safety, and protecting the public health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, crime over the past years has become an 
increasing problem. I was fortunate enough to be part of the 
crime reduction committee, where we went to all parts of the 
province and met with a wide variety of leaders and groups to 
discuss the issues around our province. After visiting eight 
areas around our province and discussing all of the issues and 
possible solutions, the committee has come up with several 
recommendations. 
 
And just lately the government has passed, now created a new 
protection and response team. The PRT [protection and 
response team] is composed of 120 police officers — some 
RCMP and municipal police service — 40 commercial vehicle 
enforcement officers, and 98 conservation officers. There is a 
$6 million commitment to support this program, and it will be 
implemented within the next year or so. Mr. Speaker, I have to 
say this committee was a lot of hard work, but we did have 
some fun and we created a cattle-rustling expert. The MLA 
from Regina Coronation Park, he’s quite the expert now as a 
cattle rustler. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the last decade we have invested more than 
$26 billion to build and expand our infrastructure that was 
totally neglected by the NDP over their 16 years in power. Over 
the last decade our government has invested 7.4 billion on 
repairing and improving over 12 000 kilometres of highways. 
There has been other projects such as Saskatoon Circle Drive 
South bridge, St. Louis bridge, twinning of Highway 11, 
passing lanes on highways 7 and 10. And there is more to come 
yet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, work also continues on the largest infrastructure 
development in the history of Saskatchewan, the Regina bypass, 
and phase one was announced and opened today. Also 
overpasses in Martensville, Warman, and passing lanes on 
Highway 5 to Humboldt and many other projects are being 
done. It all takes time but we are getting there. All of these 
projects will provide a better, safer way of travelling around the 
province. 
 
Myself personally, I have been driving in from Canora and, 
over the past few years since they put in passing lanes in Fort 
Qu’Appelle, it’s been great. I don’t know if all of you guys that 
go to football games or whatever, it’s been great. And from my 
understanding, there’s been zero fatalities since this has been 
put in, and that is some price that nobody can put on a life, to 
protect our province and our roads. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will continue to work with the prosperity and 
the competitiveness in our province. There has been more than 
100,000 jobs created by exports over the last 10 years of growth 
that has emerged. Five hundred and thirty per cent increase in 
China to $3 billion last year. India is up 272 per cent to $1.5 
billion. Pakistan, up 293 per cent to 593 million, and up 132 per 
cent to Indonesia for 543 million. Our government will continue 
to build and expand our markets through the trade missions to 
these and other countries. Saskatchewan also stands to benefit 
from our Canadian free trade agreement that has started on 

July 1st. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will continue to grow capital investment of 
over $14.5 billion in Saskatchewan this year, which is 43 per 
cent higher than it ever was under the NDP. We have reduced 
the income tax for our citizens. And because of BC moving 
their corporate tax rate up, we will return to 12 per cent, staying 
as one of the lowest in Canada. We will raise our threshold 
from 500,000 to 600,000 for small businesses, being one of the 
best in the country. All of this to give our people in 
Saskatchewan a reason to stay in our great province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our exports continue to grow and a large part of it 
is because of the agriculture in our province. We will continue 
to support our farmers, ranchers, and agribusiness. Last year 
Saskatchewan shipped out over $14.4 billion of agriculture 
products. We will continue to invest in research and 
development through the Ag Development Fund, Global 
Institute for Food Security, and Livestock and Forage Centre of 
Excellence right here in the U of S. Through the support of our 
province, government’s value-added process industry, there are 
now over 300 companies generating over $4 billion in revenues 
and also creating over 5,000 jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is prepared to stand up for our 
farmers and industry and fight for the carbon tax and federal 
small-business tax changes that would hit our provinces hard. 
 
We know that climate change is a reality, and we have more to 
do to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. SaskPower is 
expanding renewable power by 50 per cent by 2030. Mr. 
Speaker, we have invested over $1.3 billion in the first 
post-combustion carbon capture system. SaskPower BD3 
[Boundary dam 3] project has cut Saskatchewan’s carbon 
dioxide emissions by 1.6 million tonnes, this equivalent to 
taking 400,000 cars off our roads today. 
 
In 2015 farmers sequestered nearly 12 million tonnes of carbon 
into our soil due to zero-till seeding technology developed right 
here in Saskatchewan. Also, pulse crops like lentils and peas is 
helping reduce our emissions. 
 
Our uranium we mine is used to generate emission-free 
electricity around the world. These companies and others 
provide jobs for thousands of families in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are doing our job on reducing greenhouse gas 
emissions in our province, and we’ll continue to do more. But 
we’ll have to fight the imposing of carbon tax with the federal 
government, and we are willing to take the legal action if 
necessary and not let our farmers and industry be affected by 
this federal decision, for we are one of the best provinces in the 
world at reducing greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my area, we have seen growth in industry, 
farming, and population. And I’d like to tell you a couple of 
stories from around our area. First of all, this year there is a peat 
moss plant being opened up by Sunterra, and it’s being built 
about 5 miles east of Norquay. It is about a $15 million 
investment into our area, and it’ll create about 30 to 40 jobs and 
a payroll of about $2 million. It’ll be opening next May, and I 
look forward to that. 
 



2640 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2017 

Second, I see increases in Sturgis school, Norquay schools. I’ve 
been to renovations, consolidations, renovations in Kamsack 
Parkland College, new playgrounds in Canora, Sturgis, and 
others. And gone are the days where the NDP closed all these 
schools and laid off all these teachers. 
 
I’d just like to tell a little story about Preeceville. When we first 
got elected, we had them on the streets. We had problems with 
our doctor shortages and closures. And we worked hard over 
this last year and made a few changes, and we’ve got the 
doctors up to three doctors, one nurse practitioner. We’ve had 
to change the method, and we have three doctors doing primary 
care calls and emergency from 8 in the morning till 8 in the 
evening. And from what I’m seeing, the model is really good. 
 
And when I look at over the past year, and I look across the 
road and most of the opposition NDP over there have been into 
Preeceville, making them promises and everything else. But 
they fail to say about the Fyke report that they talked about 
when they closed 52 hospitals, and part of this Fyke report 
shows that they were going to close the Preeceville hospital. 
Yet when they go over there and they have coffee and 
doughnuts with all the Preeceville people and promise them 
that, they do not bring up this Fyke report. So maybe you guys 
could probably take over the Fyke report and read it over 
yourself a little bit, if you can find Preeceville again. I’m not 
sure if you could. 
 
Last of all I’d like to talk about is, you know, I have one of the 
little kids that I coached hockey, and he’s near and dear to me. 
And he’s an 11-year-old boy named Porter Wolkowski, and his 
dad and his family are big cattle farmers and stuff. Anyways 
he’s with 4-H, and he was bound and determined for the last 
two years, and this year he finally sold a cow. And he donated 
the money, he wanted to donate the money to the Jim Pattison 
Children’s Hospital. And when I see stuff like that, it just shows 
me, you know, that we are teaching our kids the right things. 
We’ve got the right values, and we’ve got a great future in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the great pleasure to work with the 
Premier and the MLA from Swift Current. I want to thank him 
for his dedication and hard work that he’s put into building this 
party, the province, and the future of Saskatchewan. I always 
say to everybody out there, he’s the Wayne Gretzky of politics, 
and these people only come around once every 50 years. So for 
that I would like to thank our Premier, Wayne Gretzky, for his 
50 years of service, and I want to wish him the best in the 
future. 
 
In closing, I’d like to say I will not be supporting the 
amendment and I will be supporting the motion from the 
Throne Speech. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood. 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a privilege to 
rise in my place and reply to the Speech from the Throne. As is 
customary in this Assembly, I would like to take a few 
moments to express gratitude to those individuals who continue 
to assist my work as the MLA for Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 

I thank my husband, Jim, for standing firmly beside me and 
supporting me. He has spent a good deal of time in Regina 
setting up our townhouse so I have a comfortable place to call 
my own when we are in session. When he is not with me in 
Regina, he is running his small business, Precision Controls, 
looking after the home front and our two chihuahuas, Duke and 
Radar. 
 
Our oldest daughter, Amy, and husband, Karl, have added a 
third child to their family, and Lukas turned one in September. 
His sisters, Gianna and Isabella, are enjoying having a little 
brother, and we were thrilled to welcome our first grandson. 
Amy is a chartered professional accountant with the Canada 
Revenue Agency and is back at work following a one-year 
maternity leave. Amy and Karl’s life got even busier this past 
year as they purchased Market Mall Auto Service in Saskatoon. 
Karl is the lead mechanic at his shop. They have joined the 
ranks of the small-business owners of this province, who are the 
backbone of our economy. I will talk more about that later in 
my remarks. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Our middle daughter, Monique, and her husband, Aaron, 
welcomed little Sebastian to their family last November, our 
second grandson. Monique is a lawyer and will return to the 
workforce after her maternity leave ends this year. 
 
Our youngest daughter, Janelle, completed a Master of Public 
Administration in 2015 and has recently moved to Edmonton 
for a two-year internship program with the Government of 
Alberta. She is adjusting well and enjoying the challenges of 
her new position. 
 
James Hawkes, my constituency assistant, has passed his 
one-year anniversary in the office that I share with the member 
from Saskatoon University. James handles the day-to-day 
operations of the office, and his knowledge and experience he 
gained as a summer student right here at the Saskatchewan 
legislature serves my constituents well. 
 
I thank my current constituency association members for their 
support as they start to plan for the next provincial election. I 
thank John Puderak for serving in the president position, and we 
welcome Robin Mowat as our new president. I thank our 
daughter, Janelle, for serving as secretary before moving to 
Edmonton, and we welcome Gwen Joa as her replacement. 
 
While the majority of my constituency association members 
have little or no political experience, they make up for that in 
common sense and commitment to their MLA and to this 
Saskatchewan Party government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my constituency of Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood is comprised of the neighbourhoods of 
Wildwood, Brevoort Park and Holliston, with a small slice of 
the former Churchill neighbourhood. The neighbourhood of 
Adelaide-Churchill used to be two separate communities, with 
Churchill in the north, Adelaide Park in the south, and Ruth 
Street is the dividing line. When the city of Saskatoon redrew 
its neighbourhood boundaries in the 1990s, the north and south 
sections were combined into one. Many have asked me how my 
constituency got its name, and I believe this to be the 



October 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2641 

explanation. 
 
I am honoured that the residents of this riding chose me to 
represent them in this Assembly, to bring their opinions and 
concerns forward on their behalf, to help resolve their problems, 
and to defend their interests. It is a responsibility that I take 
very seriously. 
 
I like to say that I am the epicentre of the seniors in the 
province, as I have the highest concentration of seniors within 
the area around Market Mall, as well as a number of retirement 
residences in my constituency. I was informed at a speaking 
engagement on this past Saturday night that this age group 
prefers to be called matures or veterans. Whatever the name, I 
couldn’t be more pleased to represent this age demographic in 
this House and be their voice. I enjoy visits to my many seniors’ 
homes and meeting with constituents like Pearl Skorobohach, 
who I talked about today, who’s 104 years young and still going 
strong at Ilarion Residence, or visiting with Howard and Dorene 
Thomas at the Bentley on the day their family was hosting a 
party for their 65th wedding anniversary. 
 
One of my favourite quotes, Mr. Speaker, is by Fred Rogers. 
You remember him as the host of Mister Rogers’ 
Neighborhood: 
 

At the center of the universe is a loving heart that 
continues to beat and that wants the best for every person. 
Anything we can do to help foster the intellect and spirit 
and emotional growth of our fellow human beings, that is 
our job. Those of us who have this particular vision must 
continue against all odds. Life is for service. 

 
I appreciate that I am able serve the constituents of Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood, as I am one who shares this particular 
vision, like Mister Rogers, and I believe that life is for service. 
 
The Speech from the Throne opened the second session of the 
twenty-eighth legislature for the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, according to the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan website, the Throne Speech outlines government 
goals, directions, and initiatives. The Throne Speech shapes the 
government’s legislative agenda that will guide our work this 
session — the over-arching themes, the broad brush strokes, the 
vision. This government’s vision is to be the best place in 
Canada to live, to work, to start a business, to get an education, 
and to build a life. Let’s see how this Throne Speech advances 
that vision. 
 
I want to start with my seniors. This government created the 
personal care home benefit in 2012 to support seniors residing 
in personal care homes. This government has tripled the 
seniors’ income plan benefit from $90 per month to $270 per 
month since 2008. Now this government will introduce the 
seniors’ education property tax deferral program that will give 
seniors with household incomes under $70,000 the option to 
defer the education portion of their property taxes on their 
home. 
 
According to the keynote speaker at the banquet I attended on 
Saturday night — it was a busy weekend — the primary 
characteristics of seniors or matures is that they are dependable, 
punctual, hard working, and possess much wisdom. They are 

the pioneers who built our province through tenacity, grit, and 
effort. The vast majority of seniors prefer to remain in their own 
homes and live independently for as long as possible or what is 
called age in place. So I applaud this initiative. These seniors’ 
programs are steps that fit with this government’s vision as the 
best place in Canada to live. 
 
All three of our daughters completed post-secondary education 
at the University of Saskatchewan. They are part of the nearly 
70,000 students who have taken advantage of the graduate 
retention program and chose to begin their careers right here at 
home. It remains the most aggressive student retention program 
in the country and fosters our vision statement as the best place 
to get an education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I mentioned that our oldest daughter and her 
husband purchased Market Mall Auto Service in September of 
2017, just over one year ago. They will benefit from this 
government raising the small business income threshold from 
500,000 to 600,000 effective January 1st of 2018, which will be 
the highest threshold in Canada. This is the amount of income 
that small businesses pay tax at the significantly lower small 
business tax rate of 2 per cent. 
 
Did you know, Mr. Speaker, that the more than 148,500 small 
businesses in Saskatchewan contributed almost one-third of the 
gross domestic product in 2016 at 31 per cent? Even more 
impressive is the fact that small businesses in this province 
account for more than 98 per cent of all businesses in 
Saskatchewan, and that per capita Saskatchewan has the highest 
rate of small businesses in the entire country. These small 
businesses help to grow our economy, create jobs, and 
encourage investment in communities across the province. 
 
It is with these facts in mind that this Saskatchewan Party 
government stood firmly against the federal government’s 
recent proposed tax changes that could have had a significant 
negative impact on small businesses in this province. This new 
federal tax fairness plan would have hurt our economy and 
threatened jobs. It is good to hear that the federal government 
has backed away from most of its proposed tax changes. 
 
The raising of the small business threshold is just one more step 
that this government has taken to create and maintain a positive 
business environment with policies that enable this sector to 
thrive. We are advancing our vision statement as the best place 
to start a business. 
 
Exports, Mr. Speaker, are big business in this province. More 
than 100,000 jobs depend on exports, and international trade is 
an import part of our economic activity. According to the Sask 
bureau of statistics data from 2015, international exports of 
goods were 41 per cent of our GDP [gross domestic product]. 
Saskatchewan exports approximately 70 per cent of what it 
produces to countries around the world. The United States is 
our top market followed by China, India, Japan, and Brazil. 
 
I met Tariq Azim Khan, ambassador to Pakistan, at the 
Speaker’s tea following the Throne Speech. He was pleased to 
inform me that exports from Saskatchewan to Pakistan are up 
293 per cent to 548 million. Through the efforts of our Premier 
and trade missions and support for trade-focused organizations, 
Saskatchewan’s exports to China have increased 530 per cent to 



2642 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2017 

$3 billion in the past 10 years. Exports to India are up 272 per 
cent to 1.5 billion. And exports to Indonesia are up 132 per cent 
to 543 million. The efforts of this government have paid off. 
The new Canadian Free Trade Agreement will be another tool 
in our toolbox to further expand our export markets. 
 
Just last month, Mr. Speaker, Moody’s investment service 
confirmed Saskatchewan’s AAA credit rating. This is the 
highest rating possible, and the first time this province ever 
received this rating was under this Saskatchewan Party 
government. They base this rating on our government’s strong 
fiscal management, and in large part to our three-year plan to 
return to a balanced budget. The difficult decisions in our 
budget have paid off with lower debt financing costs. We have 
less operating debt than we inherited from the NDP, and we 
have the second lowest debt-to-GDP ratio among the provinces. 
We will not burden future generations with growing deficits as 
other governments are choosing to do. That promotes this 
government’s vision statement as the best place to live, to work, 
to build a life. 
 
There is no arguing, Mr. Speaker, that this government in an 
innovative two-for-one approach to MRIs is helping patients get 
care sooner. Since this program was introduced in April of last 
year, 905 people have purchased an MRI with a corresponding 
number being provided at no cost to a patient on the MRI public 
wait-list. That means that 1,800 scans have been provided at no 
added expense to taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my husband was one of those 905 Saskatchewan 
residents who purchased an MRI. We had previously travelled 
to Calgary to pay a private clinic for an MRI on his back and 
we were grateful that this time we could go to Regina for an 
updated MRI. We felt good that a person on the public wait-list 
would have access to an MRI at no charge in a much shorter 
time period. I’m pleased to report that Jim underwent successful 
back surgery at Royal University Hospital in Saskatoon in June. 
 
Just last Friday, Mr. Speaker, Jim and I attended the Knights of 
Columbus 4th annual celebrity dinner in Saskatoon, an 
impressive fundraiser for the Jim Pattison Children’s Hospital 
currently under construction. I think it goes without saying that 
the recruitment of more than 750 new doctors and 3,400 nurses 
in the last 10 years has benefitted residents of our province and 
advanced our government’s vision. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech includes the introduction of 
individualized funding for preschool children under the age of 
six who are diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder. This 
fulfills a Saskatchewan Party commitment made during the 
2016 election campaign. 
 
Our province, Mr. Speaker, has the dishonourable distinction of 
having the highest rate of impaired driving among the 
provinces. In an effort to change this reality our government has 
introduced a number of measures over the past year to prevent 
further death and injury. This government will encourage 
municipalities to allow ride-sharing services to operate within 
their jurisdiction, as well as introducing legislation enabling 
SGI to offer affordable insurance to drivers working for 
ride-sharing companies. It will be one more measure the 
government will take to provide a safe ride home for 
Saskatchewan residents and one more measure that fosters the 

government’s vision statement as the best place to live, to work, 
to build a life. 
 
As a former trustee with the Greater Saskatoon Catholic board 
of education for 13 years, I am proud of this government’s 
decision to introduce legislation that will protect the right to 
school choice by invoking the notwithstanding clause of The 
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 
 
On April 20th of this year, a Court of Queen’s Bench ruled in 
the Theodore court case that the government must stop funding 
non-minority faith students to attend separate schools. The 
ruling could also risk provincial funding for 26 other 
faith-based schools in the province. By invoking the 
notwithstanding clause, this government will protect the rights 
of parents and students to choose the schools that work best for 
their families, regardless of their religious faith. 
 
This legislation will provide clarity, will provide parents with 
the assurance that they can continue to choose the school they 
want for their children to attend, and remove future uncertainty 
as the Theodore court case moves through the Saskatchewan 
Court of Appeal and possibly the Supreme Court of Canada. It 
can set parents’ minds at ease that this government will protect 
their parental right to choose the education that is best suited for 
their children, rather than a decision made by the courts. 
 
While attending the fundraising dinner last Friday, guests at our 
table wanted to discuss the notwithstanding clause legislation 
with me. One guest was a teacher who had taught in the Holy 
Family Catholic school system, the Saskatoon Misbah Muslim 
school, and now the public school system. He felt strongly that 
it was up to parents to choose which school their children 
attended, as the schools he had taught in all followed the 
provincial curriculum but were otherwise very different, in his 
opinion. Another guest at our table was a non-Catholic who 
chose a Catholic school for his son and is pleased with the 
faith-based education his son is receiving. 
 
[16:00] 
 
It was exciting to watch 21 new schools in the province 
welcome students this year. Mr. Speaker, 18 of those schools 
are joint-use facilities built using the public-private partnership 
model on nine sites in Regina, Saskatoon, Warman, and 
Martensville — 18 schools that will meet the needs of our 
growing communities for generations to come. They were 
constructed in less than two years, on time and on budget. This 
was the largest publicly owned and operated schools building 
project in our province’s history, and I was pleased to be 
directly involved in the planning of six of those schools as a 
trustee with Greater Saskatoon Catholic. 
 
In August of 2016 I was appointed as the Legislative Secretary 
to the Minister of Education for curriculum development and 
consultation. My mandate was to engage stakeholders in 
discussions on curriculum renewal and development and to 
provide options and recommendations to the Minister of 
Education regarding guiding principles for future kindergarten 
to grade 12 curriculum renewal and development, as well as 
subject areas and topics that should be priorized for curriculum 
renewal. 
 



October 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2643 

I held five engagement sessions in Prince Albert, Saskatoon, 
and Regina, with representatives of the education sector and 
interest groups between October and December of last year in 
order to hear responses to key questions regarding the future of 
curriculum development. There were meetings with specific 
groups as well. Written submissions were also received. The 
result of this process is the stop/pause on curriculum in place 
since August of 2013 has been lifted, and curriculum renewal 
will continue in a number of subject areas. More details will be 
forthcoming as the process unfolds in the coming months. I 
want to thank the many individuals who took the time to attend 
the consultation sessions, to meet with me individually, or to 
prepare written submissions. Their passion and commitment 
were evident. 
 
Mr. Speaker, protecting parental right to school choice vis-à-vis 
publicly funded education, opening 21 new schools, and lifting 
the pause on curriculum development are all examples of how 
this government advances its vision to be the best place in 
Canada to get an education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are preparing for a big change as we elect a 
new leader of our party, a new premier for Saskatchewan. It is 
with a heavy heart that we bid farewell to the most popular 
premier in Canada. I want to take some time to share what 
others have written about our Premier’s pending retirement. 
John Lax, manager of the Saskatchewan Construction 
Association, writes in the fall 2017 issue of We Build: 
 

Premier Wall’s tenure in politics was long and 
distinguished, dating from time as an advisor in the Devine 
era to Leader of the Opposition and capped by a 10-year 
run as Saskatchewan’s 14th Premier. His legacy will tower 
over those who follow in a way that few legacies do — 
Tommy Douglas and Peter Lougheed are the only western 
examples. 

 
Here are some excerpts from Derek Lothian’s editor column in 
the fall 2017 issue of Prairie Manufacturer magazine: 
 

I moved back to Saskatchewan from Ontario in 2014 in 
large part because I shared in Wall’s passion and optimism 
for the future of the province. By that time Saskatchewan 
had well eclipsed one million people. Skilled graduates 
were no longer our chief export, and Calgary had finally 
lost its moniker as Saskatchewan’s most . . . [popular] city. 
I remember flying into Regina every Christmas, marvelling 
at the sheer scale and pace of development — entire new 
neighbourhoods complete with shopping centres and 
restaurants that weren’t there 12 months prior . . . 
 
Owning the narrative has been Wall’s most effective 
ability; and I would contend we as taxpayers have reaped 
the benefit as a result. Investment has flowed, business has 
prospered, the population has flourished and we are 
punching above our weight class in the international arena. 
Few will debate style versus substance when you’re 
producing results. 
 
For manufacturers, the proof is in the pudding. Since Wall 
was first elected premier in 2007, manufacturing sales in 
Saskatchewan have swelled by 37 per cent . . . 
Manufacturing exports have spiked 48 per cent. Average 

weekly earnings for manufacturing employees are up 33 
per cent — roughly double the rate of inflation. 
 
. . . there is no disputing that Wall will leave the industry in 
a far better state than when he found it. 

 
Wall is departing politics at a time when, on principle, it is 
difficult for him to leave. Few elected officials would do 
so, with as much humility or grace. 
 
But change is good, and I am confident the best is yet to 
come. That belief — a conviction in ourselves — is the 
legacy Brad Wall will leave behind. 
 

You see, Mr. Speaker, many Saskatchewan associations send 
their publications to my office, and I do actually read them. 
 
An open letter to Brad Wall from a young Saskatchewan 
rancher appeared on a blog called View From the Ranch Porch 
on August 10th. That rancher is Adrienne Ivey and I would like 
to share her letter with you: 
 

Dear Premier Wall, 
 
Today you announced your impending retirement from 
politics, from the position of Premier of Saskatchewan, and 
my heart broke a little. 
 
Born and raised here in Saskatchewan, I never dreamed of 
a leader like yourself. I never dreamed of what 
Saskatchewan, as a province, was capable of. For myself, 
your time as Premier was a little like the blind being 
blessed with sight, as I never had the smallest vision of 
what was possible. A vision that, thankfully, you did have. 
 
You see, I grew up in a very different Saskatchewan than 
the one that my children know. In my formative years, 
Saskatchewan was quite literally the joke of Western 
Canada. The gap, as Canada knew us as then. 
 
It was not until you took our amazing province’s reins that 
I dreamed that we could ever become anything but a 
have-not province. A sentiment I can only imagine was 
shared by the majority of my classmates, by the way they 
fled Saskatchewan in droves after completing their 
education. Your leadership changed that. 
 
With the last decade, I have developed the type of puffed 
chest pride of our province that can only be likened to that 
of the pride in my children. I have shouted to the world 
that right here, right now, Saskatchewan is THE best place 
in the world to live. THE best place in the world to raise 
my children. THE best place in the world to farm, ranch, 
and feed the people of this world. For that I thank you. 
 
Thank you for bringing the people of Saskatchewan 
together. Thank you for ensuring my children’s prosperity 
here. Thank you for making the difficult, unpopular 
decisions that are best for our province in the long run. 
Before you, I never knew that politicians could make 
decisions based on what is right, rather than what gains 
votes. For that I thank you. Thank you for making the 
RoughRiders win (ok, I may be getting a little carried 



2644 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2017 

away . . .). Thank you for teaching me the word 
“Jackwagon.” 
 
Thank you, Premier Wall, for pouring your heart and soul 
into Saskatchewan, because as you have proved, we are 
worth it. 

 
It is said that when others speak well of you, it is a prayer. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, our Premier is blessed with abundant prayers. 
 
Our Lieutenant Governor started the Throne Speech by quoting 
the late Ron Petrie, an author and long-time humour columnist 
with the Regina Leader-Post, who died in 2012 after a one-year 
battle with cancer. Here is some of the Thanksgiving column 
that he penned: 
 

As a younger man, brash and full of swagger, I considered 
my calling to be Vancouver, Montreal, even New York. 
Only now do I appreciate that what I actually fancied was 
merely the idea of . . . [a] farmboy self destined for the big 
city; that, in reality, traffic jams, restaurant queues, 
cut-throat office politics, six dollar cups of coffee, shoebox 
apartments and crammed elevators are not for me, and 
never were. 
 
Where I am is Saskatchewan. Thank goodness. With the 
possible exception of the Maritimes, nowhere in Canada 
can be found folks with a keener feel for the absurd, with a 
more grounded sense of purpose and place, the confidence 
to enjoy the gift that is a good laugh at one’s own expense. 
The job description calls me a Saskatchewan humour 
writer. Hardly. I am a stenographer. I simply take notes. 
 
That my Saskatchewan grows the food that feeds the world 
makes me guilty of a deadly sin. Pride. 

 
That is how I feel, Mr. Speaker. Where I am is Saskatchewan. 
Thank goodness. And I make no apologies for the pride that I 
feel for my province. Despite the challenges that we face, we 
continue to be the best place in Canada to live, to work, to start 
a business, to get an education, and to build a life. I hope I have 
proved my thesis statement, that this Throne Speech advances 
the vision of this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the motion moved by the 
member from Estevan. I will not be supporting the amendment. 
Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, 
Culture and Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Makowsky: — Thanks so much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[Applause] 
 
Hon. Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you to my colleagues for that 
warm welcome. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s always a pleasure 
to be here at the Legislative Assembly, of course, representing 
the great people of Regina Gardiner Park, and always humbled 
to do that, always looking forward to that and to the session 
that’s coming along. 
 
I’d like to talk about the Throne Speech for a little bit. I 
recognize the excellent speech by the previous speaker, the 

member from Churchill-Wildwood. She talked about, right at 
the end, about the beginning paragraphs of the Throne Speech, 
and there was quotes by Mr. Petrie, and I thought those kind of 
hit home. I always . . . You know the part of the Throne Speech 
that I thought was pretty eloquent, and all of it is of course, but 
just that last statement by Mr. Petrie in his column there, 
“Where I am is Saskatchewan. Thank goodness.” I couldn’t 
agree more. 
 
You think about where you are. You get to work in this 
beautiful building. Every day you come to work — and boy, the 
marble palace, the oak finishes — and get to work with great 
people, and boy, this is a great place. This is a great time for our 
province, and I’m so thankful I am here and be able to represent 
the people of Gardiner Park as I mentioned earlier. 
 
Thank goodness. Thank goodness for my family. I’m so lucky 
to have a young, healthy family. We’re definitely very busy. 
We’re both working and very active, three active boys in 
Regina here. So I’m very, very thankful for them and their 
support as we do our endeavours here at the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
I’m very thankful. Thank goodness — I can definitely say this 
— thank goodness for the staff in the building. And Brittany at 
my constituency office does a great job as always — I try to 
mention when I get up to speak — does a great job on behalf of 
the people of Gardiner Park. I believe she’s been serving those 
folks and working with me for five years now. So I think that’s 
a pretty good job, and keeping me in line is definitely a 
full-time job, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In the minister’s office, there’s Jim and Damien and Jolene and 
Catherine. They do great work on behalf of the people. So thank 
goodness for those folks who do so much work behind the 
scenes on behalf of MLAs and ministers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also thank . . . At this time of year we get back to the 
Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker. It’s a lot of back and forth, 
a lot of good debate. That’s fun. But I always really like this 
time of year. My wife doesn’t like it at all, but I certainly like it. 
It’s getting cold and the leaves are falling, the winds are 
blowing, but it’s more of a personal thing for me and I’m sure a 
lot of folks around Saskatchewan. 
 
But we just wrapped up football season with the Regina Minor 
Football League on Sunday. Two great league finals. The 
peewee game, I was fortunate enough to be able to coach in that 
game on my son’s team. We won that game so . . . And then 
there was the bantam playoff after that. Of course it’s not, 
certainly not even close about me or winning — that’s fine and 
great — but certainly it’s about, as we always do this time of 
year, we have to . . . There’s always, I guess, a championship, 
and the kids are excited about that. But of course we all know 
it’s about families coming together, competing, enjoying being 
out there with your friends, your buddies, and having a good 
time and learning some skills. 
 
I think the best part as a coach, of course, as I mentioned before, 
maybe not necessarily the winning all the time, but when you 
see kids grow socially, the skills they pick up, they acquire 
while doing the activity. And I think that’s the best part of 
coaching. When you see a kid maybe who struggled at the 



October 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2645 

beginning of the year be able to grow just exponentially, boy, 
that’s what you do it for. And that’s what it’s all about, and it’s 
so much fun. 
 
And I’m proud to be part, or the minister responsible for some 
of the programs that are funded by the lottery system, Mr. 
Speaker. Not directly referenced in that Speech from the 
Throne, but those just . . . The word I was looking for is 
leverage, so many volunteer hours. And those funds, they go a 
long way in so many areas. 
 
Of course a lot of times I speak about football because I’m most 
familiar with that, but it is a great and unique part of 
Saskatchewan is that lottery system, and those dollars definitely 
go to good use. So thank goodness for that, and all the coaches, 
all the volunteers, all the parents that get behind that particular 
entity, the Regina Minor Football. 
 
[16:15] 
 
And I should also mention that they just continue to build. They 
continue to grow — a few years ago a new field, turf field, new 
stands in the last few years, and now an extremely ambitious 
project in the north end zone at Leibel Field. They are building 
a new clubhouse to store equipment, to have locker rooms for 
folks, bathroom facilities. And it is absolutely first class. It’ll be 
tough to beat in terms of a facility for . . . a minor football 
facility, even within Canada, the ones I’m familiar with. 
 
Another great one, and I don’t know where it ranked, is 
Saskatoon Minor Field as well. That’s where the Hilltops play, 
and of course they’re on to the national championship, Mr. 
Speaker, a great program there. But their facility is outstanding 
as well, and I think that speaks to again all the people that are 
involved, all the volunteers. The folks that raise money for 
those programs are so valuable to our communities, so valuable 
for those young folks, and boy, I don’t know where we’d be 
without all those people. 
 
A little bit of leeway, Mr. Speaker. I’ll get directly to the 
Throne Speech if I just, if you give me a little room here. We’re 
talking about football, so I know a couple of days ago there was 
a bit of a disturbance in the force, so to speak, on Friday as the 
old Taylor Field, old Mosaic Stadium, was taken down. And 
certainly that was a kind of end of an era, certainly. 
 
I know that was here in Regina and I guess there was some 
involvement in the new stadium and the old stadium with the 
provincial government. But you know, that was certainly . . . I 
don’t know. We knew it was one of those things that you know 
is coming and it’ll eventually take place. I didn’t necessarily 
drive down that part of town quite often, but I was . . . It’s very 
different to see the Regina skyline. You know how flat Regina 
is, and you can see that stadium for a long time, but when you 
go to look now, it’s not there. It’s kind of eerie; it’s kind of 
different. And to see that stadium come down, boy, I can think 
of a lot of memories that were there. Not just for my family, but 
for, I’m sure, for thousands of thousands of people across time 
here in our province. And what a great facility that was. It 
certainly served its purpose. 
 
I know it’s been the home of the Rider nation for 80 years. Just 
quickly a brief history of it. In the 1910s there was of course the 

Regina Rugby Club in the teen years, and they played at Park 
de Young, it was called. And it’s part of the original, the 
footprint of the old stadium there just off of, west of Albert 
Street, north of Sask Drive there — we all know where it is — 
and rugby, baseball, and soccer all shared that stadium over 
time. And it went through some different changes, different 
configurations for many, many years. 
 
It was interesting to note in the article I was reading when they 
talked about enclosing the building, certainly different now 
from the 1920s and ’30s when we talk about enclosing a 
building. What they were talking about was putting a fence 
around it so they could charge admission and make some 
money off the gate, whereas people would just I guess before 
that would just walk in and do their thing there. 
 
So in 1966 of course it was renamed Taylor Field, and to a lot 
of folks over the decades it’s always been Taylor Field. You 
know, when the name changed . . . But I think it was called 
Mosaic Stadium at Taylor Field, and of course it was named 
after “Piffles” Taylor who did so much work in the rugby club 
and bring it to prominence. And of course he was a world war 
veteran who served his country very honourably. 
 
So it was changed in ’66. The west side grandstand, it expanded 
over the years and the west side was voted on by the citizens of 
Regina. It won by about 60 per cent in ’78 and it was finally 
erected in ’79, only to be again . . . Got nearly 40 years out of it, 
and it came down just two days ago. Also temporary seats were 
put in in time for the 2013 Grey Cup. And of course I 
mentioned SMF [Saskatoon Minor Football] field in Saskatoon. 
They’re getting a lot of those temporary seats and so that’s great 
to see the legacy of the old building is still being used in other 
facilities here in the province for those facilities that need new 
stands, and it’s going to look great. I’ve seen pictures of SMF 
and it’s awesome. 
 
I certainly remember lots of great memories. The first time I 
ever played at Taylor Field was, I believe, 1991. It was the 
senior bowl, so all the high school players that were selected to 
sort of a north-south all-star team. It poured rain that day, Mr. 
Speaker. I remember it clearly. It was just coming down in 
sheets. It didn’t make for great play, but I always certainly 
remember that. 
 
I remember in 1995, my first year in the league, it was the year 
of the first Grey Cup ever in Saskatchewan, and that was 
certainly a big deal in our province. And there was 56,000 
people for a regular season game at that time with all the 
temporary seating. I remember in the Grey Cup, of course 
there’s . . . Saskatchewan’s known to have windy conditions 
once in a while and there was some concern whether those 
stands on the south side could be opened because of the wind. I 
think around Rider nation, people have had their Rider family at 
those seats and they had good relationships, including myself 
when I was done playing. So lots of memories there. 
 
I remember my boys, when they were young, on days off we’d 
go into the locker room and they had these chairs that were on 
rollers, and my guys would jump on them and kind of 
skateboard all throughout the locker room. The trainer, Ivan, 
wasn’t very happy with that but . . . He couldn’t find the chairs 
to do treatment on the guys, and I still remember that. The 



2646 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2017 

chocolate bars that he had tasted terrible but my kids loved 
them for some reason, the energy bars that were there. But lots 
of great memories, Mr. Speaker, for myself, for many folks who 
sat on the sunny side, the shady side. You didn’t have to say 
much more than that to know where you sat at old Taylor Field. 
So it’s one of those things, but I think it’s progress. 
 
Progress happens and it’s great to see that happening in our 
great province of Saskatchewan. I think that’s a lot similar . . . I 
thank you for the latitude to talk a little bit about that, but I 
think it’s kind of a thing where we talk about the Throne 
Speech, we talk about moving forward to a new stadium. 
There’s been so many new projects here in our province and 
here in Regina. I think about the bypass and I think about the 
new stadium, and all the things that have been built, those major 
economic drivers for our province. And boy, Mr. Speaker, I 
think that progress, that movement forward, that continually 
trying to better, I think we’ve seen that from this government in 
the last 10 years, Mr. Speaker, and I think it’s highlighted in the 
Throne Speech. We’re not just sort of sitting on our laurels and 
looking at the past. We’re looking forward; we’re moving 
forward; we’re going ahead, and just like we’ve seen from our 
favourite football team, moving to a new stadium and new 
expectations and new excitement about that. 
 
So I think, you know, I’d just like to highlight a few things that 
are in the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, that prove that we are 
moving forward. We’re not just, you know, thinking about the 
past, and wanting to . . . continuous improvement, always 
looking for the future, looking towards getting better, trying to 
do things. Of course mistakes will be made in any situation, in 
anything you’re trying to accomplish, and we acknowledge 
those. But I think for the most part, for the great part, I think 
we’ve moved this province forward quite a bit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I will be wary of my time here, but I think to this autism 
spectrum disorder, I’ve heard a lot from my constituents about 
that, when is that coming, and how important that would be, 
that individualized funding for the folks who have kids with 
autism spectrum disorder. 
 
I can think of the organ donation legislation that is coming, Mr. 
Speaker; the move to a single health authority that will 
hopefully save . . . Well it will save money and lead to better 
service, Mr. Speaker. Ride-sharing services, Uber and Lyft, to 
operate in our province. I think that’s an important part. I don’t 
know if the members opposite are on board with that. From 
what I understand, they’re not for some reason. I’d like to hear 
why. Maybe some of them will mention that in their speeches, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So just quickly, in the ministry that I’m honoured to be a 
minister for, there is new legislation coming for a new 
provincial park in the Porcupine Hills. We’ll hear more of that 
in the coming days, Mr. Speaker. And I think over the last, as 
was directly referenced in the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, 
over 100 million that has been spent in our parks in the last 10 
years, substantially 110 per cent more than the members 
opposite did when they were in government the previous 10 
years. 
 
So we’ve seen numbers increase to our provincial parks. 
They’re certainly jewels. They speak to the quality of life we 

have here in our great province. And I think a lot of that has to 
do, part of it anyway is the amount of capital projects we’ve put 
into the parks system, Mr. Speaker, to increase the usefulness 
and the amenities that are available to all those park goers. So 
we thank them for coming to our parks. They’re great assets for 
our province, Mr. Speaker. So again it references directly in the 
Throne Speech which I’m very happy to report to the House. 
It’s the second park that’s been created in Saskatchewan in the 
last five years. Blue Heron of course up in northern 
Saskatchewan was the other one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m also glad to see in the Throne Speech 
references to Creative Saskatchewan, the good work those folks 
do to help creative entrepreneurs in our province, help them 
move their projects and their businesses forward. And so . . . 
[inaudible] . . . million in grants in a tough budget. It’s great to 
see that amount of commitment to that creative sector. And not 
just in the film sector, Mr. Speaker, but of course all 
screen-based media, television, interactive digital media we are 
seeing great, large changes in that business with the digital age, 
Mr. Speaker, similar to what we saw in the music industry with 
the rise of the Internet and digital recording and those sorts of 
things. So great changes and Creative Saskatchewan’s on top of 
those changes to work with our great artists we have here in our 
province. 
 
And of course the music industry, the publishing industry, 
visual arts as well as the performing arts, so Creative 
Saskatchewan helps in all those creative entrepreneurs, as I 
mentioned. And also a million and a half to help those industry 
associations at Saskatchewan, those creative industry 
associations I just mentioned previously. So good support for 
that. We see good work with the Arts Board continuing in the 
creative sectors in Saskatchewan. 
 
The other part of my portfolio I guess is Sask Liquor and 
Gaming. And we’ve seen some movement certainly in that in 
the last little while. As it directly referenced in the Throne 
Speech, Mr. Speaker, 24 locations have been converted over to 
private retailers and they are having service. We’re seeing 
service in previous communities that have not had an SLGA 
store in the past. And I think it’s more good news on that front, 
Mr. Speaker. Six of the stores have former SLGA employees 
working for . . . Sorry, not working any longer for SLGA. They 
are owners of their businesses. I’m sure that’s something that 
they are proud of. 
 
Also on the liquor file, Mr. Speaker, concerned over the 
provincial trade barriers, the Agreement on Internal Trade, what 
is now the CFTA [Canadian Free Trade Agreement], we’re very 
concerned that the province to the west of us has created an 
unfair, inequitable grant program for their local breweries 
which shuts out Saskatchewan brewers. And so it’s been ruled 
by an independent panel that that is an illegal action and we 
certainly hope, we plead, and we invite the members opposite to 
talk to their counterparts, I guess is the right word, over in 
Alberta and ask them to remove this illegal activity. An 
independent board ruled against the Alberta government in their 
unfair trade practices, Mr. Speaker, and they of course appealed 
that, unfortunately. So hopefully we’ll get the members 
opposite onside with the people of the province and help our 
local brewers here in Saskatchewan. 
 



October 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2647 

So, Mr. Speaker, another thing I am certainly . . . And where I 
am, Mr. Speaker, is nearing the end of my speech. I can see my 
time. I’ve probably gone over here. I should always look when I 
start, Mr. Speaker, but I tend to go on and on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[16:30] 
 
But another thing I’m very thankful and I say thank goodness, 
is we’ve had the Premier of Saskatchewan as our leader of this 
party of course, Mr. Speaker. He’s given 18 years I believe to 
the people of the province in his service, so I just wanted to 
mention how grateful I am. I think the province is grateful for 
his service. He has been a leader not only for the people of 
Saskatchewan but for, I believe, Western Canada. He’s been 
very astute and he is a great communicator and we have been 
very lucky to have him as our Premier for the last decade. 
 
And I’d like to acknowledge the sacrifice his family has given. 
Of course he’s the MLA from Swift Current. He has to travel a 
long way and I’m sure he’s missed a few things, over the past 
nearly 20 years of service, in his family life that I’m sure he 
would have liked to have been to. But the people of the 
province asked him to serve in this role and he did so with 
wonderful distinction. And I thank him for that. 
 
I think there’s people that, you know, they kind of look for a 
career path and look for something to do and where their life’s 
going to take us. But there is some people, I think, that they’re 
just born to do something and that’s where they end up. And I 
can’t think of that more fully than with our current Premier, Mr. 
Speaker. He was born to do that job, and he’s done a great job. 
So I thank him for it, as I mentioned before. 
 
So again, Mr. Speaker, I’m very thankful for where I am. I’m 
honoured to serve and I would just like to once again stress that 
what Mr. Petrie said, at the beginning of my speech and the 
beginning of the Throne Speech, thank goodness, thank 
goodness I’m in Saskatchewan. There’s no place I’d rather be. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I am going to wrap up my speech 
and say I will, of course, when voted upon, be supporting the 
2017 Throne Speech. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Certainly it is a great 
honour to speak in this Chamber while representing the people 
from Regina Pasqua. I give great thanks to the Regina Pasqua 
residents who chose me to represent them. Also thanks to my 
campaign team who worked tirelessly day and night. Also thank 
you to our leader whose wisdom, sincerity, and love of 
Saskatchewan earned the people of Saskatchewan’s trust. 
 
I would like to not forget two people — my best friends — 
Shaun Spelliscy and Waqar Bokhari. I had an initial talk and the 
first talk ever when I decided to run for this office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know my wife Attia-Tul-Ilm is watching this 
session live. Mr. Speaker, Attia’s name means “a gift.” She is 
truly a gift in my life in the last 18 years, and we together 
having three boys: Ayaz, Kashif, and Arsalan. Also many 
thanks to my parents for all their praise and raised me along 
with other 11 kids, 11 kids. 

The Speech from the Throne highlights sustainability, 
well-being, and economic growth, debt-free Saskatchewan, and 
maintain the standard of life of people of Saskatchewan and the 
generation to come. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was tough living here in Saskatchewan before 
2007, as between 1991 to 2007, about 56,000 people left 
Saskatchewan. There were many reasons for the people to leave 
Saskatchewan. In fact the economical growth rate from 2000 to 
2007 under the NDP government was 1.7 per cent, well below 
the national average rate of 2.5 per cent. Mr. Speaker, the road 
to recovery started when the Saskatchewan Party government 
came in power. The GDP had increased by 24 per cent. This 
was the largest increase across the provinces, with Canada 
increases by 17 per cent. In 2007 the Saskatchewan debt was $3 
billion and was paid off by the Saskatchewan Party 
government. 
 
The NDP government closed 52 schools, 52 hospitals, and also 
had the shortage of 1,000 nurses in Saskatchewan. There were 
doctors shortages as well and the longest surgical waiting time 
in the country. The road to recovery started in 2007 when we 
hired more than 3,000 nurses, 750 doctors, and built the 
children’s hospital in Saskatoon, hospitals in Moose Jaw and 
North Battleford. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP closed 1,200 long-term care beds and 
had zero increase to the seniors’ income plan benefit for 16 
years. I am proud to stand here and say that this government has 
built 15 new long-term care facilities for seniors. 
 
The NDP caused substantial damage in many communities 
when they closed 176 schools, as well as having a major teacher 
shortage, crowded classrooms with no one to repair any 
schools. Our road to recovery started by building 40 brand new 
schools or replacing schools and 25 major renovations, hiring 
875 more teachers and 173 student support teachers. Eighteen 
of those schools are joint-use facilities built using a P3, or 
public-private partnership, model that reduced construction 
costs by $100 million. Those schools are located on nine sites in 
Regina, Saskatoon, Warman, and Martensville, and were 
completed in less than two years. 
 
Altogether our government has constructed or renovated 65 
schools during the last decade, including several new 
community schools. Mr. Speaker, in Regina if you drive down 
Elphinstone, we see Scott Collegiate, a recreational complex, a 
public library, a community police station, and a First Nations 
elder ceremonial room, Sacred Heart Community School, École 
Connaught Community School. 
 
We have worked with the school divisions and teachers on the 
province’s first education sector strategic plan, which has led to 
the higher graduation rate and most students reading at grade 
level. This government collaborated with indigenous leaders to 
develop programs to assist First Nations and Métis students, 
such as Help Me Tell My Story and Following Their Voices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since 2008 we have provided 8.3 billion to support 
post-secondary education, including nearly 1 billion in direct 
support for students. This includes the graduate retention 
program, the most aggressive student attraction and retention 
program in Canada. Since 2008 nearly 70,000 students have 



2648 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2017 

taken advantage of the graduate retention program, receiving 
about $345 million in tax credits. This government also 
provides the direct financial support to students through the 
Saskatchewan Advantage Scholarship, which offers all 
Saskatchewan grade 12 graduates up to 500 a year to help cover 
tuition costs to a maximum of $2,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all know under the NDP government, 56,000 
people moved out of Saskatchewan, finding jobs in Alberta, 
Manitoba, and in BC. But under the Saskatchewan Party 
government, 167,000 people moved to Saskatchewan and we 
still had the lowest unemployment rate in the country. In fact 
we have nearly doubled the national rate of job growth. 
Saskatchewan is one of the greatest provinces to live in, and I 
am proud to be here as a member of the party who works 
tirelessly to bring back many families to Saskatchewan. 
 
Creative farming in Saskatchewan inspired the world with hard 
work, innovation, and with productivity, which helped 
Saskatchewan’s economic growth. Farmers are absolutely the 
strength of Saskatchewan, feed the world, and supply food for 
dining tables around the globe. In 2016, $14.4 billion worth of 
agricultural products were shipped. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we as a government do what we can or what we 
should do. On October 25th, the day of the Speech from the 
Throne, we invited many international delegates from many 
different consulates, to improve and build our correlation to 
emerge in international markets; to keep the momentum of our 
exports, growth, and investment in Saskatchewan. 
 
There are now more than 300 food companies operating in the 
province, generating more than 4 billion in revenue and 
employing 5,000 people. And it is a grave sadness while the 
federal government and the Saskatchewan opposition is 
forgetting that who decorates their dining table three times in a 
day. Mr. Speaker, is this not a thankless action to impose the 
carbon tax on Saskatchewan, which is substantial damage to the 
farmers’ and ranchers’ community? 
  
Mr. Speaker, we have committed $7.4 billion to the province’s 
highway system. This record investment has resulted in the 
repair and improvement of 12 000 kilometres of highway; and 
the completion of significant projects, such as Saskatoon Circle 
Drive South bridge, the St. Louis bridge, the twinning of 
Highway 11, and passing lanes on Highway 7 and Highway 10. 
 
Mr. Speaker, October 27th, I visited the Regina bypass, along 
with the member from Regina Fort Qu’Appelle and the Minister 
of Highways. The Regina bypass is the largest infrastructure in 
the province’s history. It addresses the growing commuter 
traffic issues; improves safety on Highway 1 East and Victoria 
Avenue; diverts large truck traffic from Regina; construction of 
overpasses at Balgonie, White City, Pilot Butte, and Tower 
Road; eliminates key transportation bottlenecks while creating 
an efficient traffic flow on Highway 1; provides better access to 
Regina, the GTH, Highway 6 and Highway 11. 
 
The new Regina bypass will include 60 kilometres of 4-lane 
highways; 40 kilometres of greenfield 4-lane highway; 20 
kilometres of brownfield 4-lane highway to be resurfaced; 12 
new overpasses; 55 kilometres of service roads; two new 
all-movement intersections, first time ever in Saskatchewan; 

two bridges crossing Wascana Creek. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is all about Saskatchewan, our economic 
growth, and building a future for the generation to come. So I 
will be supporting the motion moved by the member from 
Estevan. I will not be supporting the amendment. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I am 
greatly humbled to be part of these historical proceedings in 
these beautiful chambers and joining in the Throne Speech 
debate. I think of the many members who have preceded me 
over the decades and all the beautiful words that have been 
spoken in this building. These members’ efforts and beliefs, 
morals and personal standards on who . . . representing their 
constituents and on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, they 
all debate to enact legislation to help the quality of life of these 
very same people that we represent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne and this legislation 
helps make Saskatchewan the great place it is to live, to work, 
to raise your family, and to enjoy all the aspects that 
Saskatchewan has to offer: the parks, lakes, resorts, and 
different amenities. Freedoms, liberties, and fresh air seem to be 
taken in stride and are a given. 
 
As my colleagues are well aware, our constituency assistants at 
our home offices work hard in the front lines. So thank you to 
Marcus and to Cora. Jason Beebe out at our Big River satellite 
office has had some health challenges recently and I would like 
to wish him well. So best wishes, Jason; get better. Your 
province needs you, and we appreciate the work and efforts that 
you put forth. Thank you to the staff in the Assembly that assist 
myself and my colleagues to make our life more manageable. 
 
[16:45] 
 
The Throne Speech shapes the legislature’s agenda and gives us 
an advancement of the vision of government as defined by 
Saskatchewan people’s voices. In a quote from Elizabeth II, 
Queen of Canada, at a Silver Jubilee steak dinner address in 
1977: 
 

Confederation itself was not a French idea or a British 
idea. It was an idea born of this land. The need for it arose 
from a shared experience and common problems. Its 
fulfillment sprang from shared attitudes and beliefs. 

 
I look at the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, like that: a shared 
attitude and belief of Saskatchewan people. As we look into the 
future with certain legislation and prepare for generations yet to 
come, we must continue to build with the same dedication and 
resiliency that our forefathers and settlers did. 
 
The foundation continues to be strong, Mr. Speaker. This 
foundation formed on the backs of the men and women who 
settled this province, made it home, and also on the new settlers 
who are carving out their future here with the right to establish 
a good quality of life wanted by all citizens. They might not be 
plowing, turning the sod into grain fields, or felling trees for 
land; however settlers are nevertheless in their right carving out 



October 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2649 

a place and establishing their own community spirit and new 
home. 
 
“Growing Stronger” was our theme to the 2017 Speech from 
the Throne and we will continue to be strong, to meet the 
challenges committed to the protection of Saskatchewan people, 
their families, and communities against hardship inherited or 
newly created. We will continue to improve revenue sharing 
such as Candle Lake resort with an increase of 115 per cent, and 
Big River with an increase of 97 per cent since we formed 
government. 
 
The cornerstones of our future successes are health, education, 
economy, and justice. Our government is delivering in these 
areas and we have a formula to address these concerns. We 
heard that more has to be done to prevent crime in rural 
Saskatchewan, so we appointed a government committee of 
MLAs to consult communities in Saskatchewan. Our 
recommendations on our government created a new protective 
and response team, consisting of 258 armed officers to improve 
response times to emergency calls and increase the visibility of 
uniformed officers in rural Saskatchewan. Composed of 120 
police officers from the RCMP and municipal police services, 
40 enforcement officers, and 98 conservation officers, this team 
can arrest and detain those suspected of committing crimes. 
Nearly 6 million has been committed to support this team and 
other initiatives arising from the communities’ report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have and we will continue to listen to the 
concerns of Saskatchewan people, respond, and provide 
protection and opportunities for all. Mr. Speaker, our 
accomplishments over the past 10 years of government are 
many. The largest income and property tax cuts in the history of 
Saskatchewan. We’ve reduced the province’s operating debt by 
40 per cent. We created surgical wait times from the longest to 
now the shortest. And Saskatchewan received a AAA credit 
rating from Standard & Poor’s for the first time in the 
province’s history, and continues to . . . [inaudible] . . . that 
status last month. 
 
We’ve created more support for people with disabilities, 
including the elimination of the original 440 wait-list for people 
with disabilities waiting for the dignity of a home. 
 
Population growth of 132,000 people in eight years. We’ve had 
more growth in the previous 75 years combined, to an all-time 
high of 1.14 million people, and a record 8 billion investment in 
infrastructure to improve roads, schools, senior facilities, and 
hospitals. And that is keeping Saskatchewan growing stronger, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
This was a summer of many changes. Our lives are constantly 
evolving and growing, not only politically, but personally as 
well. Our family grew by one more again this summer. I would 
like to announce on August 28th our daughter Brigitt and 
son-in-law Christie gave birth to their third child, Robert 
Benfield de Villiers V. He’s a little brother to Ella and Jane. 
And this new little human reminds us of renewal and growth. 
Doug and I are immensely overjoyed to have eight 
grandchildren, ages eight and under. 
 
I’m happy to say Saskatchewan is growing and that all of our 
four children, their spouses, and grandchildren live and work in 

this great province. The support of my family means a great 
deal to me as I continue to work for the citizens of the province 
we call home. 
 
Summer was also a time of parades, events, and volunteerism. 
Being able to see the positive impact you make is one of the 
reasons why people choose to volunteer, and Saskatchewan still 
ranks there up in the numbers for volunteering. It can be a real 
test of character and highly challenging at times, however the 
choice to volunteer is a demonstration of a very positive impact 
on the world. Therefore I encourage Saskatchewan people to 
continue and inspire others to keep up the good work. It gives 
humanity dignity and good spirits. If you want to touch the 
future, touch a life and all for the freedom of giving. I met 
young, old, and in between, all making the decision to give of 
their time. Saskatchewan is strengthened by Saskatchewan 
people and their ability to give. 
 
I must mention Wayne Bartel and Wayne Hyde. They’re the 
recipients of the 2017 Lakeland Citizens of the Year. They’re 
very strong, deserving volunteers. So thank you to them — 
Waynes’ world. 
 
Now one small part in helping out this summer that I enjoyed 
was serving food at the Ukrainian booth at the fair, with the 
delicious smells and the great comments from the consumers on 
both sides of the booth. Their homemade bread baked in an 
outdoor kiln was a one-of-a-kind experience and tasting 
pleasure. So thank you to the crew it took for daily mixing, 
kneading, and baking that wonderful bread all week long. 
 
Another event I enjoyed this summer was helping out at the 
2017 provincial 4-H judging competition held in August, hosted 
by the Prince Albert Exhibition agriculture producers. So they 
brought the sheep, cattle, and horses from their pastures and 
took some time away from the farm, some more volunteers 
wanting to help. The parents and chaperones commented on this 
generosity and will surely pass it on. The 4-H senior members 
did a great job of judging and I believe we are in good hands of 
the Saskatchewan future. 
 
This year’s Throne Speech is working to ensure a future for the 
next generation, a future of safe and strong communities, better 
Internet and cellular coverage throughout rural Saskatchewan, 
and investing in schools, hospitals, and improving our 
provincial parks. 
 
William James said, “The deepest principle in human nature is 
the craving to be appreciated.” And the enjoyment we receive 
by small acts of kindness are sometimes worth more than the 
grandest intention. Kindness is like a boomerang: it always 
returns, maybe not tomorrow or the next but eventually, when 
you least expect it. 
 
And all these acts of giving are important to someone, such as 
the act of giving of yourself. And by that I mean literally, the 
organ donation program. Our government reviewed the current 
organ donor program and will implement a new program led by 
donor physicians who will educate and champion organ 
donations in Saskatchewan. This will be a gift of life or better 
quality for many who suffer with the need of a healthier organ 
that is diseased or damaged. 
 



2650 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2017 

Mr. Speaker, as I belong to a family whose child has autism in 
the program I was paired with . . . It’s called adopt an MLA 
program. So this child has the autism spectrum disorder and I 
go visit him in Prince Albert several times a year. I was happy 
to see we fulfilled our commitment to provide individualized 
funding to children under six with autism spectrum disorder. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government unveiled life jacket loaner 
stations. That was piloted in 2016. Now one of these stations 
will be available in the Great Blue Heron Provincial Park in our 
beautiful constituency of Saskatchewan Rivers. Life jackets can 
be borrowed free of charge, ensuring everyone’s safety while 
they enjoy the provincial parks across Saskatchewan. 
 
Our constituency of Saskatchewan Rivers continues to benefit 
from record investments in highways and infrastructure. Some 
of the projects currently under way in Saskatchewan Rivers 
include 18 kilometres of paving on Highway 3, 28 kilometres of 
paving at the junction of Highway 55, 17 kilometres of paving 
on Highway 55 near Big River, 14 kilometres of paving of 
Highway 2, and 16 kilometres of widening and paving on 
Highway 2 North. The Government of Saskatchewan has 
invested 7.4 billion in transportation infrastructure since 2008, 
improving more than 12 000 kilometres of Saskatchewan 
highway — that is keeping Saskatchewan strong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech day will be very memorable to 
me as it was the last in the company of our Premier. Throne 
Speech day is an annual speech with usually general 
information, and in recent dates, we had specific information. 
We offer remarks on our government’s priorities and on focus 
on the economy and supporting Saskatchewan people. It also 
affords the opportunity for both sides to roll out their plans.  
 
The Throne Speech shows how we keep Saskatchewan strong. 
We owe the people the very best that we can do. We owe the 
people a positive government, and provide what the people 
need. Our duty is to the farmers, the business people, the 
loggers, people in the urban cities, and people in the rural 
constituencies. And that’s why we debate the speech. We show 
the people of Saskatchewan what is so important and how it can 
help their communities and their families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also must thank Premier Wall . . . pardon me, the 
Premier for his service to the province. It’s been a privilege to 
work with the Premier under his strong leadership, with a great 
decade of great vision and memories. Saskatchewan has grown 
stronger these past 10 years, and believing in our province has 
brought us so far. I’m grateful that, and I’m grateful to live in 
the great province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the helicopter . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
STARS. Yes, thank you. I have a little story regarding STARS. 
A few years ago before we had the STARS helicopter, I was 
snowmobiling in the northern part of Saskatchewan. There were 
a few of us all together and we had a snowmobile accident. And 
one of the young gentleman was trapped in his snowmobile, 
entangled in it. Fortunately my father was a Polaris snowmobile 
dealer, so he was able to take apart the snowmobile track and 
get this man out of it, yes, get him out. 
 
But it was pitch dark, and at that time we didn’t have STARS 
helicopter. All we had was some broken-down snowmobiles 

that we had to put back together. So we took off with this young 
man, once we got the snowmobiles. We had wrapped him up in 
what clothing we could take off to try and keep him from 
bleeding to death. And I was the last one on the trail, and as we 
were all moving, my snowmobile stopped. I could hear the 
wolves howling in the distance. We were in the boreal forest, 
and they could probably smell the blood. But one person came 
back, started my snowmobile, and away we went again. 
 
We had to go to a village to find a truck, to put this young man 
in the truck and then take him on to the hospital. And of course 
he lost his leg in it, and he almost lost his life, so unfortunately 
that was a sad story. So that’s why I think STARS helicopter 
could have saved his life, and it would have been a wonderful 
thing back then if the opposition had agreed to it. 
 
Yes, so I see my time is up, so, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, 
ultimately I will support the Throne Speech but I will not be 
supporting the amendment. Thank you, sir. 
 
The Speaker: — It now being 5 o’clock, this Assembly stands 
adjourned until tonight at 7. 
 
[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Bonk ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2621 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2621 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2621 
  Nerlien ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2621 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2622 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2622 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2622 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Breast Cancer Awareness Month 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2622 
 Agriculture Month 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2623 
 Women’s History Month 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2623 
 Lakeland’s 2017 Citizens of the Year 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2623 
 Constituent Turns 104 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2623 
 Constituent Awarded Medal for Water Rescue 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2624 
 New Computerized Tomography Scanner at Battlefords Union Hospital 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2624 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Global Transportation Hub 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2624 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2624 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2625 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2625 
 Water Management Project in Quill Lakes Area 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2626 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2626 
 Intent of Bill 40 and Ownership of Crown Corporations 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2626 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2627 
 Support for Municipalities 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2627 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2627 
 Support for Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2628 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2628 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2629 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 2630 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2631 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2634 
  Dennis ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2637 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2640 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 2644 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2647 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2648 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

 
Hon. Steven Bonk 

Minister of the Economy 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 
Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Larry Doke 
Minister of Government Relations  

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 
Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Nancy Heppner 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Gene Makowsky 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  
and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 




