






















































Hansard: May 09, 2017


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 85A  TUESDAY, MAY 9, 2017, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 

 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 

Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 

 

 

 
 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 

Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 

Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 

Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 

Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 

Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 

Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 

Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 

Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 

Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 

Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 

Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 

Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 

D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 

Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 

Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 

Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 

Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 

Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 

Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 

Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 

Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 

Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 

Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 

Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 

Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 

Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 

Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 

Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 

Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 

Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 

McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 

Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 

Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 

Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 

Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 

Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 

Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 

Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 

Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 

Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 

Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 

Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 

Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 

Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 

Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 

Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 

Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 

Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 

Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 

Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 

Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 

Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 

Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 

Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 

Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 

Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 

Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 

 

 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 11 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2433 
 May 9, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to this Assembly, it’s my privilege to introduce 
some guests from Surgical Centres Inc. in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. I’ll ask everybody to just give me a wave as I 
introduce you. I have Dr. Mohamed Nanji, the chief executive 
officer; Ms. Fatima Fazal, the chief operating officer; and Ms. 
Janet Maier, the Regina Surgical Centre nurse manager. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Surgical Centres is celebrating today their fifth 
anniversary of operating the Regina centre. Mr. Speaker, they 
have, in those five years, performed 22,000 surgeries that 
played a significant role in us being able to reduce our surgical 
wait times, Mr. Speaker. They’re having an event later today 
which I’m very happy to be attending. I’m looking forward to 
the tour and the event. And, Mr. Speaker, I thank them again for 
their great work. I look forward to much more of it down the 
road. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to please welcome them 
to their Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
join with the minister opposite in welcoming the folks from the 
Surgical Centre here today. Dr. Nanji, Ms. Fazal, and Ms. 
Maier, congratulations on your fifth anniversary here in 
Saskatchewan. And with that I’d like to ask all my colleagues to 
join again in welcoming these folks to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to ask 
leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In your gallery, I 
would like to introduce some special guests to the Legislative 
Assembly. Joining us today are 40 students, their teachers, and 
chaperones from 11 northern Saskatchewan high schools. 
They’ve travelled here from Black Lake, Cumberland House, 
Deschambault Lake, Dillon, Fond-du-Lac, La Loche, La Ronge, 
Pinehouse Lake, Stanley Mission, Southend, and Stony Rapids. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these students are here today to participate in the 
8th annual Charles Knight Youth Mentorship Program 
facilitated by the Provincial Capital Commission. This program 
gives high school students from northern Saskatchewan an 
opportunity to learn about the democratic process, to explore 
post-secondary educational opportunities and public sector 
career chances. And during their four-day stay, the students tour 
the University of Regina, the First Nations University of 
Canada, Saskatchewan Polytechnic Regina Campus, and the 
RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] training academy. 
They also visit key Saskatchewan landmarks such as the Royal 
Saskatchewan Museum, Government House, and our 
Legislative Building. 
 
The program also provides the students the unique opportunity 
to meet the Lieutenant Governor and their MLAs [Member of 
the Legislative Assembly] and to speak to them in an informal 
setting. 
 
This morning the students gained a better understanding and 
appreciation of how our democracy works by participating in a 
mock parliament. And I would like to thank you personally, Mr. 
Speaker, for facilitating the mock parliament right here in the 
Chamber. I invite all members to join me in welcoming our 
guests to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, we have a lot of northern guests here. And it is an 
honour to join the minister and just to take a little bit of time; 
I’m not going to ask for extended leave. But I just want to say 
to those students — we had a chance to have a little bit of a 
dialogue at lunchtime — you know where many of the 
challenges are, and you know that there are many people behind 
you. 
 
This is your Legislative Assembly. You’re the reason many of 
us are here — our young people, our community members, our 
children. And I just want to say to you, enjoy yourself, learn, 
take the experience you have . . . And today you’re going to 
take part in the House and the sitting. And like I said to you 
earlier, there are roles that we all have to do, and we do our 
roles the best we can, serving the people that we represent. 
 
So I just want to welcome you to your Legislative Assembly. 
To the chaperones and to all those that work to make it possible 
for 40 of you to be here, whether you’re from the Athabasca or 
Cumberland constituencies, I wish you well, and I welcome you 
and honour you here in your Legislative Assembly. Could I ask 
all my members to welcome them to their House. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave for 
an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



2434 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2017 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sitting in the 
west gallery, it is indeed my honour to introduce the Special 
Olympics Regina Raiders soccer team as well as some amazing 
school students from St. Luke high school. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members of the team today — just give us a 
wave when I say your name — are Stefan Anderson, Eric 
Black, Alex Chupik, Lucas Faye, Tyler Haddad, Whitney 
Haddad, Cody Holgate, Jordan Horvath, Zane Lauritsen, 
Bronya Rieger, Jesse Skidmore, Ryan Uleryk, and the coaches, 
Kurt Anthony, Samantha Stom-Anthony, Taylor Stom, Tammy 
Schultz, and Jacob Uleryk, and also their teachers.  
 
Samantha Anthony coaches the Regina Raiders Special 
Olympics team. She has also brought four of her incredible St. 
Luke students. In addition to the school work, holding down job 
and home responsibilities, these young citizens volunteer their 
time with a variety of service organizations, including Special 
Olympics. And the St. Luke students in attendance are Daniel 
Barth, Kobe Charbonneau, Stephanie Santos, and Porcsha 
Theriault. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the soccer team’s highlights: they 
qualified for the Special Olympics Saskatchewan summer 
provincial games this June in Moose Jaw. They plan to win the 
gold at those games and progress on to the national summer 
games in Nova Scotia in 2018. They played five years in the 
mainstream Regina Soccer Association indoor soccer league 
and improved their personal win-loss-tie record every year. 
They played four years in the local WCP [World Class Players] 
Cup, the world cup soccer tournament, this year playing our 
Saskatoon Special Olympics Rivals in the final game, and they 
won 4 to 1. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on a more individual note, we have two members 
who were part of the Special Olympics Team Canada who won 
silver medals at the World Winter Games in Austria. Two of 
our team members were married last summer: Dwight and 
Bronya Rieger. They proudly represent our province, our city, 
the team, and Special Olympics every time they step out in the 
field. Their most important goal is to always be a team and to 
exhibit the best sportsmanship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the MLAs had an opportunity to play this team a 
couple of years ago. That’s where the member from Melfort 
actually ruptured his Achilles. And the Finance minister got the 
nickname Red Light, and he was actually pulled off the field by 
one of the opposing Raiders teammates . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Yes, Red Light. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Special Olympics athletes’ oath is something 
we can all live by: Let me win. But if I cannot win, let me be 
brave in the attempt. The Raiders have their own motto based 
on the Special Olympics oath and it is simply: Let me be brave, 
as we feel that facing all of our challenges, both good and bad, 
head-on with grace and bravery, is how we want to live our 
lives. We’re very proud of you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of a very grateful city and province, 
congratulations and welcome to your Assembly. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join briefly with the member opposite in welcoming these 
Special Olympians, these Raiders, to their Legislative Assembly 
to say, on behalf of the official opposition, great work. Keep on 
competing. Keep on striving. Keep on chasing that excellence 
and keep making us all very proud.  
 
So again, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition, I’d 
like to join with the member opposite in welcoming the Raiders, 
the Special Olympians, the folks from St. Luke to their 
Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, to you, through you to 
all members of the Assembly, it’s my pleasure to introduce 
another grade 10 class from Yorkton Regional High School in 
the west gallery. Accompanying them is their teacher, Mr. Perry 
Ostapowich. As is customary, when they do come, they contact 
me through various sources for specific introductions. So with 
the group today, and I’ll ask them to wave: Nikita Serada, Andy 
McLennan, Kelsey Banga, Bailey Read, Taylor Black, Garion 
Miller, and Dustin Schendel. I’d ask all members to welcome 
them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 
ask for leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to join with the minister and my colleague from Cumberland in 
welcoming the students from northern Saskatchewan. 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 
 
And in my Cree language I told them I’m very glad that they’re 
here, and that they have nothing to fear in this house of 
democracy, and to point out that the staff and the chaperones 
and all those that organized this trip to bring these students to 
Regina should be commended as well. 
 
But I want to tell the students that I’m very, very proud that 
you’ve made this trip and to come learn how the Assembly 
works, and that the North has a very bright future based on the 
fact that these young, motivated, disciplined, hard-working 
students are a tribute to not only themselves and their family 
and their communities, but to all Aboriginal people across the 
province. So you’re the best. Keep up the great work, and 
welcome to your House. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you, through you to 
all the members of the Assembly, I would like to introduce two 



May 9, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2435 

of my constituents, Baldeep Dhindsa with his father, Gurdip 
Dhindsa. Mr. Speaker, Baldeep is a very active volunteer in the 
Sikh Society of Regina, and also a very active volunteer in 
blood services such as blood donation camps and stem cell 
camps. He has a great personality.  
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask all the members to join me in 
welcoming Baldeep and his father in their own Legislative 
Building. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to join with members in welcoming our guests from the North, 
all the guests that have been introduced. I especially want to say 
hello to the Raiders soccer team that’s up in the west gallery, 
Mr. Speaker. I had the chance to visit with them, and by 
coincidence I had quite a bit of Raiders memorabilia to use for 
pictures. Not sure how that happened. But we’re pretty proud of 
them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, though, I’d like to introduce to you and through 
you to members of the House, a guest that’s seated in your 
gallery. He is the president and owner of On Ice Management. 
His name is John Graham. He is a great friend to the province 
of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, for 12 years he’s been the 
entrepreneur responsible for bringing NHL [National Hockey 
League] hockey to the province of Saskatchewan, as well as a 
number of events. 
 
He’s got his own storied career in sports, Mr. Speaker, 
especially motorsports. He was a professional race driver, 
actually won Le Mans, which is, if you follow race car driving, 
that is a huge feat. There’s a few other trophies that seem more 
important to the rest of us that have gotten to know about them 
than to John, because that’s the kind of guy that he is. He just 
sort of puts his head down and gets on with the next project. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that brings me to this confirmation, that the 
next project was announced earlier today that we’re going to see 
some amazing European football or soccer at Mosaic Stadium 
on July 22nd when Valencia Spain FC [Football Club] plays 
New York Cosmos. And so this is going to be very high-level 
soccer for the province and at Mosaic, something we wanted to 
see at that stadium, where there could be other uses for it. So 
we’re grateful to John Graham for that promotion. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming John to 
the Legislative Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Requesting leave for an extended 
introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, it’s truly my honour to join with my colleagues 
here today to welcome the students from northern 

Saskatchewan to their Assembly. I had the opportunity to meet 
with some of you here today and valued that opportunity. But 
the words that have been expressed on the floor of this 
Assembly conveying our care your way, and our thanks and 
appreciation for how you live your lives and the commitment 
you take on and your hard work and what that means — not just 
for you and for your family but for our entire province — is 
something that I’d like to reiterate. So I’d like to extend to these 
northern leaders just thanks and encouragement from a very 
grateful opposition and a grateful province. 
 
[13:45] 
 
I’d like to join with the Premier in a quick shout-out to the 
Special Olympians that are here today, the Raiders soccer team. 
I know some of those characters up there, and they’re good 
guys. I see the former goaltender for the Rosemont Outdoor 
Hockey League sitting up there, a good friend, good person — 
cheers for the wrong NHL team. But it’s a pleasure to welcome 
them to their Assembly. 
 
And joining with the Premier, it’s really nice to join in 
welcoming John Graham here today, a remarkable story here in 
your own accomplishments in sport. And thank you so much for 
your relationship with Saskatchewan, and particularly bringing 
the NHL to Saskatchewan. Those are always special 
opportunities that we all take pride in. 
 
And of course we’re a province that exports incredible exports 
to the world — the finest agricultural products, potash, 
manufacturing goods. But we export NHL players to the world, 
Mr. Speaker, I think the largest per capita of anywhere else in 
the world. And it’s something that we have a high level of pride 
for. So thank you for bringing the game back to us, and we wish 
you well with the project that you’re currently engaged in. 
 
So I ask all members to join with me in welcoming these very 
fine guests to their Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Saskatoon. I 
do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. The people who have signed this petition are opposed 



2436 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2017 

to the Sask Party’s plan to scrap and sell off the Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company. They would like us all to know that 
STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company] provides a vital 
service to many seniors, workers, and families throughout the 
province, and that by scrapping STC out of the blue and without 
asking permission of the owners, the Saskatchewan people, the 
Sask Party is sending a clear sign about how little they care 
about protecting our Crowns, like SaskTel; and that STC helps 
to drive the economy with parcel services that serves farms and 
other businesses. Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately stop 
the plan to scrap and sell off the Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company, and to resume transportation 
services to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 
It is supported by many good leaders and thousands and 
thousands of signatures. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
again to present a petition opposing the Sask Party’s cuts to 
spiritual care, Mr. Speaker. Just a short while ago in committee, 
Mr. Speaker, the minister told me that spiritual care, it was 
inequitable across the province. So instead of enhancing this 
valuable service, Mr. Speaker, the government has chosen to 
cut it. The petitioners point out that in this last budget the Sask 
Party has eliminated funding for spiritual care services within 
our health care facilities. 
 
They point out that Saskatchewan will be the only province 
within Canada to not fund this support for patients, residents, 
and their families seeking wellness. They point out that the 
government, the Sask Party, hid their plan to scrap funding for 
spiritual care within health region facilities during the last 
election, which was just over a year ago, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And they point out that spiritual care responds to the spiritual 
and emotional needs of patients and residents, and provides a 
compassionate listening presence in times of crisis; and that 
spiritual care supports families, patients, and residents in 
making difficult decisions at a difficult time, Mr. Speaker; and 
that spiritual care can provide support for all families, patients, 
and residents in obtaining comfort and support regardless of 
their faith or belief, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
immediately reinstate the funding for spiritual care services 
in this province’s health region facilities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens of 
Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
stand in my place under the direction and order of the member 
from Prince Albert Northcote and her call for anyone in the 
Assembly to help present a petition from the city of bridge, 

Prince Albert, to help that community fight for a second bridge. 
 
And the prayer, Mr. Speaker . . . Before I get to the prayer, I 
wanted to read parts of the petition: that the need for a second 
bridge for Prince Albert has never been clearer than it is today. 
Prince Albert and all the communities north of Prince Albert 
and all the businesses that send people and products through 
Prince Albert require a solution. So the prayer reads as follows, 
that we ask: 
 

That the Sask Party government stop stalling, hiding 
behind rhetoric, and refusing to listen to the people calling 
for action, and begin immediately to plan and then quickly 
commence the construction of a second bridge for Prince 
Albert using federal and provincial dollars. 

 
And as we do day after day, week after week, and month after 
month, and page after page, Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to 
present yet another petition. And this particular petition has 
been signed by people from St. Louis and Prince Albert. And I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
another petition concerning pay equity here in Saskatchewan. 
And the undersigned residents of our province want to bring to 
our attention the following: that the citizens of this province 
believe in an economy powered by transparency, accountability, 
security, and equity; and that all women should be paid 
equitably; and that women are powerful drivers of economic 
growth and their economic empowerment benefits us all. 
 
And we know that the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives 
found that in Saskatoon in 2016, women earned on average 63 
cents for every dollar that a man makes, and in Regina women 
earned on average 73 cents for every dollar a man makes. 
According to the most recent StatsCan data, the national gender 
wage gap for full-time workers is 72 cents for every dollar a 
man makes. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan eliminate 
the wage gap between women and men across all sectors 
where the Government of Saskatchewan has jurisdiction, 
provide a framework under which this can be done within 
this term of the Assembly, and that Saskatchewan 
government call upon workplaces within Saskatchewan 
within the private sector to eliminate the wage gap between 
women and men. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition today come from 
the city of Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
provide a petition to increase the funding to Prince Albert 
mobile crisis. Due to a cut in funding, Prince Albert mobile 
crisis unit has had to close its doors during daytime hours, 
resulting in a loss of resource to people in distress. The daytime 



May 9, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2437 

closure of Prince Albert mobile has put stress on Prince Albert 
Police Service, Victoria Hospital, and other agencies who may 
not be trained and/or qualified to provide counselling and 
intervention services to clients. And, Mr. Speaker, we know that 
emergency services can happen at any time and we need to have 
those crisis intervention workers available to help provide 
services at those times. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to increase funding to 
Prince Albert mobile crisis unit so they may once again 
offer 24-hour emergency crisis service. 
 

Mr. Speaker, individuals across the province realize that this 
third-largest city in our province needs and deserves crisis 
intervention services 24 hours a day, seven days a week. But 
this particular petition was signed by individuals from Canwood 
and Prince Albert. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition in support of sexual abuse prevention curriculum in 
Saskatchewan. Those who have signed this petition wish to 
draw our attention to the following: to the fact that 
Saskatchewan has the second-highest rate of sexual child abuse 
in Canada; to the fact that victims of childhood sexual abuse are 
four times more likely to commit suicide; and that there is 
currently no comprehensive elementary or secondary 
curriculum regarding the prevention and reporting of sexual 
child abuse in Saskatchewan. 
 
They also want to remind us that, as a province, it’s our shared 
responsibility to protect children and youth, to educate them as 
every child has the right to be protected and to be safe. Mr. 
Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan take immediate and 
concrete action to develop and implement Erin’s law; and 
that such legislation would ensure that a comprehensive 
health education program be developed and implemented 
in grades pre-K through 12, along with training for school 
staff on the prevention of sexual child abuse. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions have come in from all across the 
province. Those that I present today are signed by people in 
Regina, Craven, and Balgonie. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition to ensure job security for victims of domestic 
violence. Saskatchewan has the highest rates of domestic 
violence amongst all provinces in Canada. One in three 
Canadian workers have been impacted by domestic violence, 
and for many of them the violence will follow them to their 
workplace. Victims of domestic violence should not be further 

victimized at work. Mr. Speaker, employers lose $77.9 million 
annually due to the direct and indirect impacts of domestic 
violence. 
 
Manitoba has already enacted legislation similar to our private 
member’s bill, and Ontario is on its way to enacting legislation 
that ensures job security for all survivors of domestic violence. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan enact 
legislation that requires all employers to provide a 
minimum of five paid workdays and a minimum of 17 
weeks unpaid work leave with the assurance of job security 
upon return for all survivors of domestic violence in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing the petition today come 
from Prince Albert, Big River, and Saskatoon. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition calling on 
the government to restore funding to post-secondary 
institutions. Mr. Speaker, students in this province pay among 
the highest tuition rates in the country for post-secondary 
education, and now we’ve seen a decrease in the funding for 
colleges and universities of over 5 per cent for all of those 
institutions. 
 
We’ve already seen that this is resulting in increased tuition at 
the University of Regina and job losses at Sask Polytechnic, at 
the University of Regina, and at the University of 
Saskatchewan. And we’ve also seen a decrease in the aid 
available for students who want to study, as well as the 
elimination of rebates on tuition and books. Mr. Speaker, all of 
these add up to less affordable, less accessible education — a 
very unnecessary barrier to an important investment in our 
future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately restore 
funding to Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions and 
stop the damaging cuts to our students. 

 
This petition is signed by individuals from Regina, Mr. 
Speaker. I do so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

Monument to Missing and Murdered 
Indigenous Women and Girls 

 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After three 
years in the making, the monument to missing and murdered 
indigenous women and girls has been unveiled outside the 
Saskatoon police station. I would like to especially thank the 



2438 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2017 

member from Saskatoon Fairview for her dedication and hard 
work on this monument. 
 
This project was completed in collaboration with families of 
missing and murdered women, Elders, public consultation, and 
Saskatchewan artist, Lionel Peyachew. Mr. Speaker, this 
monument was inspired by Carol Wolfe, whose daughter, 
Karina, went missing over six years ago. This monument will 
serve as a place of peace to remember those who have gone 
missing, as well as provide a healing space for communities to 
remember their loved ones. It serves as a beacon of hope to all, 
to show support and condolences for the families who have lost 
sisters, daughters, mothers, and friends. 
 
I feel hopeful that this monument will serve as an important 
reminder to the people of Saskatchewan to educate each other 
on the heartache too many communities are feeling after losing 
a loved one. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members join me in thanking 
the organizers and artists for creating this wonderful work of 
art, and thanking the Saskatoon Police Service for providing a 
space for this important piece of history to be displayed for all. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Prince Albert Canada 150 Mural 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Friday, 
February 24th, Prince Albert’s contribution to the Canada 150 
Mosaic mural art project was unrevealed. The event took place 
at the Alfred Jenkins Field House, where it will remain in 
display in the main lobby. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the last year, adults and children from Prince 
Albert skilfully and carefully hand painted hundreds of 4-inch 
tiles. These tiles were then placed so that they created a large 
mosaic mural. The mural is a beautiful display that depicts the 
buildings in our cities, First Nation teepees, children at play, 
and our forests and lakes, along with many other scenes. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the making of this mural is truly an example of a 
community uniting together to create something special. The 
tiles were given to people from all walks of life and from many 
cultural backgrounds. Public workshop sessions to paint the 
tiles were held at Mann Art Gallery and at the E.A. Rawlinson 
Centre. As well, tiles were brought to participants to paint at the 
P.A. [Prince Albert] Youth Residence, Prince Albert Collegiate 
Institute, YWCA [Young Women’s Christian Association] 
Regional Newcomer Centre, the Sask Polytech culture, identity, 
and diversity class; and Caleb Village Senior Centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in 
congratulating the organizers of the Prince Albert mosaic mural 
art project and all the people who painted the tiles which then 
made up the mural. And I invite all members to stop in at the 
Alfred Jenkins Field House to view the mural the next time they 
are in Prince Albert. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Westview. 

Children’s Hospital Fundraising Gala 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On April 28th, 
I, along with the Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport and the 
member for Saskatoon University had the opportunity to attend 
the Children’s Hospital’s Jeans and Jewels fundraising gala at 
TCU Place in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fundraising event provided guests with fine 
dining, and entertainment was provided by CCMA [Canadian 
Country Music Association] nominee, Tenille Arts. All 
proceeds raised through the event will go towards the various 
pediatric equipment needed at the new children’s hospital in 
Saskatoon. The children’s hospital will offer state-of-the-art 
facilities and equipment for facilities across our province by 
providing high-quality care, research, and innovation to our 
young patients. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the children’s hospital nearly 50 per cent 
complete, the generous donations and sponsors help contribute 
to this specialized facility, which is set to open its doors in 
2019.  
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I would like to send my sincere 
congratulations and thank the generous families, staff, sponsors, 
volunteers, and attendees for this event. The generous donations 
and sponsorships displayed at Jeans and Jewels Gala are a true 
testament of the people of Saskatchewan. Together we are 
working to support the improvement and quality of maternal 
and children’s health care in our province. Saskatchewan’s first 
children’s hospital will accommodate kids, moms-to-be, and 
families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in thanking 
everyone involved in making this night a success. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Islamic Association of Saskatchewan Open House 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On April 22nd I had 
the pleasure of attending the Islamic Association of 
Saskatchewan’s annual open house at the Copland Crescent 
mosque in Saskatoon, along with my colleague from Saskatoon 
Nutana. The IAS, the Islamic Association of Saskatchewan, is a 
non-profit organization that was first established in the 1970s. 
Today, under the umbrella of their three mosques, they 
accommodate a Muslim population of over 9,000, representing 
more than 50 nationalities. The community also has a full-time 
Islamic school that was established in 2000 and is currently 
providing schooling for 200-plus students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, each year the IAS holds their open house in order 
to foster understanding and respect between the diverse and 
multi-religious communities of Saskatoon and throughout 
Saskatchewan. The event encourages people from all 
backgrounds to tour the mosque, listen to the call to prayer, 
observe prayer, get their questions answered, and to learn about 
Islam and Muslim peoples. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year the IAS hosted over 750 guests at its 
open house. Its tremendous success can be attributed to the 



May 9, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2439 

wonderful relationships the association has fostered in 
Saskatoon. The IAS regularly reaches out directly to other faith 
groups and ensures that their association is open to dialogue and 
engagement with everyone in Saskatchewan, not only during 
their open house but throughout the year. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would like all members to join me today in 
thanking the Islamic Association of Saskatchewan for hosting 
such a wonderful event, and in recognizing their invaluable 
efforts to promote cultural and religious understanding in our 
province. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Carlton. 
 

Samuel McLeod Business Awards 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I had the 
honour of attending the 27th annual Samuel McLeod Business 
Awards gala, which was hosted by the Prince Albert and 
District Chamber of Commerce on April 27th. The event, which 
was held in the Ches Leach Lounge, showcased and celebrated 
the best in local business. Mr. Speaker, I had the honour of 
presenting two awards: the Community Involvement Award to 
Mr. Mikes Steakhouse, and the Business Transformation Award 
to Gene’s Cycle & Sports. 
 
Other award recipients of the evening were Patricia Weir with 
Lawton Partners for Female Business Leader of the Year, Bryan 
T. Rindal with BTR Financial Planning for Male Business 
Leader of the Year, Prince Albert Habitat for Humanity for the 
Non-Profit Organization Award, the Rusty Owl for the new 
business venture award, Travelodge Prince Albert for the 
Service Award, Gateway Mall for the Marketing Award, the 
Prince Albert Winter Festival Society for the Tourism Award, 
Whitney Darchuk with Pure Athletics for the Young 
Entrepreneur Award. And I am pleased to announce that 
Redhead Equipment took home Business of the Year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate all the winners and 
nominees and thank them for their contributions to our 
community. I’d also like to thank the chamber and sponsors for 
making the Samuel McLeod Business Awards possible. Thank 
you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 

Ground Broken at Global Trade Exhibition Centre 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There was excitement 
last week as ground was broken on the Global Trade Exhibition 
Centre at the Global Transportation Hub. The groundbreaking 
was attended by myself, the Minister of the Economy, the 
member from Moose Jaw North, the Regina Chamber of 
Commerce CEO [chief executive officer], and Brightenview 
CEO Joe Zhou, among many others. 
 
This $45 million facility will be build by Brightenview 
Development International and will include six buildings that 
will be a hub for imports from around the world with specific 
emphasis on Asia and exporting Saskatchewan goods to 
increasingly accessible global markets. The first two buildings 
are planned to be up and running by February of next year.  

Mr. Speaker, this will be a great addition to the GTH [Global 
Transportation Hub] and provides a unique opportunity for 
investment as the GTH has its foreign trade zone designation. 
Brightenview expects there to be around 300 businesses 
represented in the project when complete.  
 
With capital investment expected to be more than $200 million, 
Mr. Speaker, this is good news for the GTH, good news for 
Regina, and good news for Saskatchewan. I would invite all 
members to join me in acknowledging this investment. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
North. 
 

Increase in Saskatchewan Building Permits 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I’m extremely 
pleased to acknowledge that in Saskatchewan, year-over-year 
building permits jumped 13.2 per cent in March of this year. 
13.2 per cent is the highest increase among the provinces, well 
ahead of the 1.5 per cent posted nationally and the six provinces 
who recorded declines. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is growing, and more and more 
people are choosing to live, to work, and raise their families in 
this great province. It is clear that choosing to come and stay in 
Saskatchewan, with the population increasing over 17,000 in 
2016, an increase in residential permits by almost 27 per cent 
over March of last year, and one of the youngest populations in 
Canada, unlike under the NDP [New Democratic Party] 
government, when our province’s young people were leaving in 
droves to seek opportunities in our neighbouring provinces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, building permits totalling $151.2 million in March 
of 2017, which is up from $133.6 million in March of last year. 
Building permits are one of the best indicators for our growing 
economy. During this session, we have seen incredible growth 
in the population, in building permits, retail sales, wholesale 
trade, and manufacturing, which shows that our province and 
economy remain strong and resilient. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Before question period, I’d like to mention to 
the members that earlier today we were lucky enough to have a 
mock parliament in the Assembly with our students from the 
North. We had a mock question period that was . . . We had 
pretty good decorum. And we’re about to start question period, 
and I hope we will have as good decorum as what we had in the 
mock parliament. And you will see vigorous debate of ideas and 
policies, but we shouldn’t debate one’s motives and characters 
of hon. members in this Assembly. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Details of Land Transactions 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, irony is not dead in the 
Sask Party. Yesterday the Premier stood out in the rotunda. He 
huffed and he puffed and even wagged his finger at journalists, 
Mr. Speaker. He bragged he’d use money to sue the feds and he 
called on the Prime Minister to release documents. Mr. Speaker, 



2440 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2017 

of course Saskatchewan people need their government to stand 
up for them. Of course we need to be able to act to stop Ottawa 
from simply forcing their scheme on Saskatchewan. And of 
course we need government to be transparent. But come on. 
The Premier should step out of his glass house before he starts 
throwing stones. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party hiked taxes by a billion dollars this 
year alone, on top of their $1.5 billion carbon capture tax. And 
they’re tying the hands of our cities and towns from defending 
themselves against the Sask Party in court. And, Mr. Speaker, 
time and time again the Sask Party’s done all they can to hide 
and redact documents. 
 
To salvage even an iota of credibility, will the Premier release 
some of his hidden documents today, like his supposed 
appraisal that he claimed justified the wild sales price in his 
GTH scandal that wasted millions of dollars? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I always appreciate my 
hon. friend’s preambles, even if they’re not always of the 
non-fiction variety, Mr. Speaker. Let me just say, Mr. Speaker, 
I do agree in one point that he said. He said it’s important for all 
of us to stand up for Saskatchewan’s interests. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
very important. In fact I think it’s high time that our NDP 
opposition said very unequivocally that they would oppose the 
federally imposed carbon tax without qualifying it. 
 
We have the newly elected member for Meewasin who has said 
he very expressly supported Mr. Trudeau’s federally imposed 
carbon tax. We’ve had . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well 
we’ve got the . . . He said no; we’ve got the transcript, Mr. 
Speaker. There’s a recording of his response to the Trudeau 
carbon tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a potential leader over there, a leader of the 
NDP. I would say to my hon. friend across the way, the interim 
leader of the NDP, before he lays down this leadership mantle 
and turns it over to someone else to be elected by the NDP, he 
needs to be very clear on his position, the NDP’s position, 
against a federally imposed carbon tax in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Here’s the other parts of the preamble, Mr. Speaker, that were 
not correct. Mr. Speaker, as soon as there were concerns about 
the particular issue he raised, it was our government that turned 
the matter over to the Provincial Auditor. In fact we made 
available to the auditor every cabinet document. That doesn’t 
happen all the time, Mr. Speaker. Moreover, we have accepted 
the recommendations of the Provincial Auditor. 
 
And here’s the good news: we just heard in a member’s 
statement that land is selling out at the GTH, Mr. Speaker, at a 
value greater than what was paid. There haven’t been millions 
lost. There were millions invested that were approved by the 
NDP that we carried out, but the characterization by my hon. 
friend is incorrect again. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
 

Regina Bypass Project 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, so I guess the answer is 
no. How does this Premier honestly expect anyone to take him 
seriously about transparency when he refuses to be transparent 
himself, Mr. Speaker? 
 
You know, the Sask Party won’t even tell us how much of the 
$2 billion being spent on the bypass and its massive overrun 
will stay in Saskatchewan. They just signed a contract with a 
foreign conglomerate but tell us just to trust them. Sixty-seven 
per cent of the companies, they say, are from the Saskatchewan, 
but they won’t tell us how much of the work these companies 
got. They have no problem reading off a list of the companies 
from Saskatchewan, but when asked, when we asked the 
Minister of Highways to provide us a list of companies working 
on the project from out of province, he said we should ask 
SaskBuilds. So we asked SaskBuilds; they told us that they 
didn’t have it either. 
 
Mr. Speaker, instead of the grandstanding, would the Premier 
show some transparency and provide us with a list of 
companies from outside Saskatchewan who are working on the 
bypass and how much money they are taking out of 
Saskatchewan? This is about Saskatchewan jobs and taxpayers’ 
money. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, just to correct the record, 71 per cent of the businesses 
that are working on the bypass are from Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. Those are the numbers; that’s the information that we 
have from Regina Bypass Partners, Mr. Speaker. And as the 
member knows, the Government of Saskatchewan has signed a 
contract with the consortium to build the bypass, Mr. Speaker. 
They enter into all the contracts with respect to the subtrades 
that are working on that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now in committee we were asked what the number of 
companies were that were working from outside the province. 
Certainly anyone with any math skills can do that calculation. 
And we’ve asked, Mr. Speaker . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, they 
laugh. Mr. Speaker, if 71 per cent of the companies, Mr. 
Speaker, if 71 per cent of the companies, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Saskatchewan, it’s pretty easy to figure how many, what the 
percentage is of companies that are working outside 
Saskatchewan. 
 
[14:15] 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we have asked Regina building bypass 
partners for the information. I indicated in committee that we 
would reach out and ask for that information. We’ve asked for 
that information, Mr. Speaker. I don’t have it with me today, 
but if they provide it to us, Mr. Speaker, we’re happy to tell the 
House what that information is. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Public-Private Partnerships 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, no answer. Of course the 



May 9, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2441 

question was about how much money is flowing to these 
companies outside Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. So more 
grandstanding but no transparency. 
 
And you know, time and time again, we see the Sask Party 
putting the interests of their party and the wealthy and the 
well-connected ahead of Saskatchewan people. You know, what 
we see is the Sask Party’s mortgaged the future of our province 
with their costly schemes. Hundreds of millions of dollars, 
billions, in so-called partnerships with corporations who will 
collect money from Saskatchewan people for decades. 
 
Mr. Speaker, P3s [public-private partnership] let the Sask Party 
make announcements, cut ribbons, put on the full dog-and-pony 
shows, but again it’s Saskatchewan people who are being 
forced to pay the price, and they’re on the hook for decades, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
For example, the Swift Current long-term care centre is worth 
$108 million, but the Sask Party’s forcing Saskatchewan people 
to pay more than two and a half times that amount — $279 
million, Mr. Speaker. That’s on top of the hundreds of 
thousands of Saskatchewan dollars handed to companies with 
failed bids on this project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the real costs of Sask Party mismanagement 
mounting, will the Premier at least admit that the Sask Party has 
failed with their costly P3 schemes? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, in the member’s preamble 
he’s conveniently forgetting to note that part of the advantage 
of a P3 is that it contemplates maintenance throughout the life 
of the project, Mr. Speaker, at least for decades into the project, 
which is why, Mr. Speaker, an independent evaluation of the 
long-term care facility that he has raised indicates that it will 
save taxpayers $60 million. 
 
It’s also why that same independent analysis has demonstrated 
that with the P3 projects undertaken by this government the 
savings have been about a half a billion dollars, Mr. Speaker, 
over all of the P3 projects undertaken by the Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now he says, the Leader of the Opposition says, well these are 
just about ribbon cuttings and press releases. I’ll tell you what, 
Mr. Speaker, they’re actually about a brand new Saskatchewan 
Hospital in North Battleford. They’re about a bypass for the city 
that’s been needed. They’re about brand new schools in the 
province of Saskatchewan that have been needed because of 
population growth. Mr. Speaker, they’re about projects like a 
long-term care facility in this province. 
 
What we have seen, Mr. Speaker, in the last eight years is both 
a conventional and a P3 approach to building infrastructure. 
Why? Because this was ignored by members opposite for 16 
years, including their last four years when they were sitting on 
about $750 million and kept telling the people of North 
Battleford, you can wait. And he kept telling the people, those 
mental health patients that needed that hospital, you can wait. 
 
We took a different approach on this side. We used a P3, Mr. 

Speaker. They’re saving money, and they’re getting projects 
built finally in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Proposed Power Generation Facility 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, only this Premier could 
somehow try to pretend that he’s saving people money with a 
project that went from $400 million to $2 billion and counting, 
Mr. Speaker — outrageous. You know, it’s a bunch of bluster, 
Mr. Speaker. But they’re forcing Saskatchewan people to pay 
the price. 
 
And, you know, this is also true with the Sask Party and how 
they use the North. Today we heard the project at Black Lake is 
being put on ice. Mr. Speaker, before the election there was 
much fanfare about this project. They said it would create jobs 
and serve communities in the North. 
 
Like pulp and paper in Prince Albert and countless other 
projects in the North, the Sask Party used them for political 
theatre before the election. Now nothing, Mr. Speaker, with yet 
another project put on hold. But while the needs in the North for 
affordable and stable power supply remain and the need for jobs 
in the North remain, we need this Premier to act. Will this 
Premier share if he has any real plan to support northern jobs 
and to support the North? Because frankly his photo ops and 
empty promises aren’t cutting it. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, again we have to correct the 
preamble of the interim Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker. 
The project, the Regina bypass, Mr. Speaker, is three times 
larger than the original project that was envisioned. Mr. 
Speaker, the $400 million price tag for the bypass, the $400 
million price tag for the bypass, Mr. Speaker, is with respect to 
the southern section. We’ve added the eastern section, Mr. 
Speaker, with bypasses at White City and Balgonie, Mr. 
Speaker, and we’ve added the western section with the 
connection up to Highway 11, Mr. Speaker. That’s why the 
price is the price it’s at. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to the North, Mr. Speaker, 
SaskPower has not made a final decision with respect to the 
Tazi Twé project at Black Lake, Mr. Speaker. That decision is 
going to be made later on this year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, SaskPower will proceed in a responsible 
manner when it comes to the provision of electricity in the 
North, Mr. Speaker. The requirements for electricity in the 
North, Mr. Speaker, are declining because some of the work at 
the potash mines, Mr. Speaker. So the requirement to build the 
facility might not be there, Mr. Speaker. But the decision at 
SaskPower which will be made in a responsible, fiscally 
responsible manner, Mr. Speaker, will be left to the board of 
directors at the SaskPower corporation. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
 



2442 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2017 

Government Response to Shooting in La Loche 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
people of the North deserve better than that. It has almost been 
a year and a half since the La Loche school shooting. A year 
and a half, Mr. Speaker, and people are still suffering. With us 
today is Charlene Klyne. And Charlene was a substitute and one 
of seven people injured in shootings that left four other people 
dead. Charlene survived but she is still suffering. 
 
Minister after minister and the Premier said kind words and 
promised that victims would be appropriately supported, but 
sadly, Mr. Speaker, Charlene and others are still waiting. Mr. 
Speaker, they have been through enough already. So why is this 
government making these victims still battle with medical, 
financial, and WCB [Workers’ Compensation Board] issues? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Rural and 
Remote Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and it’s an 
honour to have these people in the Assembly today. And of 
course our thoughts and prayers continue to go with the 
communities and the families in La Loche and those that are 
impacted by that tragic day over a year ago, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I believe this government has been fairly responsive in the 
response to La Loche. I mean, a lot of the neighbouring regional 
health authorities, along with ministry supports, and others 
responded very quickly. The now Children’s Advocate was the 
person we had them touching base with on the ground to make 
sure that services that were needed were accessed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And since the shooting, before the shooting, Mr. Speaker, we 
had been up to the community to hear what some of the needs 
and what some of the wishes in the community were, Mr. 
Speaker, and we’re in a process of responding to those, as well 
as post the tragic event, Mr. Speaker, responding in a lot of 
different ways, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We know that mental health supports have been increased in the 
North, although we always know there’s more work to do. If 
there’s still a need, we’re going to continue to try and address 
those to the best of our ability and with those partners in the 
North as well as the regional health authorities, as well as 
increasing access to care, whether it’s psychiatric or other care, 
through increased clinics, increased psychiatrists, or whether 
it’s through remote presence technology, Mr. Speaker. We will 
continue to support them in any way we can. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, let me be clear: you have not 
responded to that school shooting crisis in La Loche. Let me be 
perfectly clear: the victims need more than words, Mr. Speaker. 
They have heard it all before. 
 
Earlier this year the Premier said, and I quote: 
 

We witnessed an unimaginable event in a place where 
young people go to learn and be nurtured by teachers and 
teacher-aides who have a passion for them. 
 

The Premier went on to say: 
 

We resolve once again as a province to walk with you, to 
remember the lives that were lost far too soon, and to turn 
the pain of loss into seeds of hope for the future. 

 
Mr. Speaker, kind words, promises, speeches, and tweets. Mr. 
Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan demand to know: when 
will the Sask Party take real action? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I know that with the 
community as a whole through the regional authorities, through 
the ministry, that Health has been very engaged in the events 
post the tragic events in La Loche. As well as I know that 
officials from WCB, Justice, Social Services, and others have 
met with the Klyne family. 
 
Services that have been provided, Mr. Speaker, include 
counselling, WCB wage placement, expenses for housekeeping, 
home renovations to accommodate loss of vision, travel for 
medical, rent in Saskatoon while they were also paying rent in 
La Ronge, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I do know the WCB wage replacement is based on prior years’ 
income, which were part time, but again our government 
introduced WCB coverage for substitute teachers. Under the 
NDP this would not have qualified, Mr. Speaker. And again, 
you know, there can’t be enough said for the community of La 
Loche and the tragedy that they suffered, but this government 
will continue to stand with our friends from La Loche. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, Charlene has done the best she 
can. She didn’t ask for this to happen to her and her family. 
Yes, she worked part-time as a substitute teacher, but her 
injuries from this school shooting are full-time and permanent. 
She has 13 pellets throughout her chest and neck. Doctors 
recommended massage therapy to remedy the pain, because 
surgery may be too dangerous. WCB won’t allow for those 
proper treatments. 
 
Charlene’s insurance, not government, offered her $50,000 for 
the loss of her eyesight. What price would the minister put on 
his eyesight? And how can the minister justify not ensuring — 
and I’ll say it again — how can the minister justify not ensuring 
that she gets the treatment that doctors have prescribed for her? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, words can’t adequately 
describe the pain and agony that somebody that’s gone through 
the tragedy of La Loche . . . The people that have lived there, 
the people that were hurt in that episode is something that . . . 
All we can do is stand in this House on both sides and say that 
we offer our deepest sympathy and our deepest condolences for 
what they’ve gone through. And we want to stand with them 
and work with them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I met with Workers’ Compensation several times 



May 9, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2443 

to ensure that everything that Ms. Klyne was entitled to was 
being provided. If there are other things that I’m not aware of, 
we’d be glad to look at it again and work with WCB to make 
sure that we’re doing everything that we can. 
 
I was in La Loche on February 27th. I was there with the 
ministers of Government Relations, Health, Justice, Social 
Services, and Advanced Education. We met with the mayor. 
We met with the town council. We met with teachers and staff. 
We want to continue to work with the people of La Loche to 
make sure that we do everything that we can to support them as 
they go forward. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Support for the Status of Women 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, on issue after issue, the Sask 
Party is failing to follow through on their words and actually 
serve Saskatchewan people. Yesterday when I asked the 
Minister for the Status of Women to address the fact that in 
April, 84 per cent of the newly unemployed in Saskatchewan 
were women, the Minister of the Economy stood up and tried to 
spin the problem away with his lines, and did not even mention 
women once in his answer. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when the Minister for the Status of Women 
spoke in scrums, she said that her office had no staff because 
the retirement of her former staff person came too quickly. Not 
too quickly, though, for it to have been pre-announced in this 
Chamber. The minister was well aware this retirement was 
coming, yet today this position remains empty. 
 
Mr. Speaker, from domestic violence to unemployment, women 
are such a priority for the Sask Party and the minister that, 
literally, no one can handle it. To be clear, Mr. Speaker, zero 
people are enough to meet their commitment. This is not a job 
that should be handled off the corner of the desks of other 
ministries. How can that minister honestly justify having no 
staff at all? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the 
member opposite for the question. You know, we had a 
long-standing dedicated staff member who retired at the end of 
April. Mr. Speaker, as the member opposite knows, I’m not 
involved in the personnel matters of our ministry. However I 
would say this, Mr. Speaker: the work of the Status of Women 
office and the work of advancing women across government is 
not the job of a single person, Mr. Speaker. Advancing the 
well-being of women in our community is everyone’s 
responsibility. 
 
[14:30] 
 
And I would say, Mr. Speaker, that I’m very proud of the record 
of this government in working on things like the interpersonal 
violence committee. I am proud of the record of this 
government in working on the domestic violence death review 
panel, Mr. Speaker. I am very proud of the work of this 
government in having 50 per cent of our Crown boards 

composed of women, Mr. Speaker. I’m very, very proud of our 
government in having the first Deputy Premier who’s a female, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think there’s a lot of good work that’s being done in our 
government. We’ve had members of our government — male 
members, in fact — who’ve advocated very strenuously, for 
example, for an emergency shelter for women in their 
community, Mr. Speaker. There is a lot of work still to do on 
this file, but it is not the responsibility of any one person. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Wait Times for Health Care 
 
Ms. Chartier: — I’m curious if the Status of Women Minister 
is saying that we don’t need a Status of Women office, Mr. 
Speaker, that we don’t need someone responsible for it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier made a commitment to the people of 
Saskatchewan that there would be no ER [emergency room] 
waits by March of 2017. Well add that to the list of Sask Party 
broken promises. When that was clear that they wouldn’t get 
there, they clawed it back to 60 per cent. Then the current 
Minister of Health said, and I quote: 
 

. . . it was an aggressive target. We’ve set aggressive 
targets in the past in other areas . . . We haven’t been 
scared to do that. We think generally if you want to make 
significant improvements, it’s important to set targets. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s look at their significant improvements. 
When it comes to ER waits, what progress has the Sask Party 
made? Well none, Mr. Speaker, none at all. 
 
To the minister: what is the point of setting targets if you refuse 
to commit the resources and do what it needs to actually meet 
those targets? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, as the member opposite said, 
I did say this government has never been scared to set targets. 
We think it’s important to do that. And certainly in some 
instances we don’t achieve them. That isn’t going to stop us 
from trying, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Earlier today I introduced some people from surgical centres, in 
the gallery. That was an initiative that we think paid huge 
dividends. We went in this province, Mr. Speaker, regardless of 
what the members opposite say, we went from the worst 
wait-list in the country, Mr. Speaker, to among the best. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are experiencing some fiscal issues right now, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s had an impact on how much we can do into 
surgical wait times. But we have had initiatives, Mr. Speaker: 
another $12 million in this budget that’s going towards 
accountable care teams and more announcements to come, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re going to continue to work in this direction. 
 



2444 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2017 

But, Mr. Speaker, I’d point out once again, the members 
opposite really don’t have much to crow about. Mr. Speaker, 
when they were in government, the worst wait times in the 
country. It’s not the case any more. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, this government went to 
committing to zero wait times to making zero progress, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s clear the minister doesn’t want to admit they 
failed. But let’s be clear: they failed. 
 
Here’s what his official said: “. . . in some cases we’re holding 
on to the baseline.” In short, Mr. Speaker, they’re mostly not 
going backwards. But the numbers don’t lie. In the last year in 
the province’s major hospitals, almost all of the wait times went 
up. The ministry itself is admitting they’ve lost ground. Mr. 
Speaker, people are waiting four and a half hours in an ER to 
see a doctor. And it’s clear that they have to wait much longer 
for the Sask Party to finally make good on a promise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how can the minister continue to stand by his lines 
when Saskatchewan families are being forced to wait in longer 
and longer lines for emergency medical care that they need? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
take this issue very seriously, and it’s not strictly a 
Saskatchewan phenomenon. As I’ve attended meetings of 
Health ministers from across the country on several occasions 
in the last 6 or 8 months, Mr. Speaker, ER wait times are a 
problem right across this nation. Mr. Speaker, there’s many 
reasons for it including demographics as baby boomers move 
through the system. Mr. Speaker, our population in 
Saskatchewan is increasing, has added strain to the system. 
There’s a number of reasons, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But again, we haven’t been scared to set targets, Mr. Speaker. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important to look . . . Even in this 
budget, in a fiscally difficult budget, we’ve taken action to deal 
with that — $12 million more towards initiatives that will help 
with that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have to tell you, the member opposite gets on her 
feet frequently and espouses, somehow, that the NDP record 
was better than what’s happening now, Mr. Speaker. Our record 
certainly isn’t better but I will stand on our record, Mr. Speaker, 
compared to the members opposite — 750 more doctors, Mr. 
Speaker, than when they were in government, over 3,000 nurses 
of every designation, more care aids. Mr. Speaker, we’ll take no 
lessons from the member opposite. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Minister of Energy and Resources 
on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — With leave to ask for permission to 
introduce a guest. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
to my colleagues, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased this afternoon 
to introduce a guest seated in the west gallery. Cliff Cullen is 
the Minister for Growth, Enterprise and Trade with the 
Government of Manitoba. He is here in Regina for the Energy 
Council of Canada conference. 
 
I had an opportunity to be a member of a panel this morning 
with Minister Cullen and as well as our colleague from Alberta 
at the council. And we had a very, I think — I hope people 
would have agreed — it was a very engaging dialogue amongst 
the ministers and then a very good meeting afterwards between 
the three of us. I look forward to working with Minister Cullen 
in our respective roles, and I would ask that all members would 
help me to welcome Minister Cliff Cullen to the Saskatchewan 
legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — With leave to respond, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On behalf 
of the official opposition, I want to welcome Minister Cullen 
from Manitoba to this Legislative Assembly, and certainly wish 
him the best of luck with the meetings ahead. And certainly the 
partnership between Manitoba and Saskatchewan on many 
different files, Mr. Speaker, has been long, productive, and 
enduring. So we wish him all the best with his meetings here 
today, but it’s a . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Except for the Bombers. 
 
Mr. McCall: — I’m reminded by my colleague, except for the 
Bombers, of course. But anyway, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the 
official opposition, I’d join in welcoming Minister Cullen to 
this Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — To ask for leave to introduce a guest, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In the 
east gallery, we want to introduce a gentleman that has been a 
very solid source of support, love, and compassion. Obviously 
with Charlene today and throughout her journey has been her 
family, but with her today is her son, Jeffery. 



May 9, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2445 

And I want to tell Jeffery on behalf of the opposition that we’re 
very, very thankful for his compassion and his kind-heartedness 
and his support for his mom in her trying times, and that it’s 
always important to recognize a family also suffers through this 
tragic challenge that they have encountered as a family. So I 
want all members of the Assembly to welcome Mr. Jeffery 
Klyne to his Legislative Building. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, leave to respond. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the member opposite in welcoming these people to their 
legislature today. I think for most of us, the tragedy that befell 
the community of La Loche and the people that were there is 
something that we can only offer our sympathy to, and in 
particular to Ms. Klyne. And I would say welcome, and I hope 
we’re able to continue to work and be helpful to her. And to her 
son, we thank him for being a great family member and looking 
after his mother. So thank you, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of all of 
us. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the 
Standing Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 43, The 
Pipelines Amendment Act, 2016 with amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the Minister of 
Energy and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 
the bill and its amendments be now read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bills on Bill No. 
43, The Pipelines Amendment Act, 2016 and that the bill and its 
amendments be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Chair. 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Again I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 55 . . . 
 
The Speaker: — For all members, we didn’t move all of the 
amendments before going on to the next report from the 

committee. We’ll continue on with the amendments. 
 
So when shall the amendments be read a first time? I recognize 
the minister. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 

Bill No. 43 — The Pipelines Amendment Act, 2016 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — I move that the amendments be now 
read a first and second time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that the 
amendments be now read a first and second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 
reading of the amendments. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 43 — The Pipelines Amendment Act, 2016 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 43, The Pipelines Amendment Act, 2016 be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. All those in favour? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — Third reading. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 
Standing Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 55, The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Economy - Audit Assessments) 
Amendment Act, 2017 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the Minister of 
Energy and Resources. 
 



2446 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2017 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — I will try to keep this simple, Mr. 
Speaker. I request leave to waive consideration in Committee of 
the Whole on this bill and that the bill be now read the third 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bills on Bill No. 
55 and the bill be now read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Energy 
and Resources. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 55 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Economy—Audit 
Assessments) Amendment Act, 2017 

 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — I move that the bill be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — All those in favour say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 
Standing Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 56, The 
Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2017 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on bills? I recognize the Minister of 
Energy and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 
the bill be now read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bills that Bill No. 
56, The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2017 
without amendment and that the bill be now read a third time. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Energy 
and Resources. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 56 — The Oil and Gas Conservation 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — I move that the bill be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 56 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 
facilitate the work of committees this afternoon, I move that this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that this Assembly do now 
adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly now stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:45.] 
 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2433 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2433 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2433 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2433 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2434 
  McCall ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2434, 2444 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2434 
  Belanger ......................................................................................................................................................................... 2434, 2444 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2434 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2435 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2435 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2444 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2445 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2435 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2435 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2436 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2436 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2436 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2436 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2437 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2437 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2437 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Monument to Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women and Girls 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2437 
 Prince Albert Canada 150 Mural 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2438 
 Children’s Hospital Fundraising Gala 
  Buckingham ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2438 
 Islamic Association of Saskatchewan Open House 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2438 
 Samuel McLeod Business Awards 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2439 
 Ground Broken at Global Trade Exhibition Centre 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2439 
 Increase in Saskatchewan Building Permits 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2439 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Details of Land Transactions 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2439 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2440 
 Regina Bypass Project 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2440 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2440 
 Public-Private Partnerships 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2440 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2441 
 Proposed Power Generation Facility 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2441 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2441 
 Government Response to Shooting in La Loche 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2442 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2442 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2442 
 Support for the Status of Women 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2443 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 2443 
 Wait Times for Health Care 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2443 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2443 



 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on the Economy 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 2445 
FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 Bill No. 43 — The Pipelines Amendment Act, 2016 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2445 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 43 — The Pipelines Amendment Act, 2016 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2445 
 Bill No. 55 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Economy—Audit Assessments) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2446 
 Bill No. 56 — The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2017 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2446 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


