


















































November 28, 2017 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 19A  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 28, 2017, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Nicole Sarauer 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Hon. Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Hon. Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 
Vacancies — Kindersley, Melfort 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 47; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 2 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3145 
 November 28, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I would request leave for an 
extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
colleagues for the leave. Mr. Speaker, seated in your gallery this 
afternoon is someone that is a very special guest of the 
Assembly and yet, at the same time, really not a guest at all. 
She is the former MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 
for Swift Current who served in the legislature from 1982 until 
1991. She’s joined by her daughter, Sherry, and her son-in-law, 
Ron. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can remember in grade 11 at the Swift Current 
Comprehensive High School going to an all-candidates forum 
that was held there in the student lounge at the time. And I hope 
I get the roster of candidates right. Pat Smith was there 
representing the Progressive Conservatives as a candidate for 
election. My science teacher, Spencer Wooff, was representing 
the New Democratic Party. I think the woman representing the 
Liberal Party was Pat White. And then there was a Western 
Canada Concept candidate by the name of Henry Banman who 
was running. And, Mr. Speaker, I can remember being 
thoroughly impressed by what Pat Smith had to say and how 
she said it and how she communicated with students. 
 
Of course that spring, in late April, she went on to become the 
elected member of the Legislative Assembly for Swift Current 
constituency. And then shortly thereafter, she was one of the 
first two women cabinet ministers in the history of the province. 
I think it’s surprising for some that it took until 1982 for that to 
happen but her, along with Joan Duncan, they were appointed 
to the provincial cabinet by then Premier Devine. She was 
accustomed though to blazing trails because she was also the 
first woman to ever serve as president of the SSTA, what was 
then known as the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association, 
as well. 
 
And in this building, she served as the minister of Social 
Services, the minister of Education. She was for a time the 
minister of Energy and Mines. She was minister of Urban 
Affairs. She was minister of Culture, Multiculturalism and 
Recreation. She was minister responsible for the Status of 
Women. And then later on in her elected career, she became the 
deputy premier of the province of Saskatchewan, the first 
woman deputy premier, and I think, I think the only woman 
deputy premier in the history of the province. Maybe I could do 

something about that here in the next number of weeks. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I had the great honour of serving as her 
summer student, and I learned from her directly, Mr. Speaker, 
the importance of hard work. But also hers was an example of a 
sense of humour and great integrity, which she maintained 
through her entire time as an elected official and then well 
beyond. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m also honoured to report to the House that 
she’s been a mentor to me when I first ran for office in 1999 as 
a nominated candidate. She was a great source of advice and 
counsel, and then thereafter as well she provided advice. And 
so, Mr. Speaker, we are . . . I’m very fortunate to count Pat as a 
friend and a mentor. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s just great to see her 
and Sherry and Ron here in the Assembly and to have a visit 
with Pat Smith. 
 
I just want to say on behalf of the government, but also on 
behalf of a grateful province, we have a lot to be thankful for in 
terms of Pat Smith. She was a leader for this province in 
historic terms, contributed much not just to Swift Current 
constituency but to all of Saskatchewan. And I’d ask all 
members to please join with me in welcoming her back to her 
Legislative Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d just 
like to quickly join with the Premier in welcoming Pat Smith 
and family to her Legislative Assembly. Welcome back. And 
certainly to get the drop on someone like Spencer Wooff, your 
sense of humour must have been, you know, right up there, 
because certainly I’d known Spencer Wooff and he’s a heck of 
a human being. 
 
But certainly it’s good to see you here today at your Legislative 
Assembly, and good to see the Premier being afforded this 
chance to say thank you to someone who meant a lot to his life 
and his political life, and certainly someone that did a lot for 
this province in blazing those trails. So on behalf of the official 
opposition, I’d like to join with the Premier in welcoming Pat 
Smith to her Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, I’d like to introduce a special guest seated in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker. I can hardly see her here, but I know she’s 
there: Michelle Okere.  
 
Mr. Speaker, Michelle is the chapter services manager for 
Saskatchewan for Mothers Against Drunk Driving, Mr. 
Speaker. And I know she works very hard for this cause, and 
I’ve had a lot of dealings with Michelle. We’ve spoke at many 
events together, Mr. Speaker, one just a week or so ago in 
Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker, when we were kicking off the Red 
Ribbon campaign in Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Impaired driving is something . . . I know she’s forefront in the 
battle against impaired driving, as I am, Mr. Speaker, and it is 



3146 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2017 

always a pleasure to see her and speak with her and to join in 
events that are supporting Mothers Against Drunk Driving, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like all members to join me in 
welcoming Michelle to her Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with the 
minister in welcoming Michelle Okere to her Legislative 
Assembly and to thank her on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan, and in fact people across this country, for the 
work that her organization has done in, first of all, bringing the 
issue of drinking and driving to the fore and their consistent and 
thoughtful lobbying in reducing the numbers of drinking and 
driving. 
 
Of course in Saskatchewan, we have one of the highest rates of 
drinking and driving, and we will need many voices such as 
theirs in order to properly address this problem. So I invite all 
members to join me in welcoming Michelle to her Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too would 
like to join with the members opposite and the Minister 
Responsible for CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan] to welcome Michelle to her Legislative 
Assembly. Michelle is a constituent of mine, but Michelle is 
also a very good friend. 
 
I’m so pleased that Michelle has taken on the role with Mothers 
Against Drunk Driving, and she will do an absolutely incredible 
job. Michelle has, in any job that she has undertaken, she has 
always risen to the challenge and has done a superb job to 
ensure that, whatever cause that she is championing, she does to 
the best of her ability. And we all benefit from her hard work 
and her commitment to our community. So thank you very 
much, Michelle, and welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you, in the west gallery, some 
representatives from Diabetes Canada seated here today. I’ll 
introduce them specifically; I’ll ask them to just give a wave as 
they get introduced. With us is Brie Hnetka, regional director in 
Saskatchewan; a good friend of mine along with her family, 
Melissa Johnson, north volunteer regional Chair, and Tim and 
the kids; Bob Lydiate, a national advocacy committee member; 
Don Henricksen, south volunteer delegate; and David Thieme, 
north volunteer delegate. Mr. Speaker, also here with this group 
are more than 20 volunteer advocates from across 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Diabetes Canada works tirelessly to raise awareness about 
diabetes and improve the health of people living with this very 
serious condition. The Minister of Health and I met with Brie 
and Melissa earlier today, and we look forward to seeing them 
again. I look forward to seeing them again tonight at the 

reception. I also took part in a diabetes risk assessment today 
and, Mr. Speaker, and I’m happy to report low-risk. So aside 
from the other challenges I have, that’s pretty good. 
 
As part of the Diabetes Awareness Month, Mr. Speaker, the 
campaign this year, Diabetes Canada urges Canadians to take 
the CANRISK test to find out their risk of type 2 diabetes. I ask 
all members to join me in welcoming them to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the minister opposite in welcoming the folks today here from 
Diabetes Canada, Ms. Hnetka and all the volunteer advocates 
who have all been touched by diabetes in one way or another 
and want to come here and help us as legislators understand the 
issues facing those living with diabetes and what we can do as 
legislators to better support them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also had the opportunity, as a few members on this side of the 
House did as well, to do the risk assessment, which was very 
much appreciated. I’m glad to report that at this point in time 
my risk is low but, as it was pointed out, I should come back 
and do it next year as well because things are always changing 
in our life. 
 
But I just want to thank those folks with Diabetes Canada for 
the support that you provide to those living with diabetes, the 
advocacy that you do, and the research. That’s a big component 
of Diabetes Canada too, to find a cure. 
 
So with that I’d like to ask all members to join me in 
welcoming these folks to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Makowsky: — Thanks a lot, Mr. Speaker. In the 
west gallery you’ll find a fine group of grade 12 students from 
F.W. Johnson Collegiate. Their teacher is Mr. Scott McKillop. 
He’s well known around here, a frequent visitor. And he always 
has his students well armed with great questions for their MLA, 
which I look forward to after routine proceedings. So I ask all 
members to welcome this group of students here this afternoon. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
privilege to introduce two people seated in your gallery, Wes 
and Candace Topal who are here today. It’s one of their first 
visits I think since they’ve recently retired, both of them: 
Candace from SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] and 
Wes from a business that he ran in Balcarres. They’re from Fort 
Qu’Appelle of course in the constituency of Indian 
Head-Milestone.  
 
But the Topal name may be familiar to a few members that 
were elected pre-2016, I guess, or ’15. Their son Dylan was a 
Page in the legislature for a number of years, or for one year I 
guess, and served quite well. He liked the building so much that 



November 28, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3147 

now he’s working in the building for the Minister of Social 
Services, was a ministerial assistant, and now is the comms 
director in that office. So I’d like all members to welcome Wes 
and Candace to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join 
with the member from Indian Head-Milestone in welcoming 
Wes and Candace to the Legislative Assembly. Wes and I go 
back a long ways. We worked together in the beautiful city of 
Swift Current for a financial institution and made some good 
memories back then, I think you can say Wes, probably. And 
dare I say it was in the early ’70s. But as the member has 
already indicated, Wes is retired from a very successful 
fibreglass vault business in the province and Candace from her 
employ at SGI. And they’re certainly enjoying their opportunity 
for retirement, travelling around the province and enjoying each 
other’s company. So everyone, please welcome Wes and 
Candace. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you I would like to acknowledge Bill Gowen sitting in the west 
gallery. Give us a wave, Bill. Bill was my very affable and 
competent campaign manager for the 2016 election and he is a 
very good friend. He is here today as a volunteer with Diabetes 
Canada, so please help me welcome him to his Legislative 
Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition calling for critical supports for survivors of 
domestic violence. Those who signed the petition would like to 
bring to our attention the following: Saskatchewan has the 
highest rate of domestic violence amongst the provinces. 
Employers should be obligated to reasonably accommodate 
survivors of domestic violence in the workplace. Employees 
who are survivors of domestic violence should be able to take a 
leave of absence from their employment without penalty. And 
Saskatchewan must do much more to protect survivors of 
interpersonal violence. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Legislative Assembly to pass legislation providing critical 
support for survivors of domestic violence. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is what we’ve called for in our bill, private 
member’s Bill 605. We’re very hopeful that the Minister of 
Justice and his entire caucus will either pass that private 
member’s bill or steal it from us and table it as a government 
bill. 
 
Those who have signed this petition today come from Regina. I 
do so present. 
 
[13:45] 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 
to rise today and present a petition from citizens who are 
opposed to the federal Trudeau Liberal government’s decision 
to impose a carbon tax on the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier has asked all of us, all elected 
representatives from both sides of the House, to stand up for 
Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer as follows: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
take the following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on our 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Leask, 
Shellbrook, Canwood, Big River, and Stump Lake. I do so 
present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand 
in my place today to present a petition on behalf of the fine 
folks of the town of Balgonie because as we say every day, 
someone has to stand up for them. Mr. Speaker, the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Take the necessary steps and actions to leave the west-in, 
west-out driving access for vehicles into and out of 
Balgonie at the intersection of Highway No. 1 and Main 
Street. 

 
And they also respectfully request that the Government of 
Saskatchewan put up a locked gate on the apron between 
the eastbound lanes and westbound lanes of Highway No. 
1 and Balgonie’s Main Street intersection. This gate would 
allow emergency services access to the eastbound lanes of 
Highway No. 1 at the Main Street, Balgonie intersection, 
but would not allow the public access to cross the east- and 
westbound lanes. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as we do every day, we present petitions 
from all throughout the region that are concerned about 
Balgonie’s loss of access in and access out, Mr. Speaker, and 
page after page, from town after town. And the people that have 
signed this petition, or this particular page of the petition, are 
from Pilot Butte and Balgonie. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m rising today to 
present a very important petition regarding the community of 
Buffalo Narrows in the northern part of the province. The 
people who have signed this petition are residents of the village 
of Buffalo Narrows, and they are very concerned about some 
actions this government took earlier when they closed the 
Buffalo Narrows Correctional Centre. 
 



3148 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2017 

It’s had a very significant impact on their community, on the 
individuals who were placed in centres, left 15 people out of 
work. And of course that would have a huge financial impact on 
the families and the local businesses. It also hurt the elders 
within the community, Mr. Speaker, who were able to access 
the labour from the inmates to help them do odd jobs, and that’s 
a really significant loss for those elders. 
 
The closure of the centre hurt families of the inmates, while 
they were learning new skills while working with skilled 
employers to get employment upon release. And of course the 
families were able to visit the inmates as well, which is an 
important part of the reconciliation process, Mr. Speaker, and 
the rehabilitation process. 
 
So I will read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
immediately reopen the Buffalo Narrows Correctional 
Centre to better our community for future generations to 
come. 

 
I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition to get big money out of Saskatchewan politics. The 
undersigned residents of Saskatchewan want to bring to our 
attention the following: that Saskatchewan’s outdated election 
Act allows corporations, unions, and individuals and even those 
outside the province to make unlimited donations to our 
province’s political parties; and that over the past 10 years, the 
Saskatchewan Party has received $12.61 million in corporate 
donations. Of that, $2.87 million come from companies outside 
of this province. 
 
And we know that the federal government and the provinces of 
Alberta, Manitoba, Quebec, Nova Scotia, and now British 
Columbia have moved to limit this influence and level the 
playing field by banning corporate and union donations to 
political parties. And, Mr. Speaker, we know that Saskatchewan 
politics should belong to Saskatchewan people. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party to overhaul Saskatchewan’s campaign 
finance laws to end out-of-province donations, to put a ban 
on donations from corporations and unions, and to put a 
donation limit on individual donations. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from the city 
of Regina. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to stand 
in my place today to provide a petition for a second bridge for 

Prince Albert. The individuals who signed this petition wish to 
bring to your attention the following: that the Diefenbaker 
bridge in Prince Albert is the primary link that connects the 
southern part of the province to the North; and that the need for 
a second bridge for Prince Albert has never been clearer than it 
is today. 
 
Prince Albert, communities north of Prince Albert, and 
businesses that send people and products through Prince Albert 
require a solution; that municipal governments have limited 
resources and require a second bridge to be funded through 
federal and provincial governments and not a P3 [public-private 
partnership] model; and that the Saskatchewan Party 
government refuses to stand up for Prince Albert and this 
critical infrastructure issue. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan ask that the 
Saskatchewan Party government stop stalling, hiding 
behind rhetoric and refusing to listen to the people calling 
for action, and to begin immediately to plan and then 
quickly commence the construction of a second bridge for 
Prince Albert using federal and provincial dollars. 
 

The individuals that signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, come 
from the community of Prince Albert. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
calling on the government to restore funding to post-secondary 
institutions. These citizens wish to bring to your attention that 
the Sask Party is making students and their families pay for 
Sask Party financial mismanagement; that Saskatchewan 
students already pay the second-highest tuition fees in Canada; 
that this budget cuts 36.8 million from post-secondary 
education and 6.4 million from technical institutions; that 
funding for the Saskatchewan Student Aid Fund and 
scholarships have been cut by 8.2 million; and that the Sask 
Party has broken a 2016 election promise by cancelling their 
first home plan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately restore 
funding to Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions and 
stop the damaging cuts to our students. 

 
The people signing this petition are from Saskatoon, Mr. 
Speaker. I do so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 
 

Diabetes Awareness Month 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
November is Diabetes Awareness Month in Saskatchewan. I 
would like to take a moment to draw attention to this very 
serious disease, and the impact it has on patients and family. 



November 28, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3149 

Each year, over 200,000 Canadians are diagnosed with diabetes. 
This amounts to one in 12 Canadians living with type 1 or 
type 2 diabetes. Mr. Speaker, living with diabetes requires a 
great deal of care and attention. For many, this is made possible 
by the love and support of family and friends. 
 
This year the focus on Diabetes Awareness Month is on 
prevention and early detection of prediabetes and type 2 
diabetes. Diabetes costs individuals 5 to 15 years of life 
expectancy. It contributes to over 30 per cent of strokes, 40 per 
cent of heart attacks, and 70 per cent of all non-traumatic 
amputations, as well as being the leading cause of blindness. 
Early detection is key and education and awareness are crucial. 
Maintaining health and wellness is also important as it can often 
prevent prediabetes and type 2 diabetes, and plays a significant 
role in diabetes management. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to recognize Diabetes Canada for the 
work they do to fight diabetes and support people living with 
this very serious disease. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 

Saskatoon Advocate Recognized for 
Contributions to Gender Equality 

 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House today to 
recognize Betsy Bury, one of the six recipients of the 2017 
Governor General’s Award in Commemoration of the Persons 
Case, recognizing Canadians who advance gender equity. 
 
Betsy Bury is one of those people who has dedicated her life to 
supporting social justice initiatives, especially those 
surrounding women’s rights and access to health care services. 
It’s my honour to recognize her today for her continued work to 
advance equality and social justice in this province. 
 
After serving in the women’s division of the Royal Canadian 
Air Force, Betsy was inspired by Tommy Douglas to fight for 
medicare. In 1962 in response to the doctors’ strike against 
universal health care, she helped to establish the Saskatoon 
Community Clinic, a medical co-operative providing 
comprehensive prevention-focused care, and a place where I’ve 
been honoured to have had the opportunity to practise. 
 
Betsy served as the member relations and health ombudsman 
for the clinic and also served on the board of the Saskatoon 
Family Planning Centre and helped launch Saskatchewan’s first 
Planned Parenthood clinic, which is now the Saskatoon Sexual 
Health Centre. 
 
Since her retirement in 1988, Betsy has continued to be an 
outspoken advocate for increasing women’s involvement in 
politics. She’s also actively involved in the Saskatoon branch of 
Veterans Against Nuclear Arms, and along with her late 
husband, John, was awarded the Joanna Miller Peace prize in 
2014. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all the members to join me in congratulating 
Betsy Bury on her Governor General’s Award and thanking her 
for her dedication to social justice and gender equality. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 
 

New Computerized Tomography Scanner 
in Lloydminster 

 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise in 
the House today and announce that the new computed 
tomography scanner has been installed in the Lloydminster 
Hospital. The new 160-slice CT [computerized tomography] 
scanner is providing more detailed information for diagnostics 
and direction of treatment while reducing radiation exposure for 
patients. It is quieter and less intrusive than the previous 
16-slice CT while allowing for faster and more complex scans. 
Even though it’s only been 12 years since the previous scanner 
was installed, the technology has changed significantly to 
improve patient care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when using a CT scan, it can be for urgent matters 
or a step toward identifying the exact nature of an illness or 
injury. Having this new equipment will provide the best service 
to both patients and medical staff who are happy and excited 
about the new CT scanner, which is why, Mr. Speaker, this 
investment is so crucial. 
 
As a government, we have contributed $600,000 towards 
replacing the previous scanner with a safer, modern, and more 
enhanced unit. I would like to thank the Lloydminster Region 
Health Foundation, as they have committed to fundraise a 
matching contribution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members please join me in 
celebrating the new CT scanner at the Lloydminster Hospital. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Regina Philanthropist Invested Into the 
Order of Canada 

 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to recognize 
a constituent of Regina Lakeview, a passionate advocate for the 
arts. Ms. Jacqui Shumiatcher was recently awarded the Order of 
Canada. Mr. Speaker, Jacqui Shumiatcher has made a 
tremendous impact on the Regina arts community. Jacqui has 
served Regina as a business person, a philanthropist, and a 
patron of the arts. 
 
Born in Vendin-le-Vieil, Pas-de-Calais, France in 1923, she 
emigrated to Canada in 1927. Jacqui worked as a teacher at 
Sacred Heart Academy along with other schools before she 
married Morris, a well-known Saskatchewan lawyer, while he 
was counsel to Tommy Douglas. 
 
Jacqui has been commended for her legendary philanthropic 
work. For decades she has helped develop and financially 
support cultural, artistic, and social organizations. Until 2004 
she did this work alongside her late husband, Morris. Jacqui has 
contributed time and financial support to institutions such as the 
MacKenzie Art Gallery, the University of Regina, and the 
Regina Symphony Orchestra. Beyond this, she has also donated 
many works of art. In 2014 she gave 1,310 pieces of art to the 
University of Regina, a collection valued at over $3 million. 



3150 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2017 

Mr. Speaker, the Order of Canada is one of our country’s 
highest civilian awards. Established in 1967, it recognizes 
community dedication, service, and outstanding achievement. 
Ms. Shumiatcher had this to say when asked about receiving the 
award:  
 

It’s a wonderful feeling . . . I’m thrilled. And that’s not 
going to be the end for me. I’m going to keep going, 
because 94 years old isn’t . . . [that] old. 

 
She is truly an inspiring woman, Mr. Speaker, and I ask all 
members to join me in recognizing Jacqui Shumiatcher, 
recipient of the 2017 Order of Canada. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 

Physician Named Cameco Chair in Indigenous Health 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, earlier 
this fall I had the pleasure of bringing greetings to the 
announcement ceremony of the new Cameco Chair in 
Indigenous Health. After nearly a decade search across the 
nation, Dr. Alexandra King was appointed as the Chair. Dr. 
King is from the Nipissing First Nation in Ontario and was 
educated at Simon Fraser University. As a specialist of internal 
medicine, she is well suited for this role. Dr. King will serve as 
the Chair for five years. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the goal of this new position is to improve health 
outcomes for indigenous people in Saskatchewan. The gap in 
health outcomes for indigenous people persists, and it is 
important for the federal and provincial governments to 
continue to work together with First Nations and Métis 
communities to address it. The path forward involves making 
health care more culturally responsive and accessible for First 
Nations people, and the Cameco Chair in Indigenous Health is a 
step in this direction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank Cameco for their donation of $1.5 
million to the Royal University Hospital to make this position a 
reality. I’d also like to thank the Royal University Hospital 
Foundation and the University of Saskatchewan’s College of 
Medicine for making this recruitment possible. And finally, I’d 
like to ask that all members of this Assembly join me in 
wishing Dr. King the very best in her new role. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 
 

North Battleford Vikings Win 
3A Provincial Championship 

 
Hon. Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
earlier this month the North Battleford Comprehensive High 
School Vikings won the 3A provincial football championships 
on a very cold November afternoon. They defeated the Yorkton 
Regional High School Raiders by a score of 14-7. Running back 
J.T. Lamb scored both the Vikings’ touchdowns, and their 
defence performed exceptionally well, propelling them to their 
first provincial championship since 1995. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the Vikings also had the experience of winning 
the championship at home in front of family, friends, and 
alumni. Alumnus Bob Bartkewich, who had put together a 
tailgate party prior to the game, was credited as a factor for the 
fantastic turnout as the bleachers were full and fans filled both 
sidelines. Head coach Mike Humenny also credited the crowd 
with making the game so memorable. Mr. Speaker, this team 
has 25 grade 12 students, and Coach Humenny felt their 
experience played a significant role in their victory, specifically 
when facing the sub-zero weather that had a substantial impact 
on both teams’ offences. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s incredibly rewarding to see all of these 
graduating students, who have put so much commitment and 
passion into their sport, go out on top. I’d also like to 
acknowledge Coach Humenny and all of the coaching staff on 
all of their work. This coaching staff is one of the best in the 
province, proving it once again with this victory. The Vikings 
football program has been a remarkable one for so many years, 
and it’s due to the dedication of coaches and players like this 
year’s team. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of everyone in this Assembly, I’d like to 
congratulate Coach Humenny and all members of the North 
Battleford Comprehensive Vikings on their impressive season. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 
 

Saskatchewan Highly Ranked in Investment 
Attractiveness Survey 

 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to be able 
to announce that Saskatchewan has ranked second in Canada 
and seventh globally for the most attractive jurisdiction for oil 
and gas investment by Fraser Institute. Mr. Speaker, the survey 
notes pressure such as pipeline capacity which weighed on the 
rankings of Canadian jurisdictions. Those are pressures, I would 
note, that the federal NDP [New Democratic Party] has 
campaigned on making even worse. Policies matter, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It is interesting to note that the two NDP provinces to our west 
now rank the least attractive in Canada. British Columbia, 
which just elected an NDP government, went from 39th 
globally to 76th, just behind Myanmar and Tanzania — but still 
ahead of Angola and Uganda — because policies matter, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
NDP Alberta is following in their footsteps. They now rank 
33rd globally and are the second worst in Canada. That was the 
group the Saskatchewan NDP said they were watching and 
cheering every step of the way. Investment perception in that 
province has dropped quickly, Mr. Speaker, because policies 
matter. 
 
We know members opposite aren’t very comfortable with this 
sector of the economy. We know that some members opposite 
support the Leap Manifesto, which calls for the end of fossil 
fuels altogether. Policies matter because they bring investment 
and jobs to our province. A reminder to the members opposite: 
policies matter because people matter. 
 



November 28, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3151 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

SaskPower Project and Consultation With First Nations 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, despite the rhetoric and their 
talking points, the Sask Party’s actions and their unscripted 
comments make it clear that they are walking further and 
further away from our province’s path toward reconciliation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the chief of Cumberland House Cree Nation, 
Chief Chaboyer, is here today in the gallery. He and his council 
are concerned because SaskPower has combined two projects in 
the North and are looking to license them in perpetuity. Mr. 
Speaker, these licences are expiring, yes, and the First Nation is 
not opposed to these projects. They’re asking for nothing more 
than their treaty rights and for the government to respect their 
duty to consult. But the government is sitting back and letting 
SaskPower ram forward with this never-ending licence without 
any proper consultation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, has the government learned nothing from the past? 
Will the Premier step in and ensure proper consultation on this 
important project? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We 
place a high degree of importance and priority in terms of 
partnerships with First Nations and Aboriginal communities and 
individuals in the North and across the province. That would be 
true in respect of their dealings with a Crown corporation. It’s 
also true in terms of the duty to consult which this government 
has taken very seriously and implemented to ensure that that 
consultation process is both respectful and meaningful, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
With respect to this particular SaskPower issue, I know the 
minister will have some more to add, but I just want to provide 
assurance to the hon. member and to members of the House that 
consultation is a priority. It doesn’t mean that all sides get 
exactly what they wanted; I guess that’s the very definition of 
consultation. But it will happen earnestly, Mr. Speaker, it 
should be happening earnestly. And I’ll look forward to the 
subsequent question by the member opposite. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, if consultation is a priority of 
this Premier and this government, he needs to commit to 
meaningful consultations with this chief and his community 
today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s unacceptable that the Sask Party refuses to 
acknowledge and enforce their duty to consult. These licences 
aren’t for another 50 years or even a lifetime, Mr. Speaker. 
SaskPower wants it to stand in perpetuity. So I’m going to ask 
again. Is he going to stand by while his party turns their back on 
reconciliation and on treaty rights, or will he do the right thing 
today and agree that they will work with, instead of against, the 
Cumberland House Cree Nation, commit to meaningful 
consultation by the government, by the Premier, by the 

minister, with the chief and his community? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, certainly this has been an ongoing work that 
SaskPower has been engaged with the First Nations on this 
matter. I would certainly be willing to meet with the chief and 
members of the council that are here today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important to note that first and 
foremost it was this government that brought in the framework 
to deal with duty to consult and to enact that policy as a part of 
the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. But I think it’s also 
important to note that the duty to consult is not required when it 
deals with the past impacts of something like a dam, in this 
case. If there are future impacts, then that would be as a part of 
the duty to consult. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is something that SaskPower has met several 
times with all five of the First Nations that have been identified 
as rights holders and in fact have forwarded funds to be a part 
of that and to engage in that process. And so I’d be pleased to 
meet with the chief afterwards. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure the chief would 
appreciate the meeting with the minister and maybe the Premier 
as well, but they need more than just another, yet another 
meeting. They need a commitment for meaningful consultation. 
Mr. Speaker, again the band is not against the projects 
continuing. They just don’t want their rights to be flushed away 
in the process. They want meaningful consultation with the 
Crown and to work towards a constructive solution. 
 
They don’t want to be spoken down to or dictated to. Mr. 
Speaker, if our province is to succeed, we have to respect each 
other’s rights and we have to build together. So will the Premier 
ensure that there is proper consultation before they plow 
forward and lock this decision in forever? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, in the discussions that have taken place with 
SaskPower and the Water Security Agency, Mr. Speaker, I 
would hope — and I will certainly check with officials to 
ensure — that nobody has been spoken down to by officials 
representing the Government of Saskatchewan, representing 
SaskPower and the Water Security Agency. There have been a 
number of meetings, as I’ve indicated before, since 2015 on this 
matter, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ll address the member from Nutana’s 
question. The current licensing has no fixed date attached to it, 
unlike the previous 50-year term, but the regulations allow for 
periodic review of the operation. And the licence may be 
cancelled, amended, or suspended if it’s deemed in the interest 
of the public or if the impact deviates significantly from the 
impacts predicted when the licence was first issued. 
 
Keeping in mind, Mr. Speaker, this is a dam that has been in 



3152 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2017 

operation for a number of decades in the province of 
Saskatchewan. We want to continue that relationship and ensure 
that this is an asset that we can continue to operate into the 
future. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 

Funding for Municipalities 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday Saskatoon residents 
found out they’ll have to pay yet another unfair tax hike. Facing 
the reality of the Sask Party cuts, our city council was forced to 
increase taxes by nearly 5 per cent. Over half of that increase, 
2.78 per cent, was directly attributed to the Sask Party’s cuts to 
the city. 
 
Many Saskatoon families are already struggling to make ends 
meet. When the Sask Party raised education taxes and the PST 
[provincial sales tax], they made it even harder. And now 
people are seeing their municipal taxes go up as well. Families 
are doing their best to get by, and our city councillors are doing 
their best to make do with the mess the Sask Party has dumped 
on them. So why is the Premier turning his back on them on his 
way out the door? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll just remind 
the member opposite that revenue sharing in this province has 
increased since 2007 about . . . For Saskatoon alone, 257 
million last year was revenue sharing in the province, up 130 
million or 103 per cent since 2007. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s up to the city of Saskatoon, or any 
municipality for that matter, to set their municipal rate, and 
we’re not in charge of that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank the 
minister for the reminder. I’ll remind the minister that families 
all across the province are facing higher taxes and fees. They’re 
paying more and they’re getting less. The Sask Party’s cuts to 
our cities, towns, and villages are forcing municipalities to 
struggle, and to make matters worse, municipal leaders don’t 
know what’s coming next. Mayors are lobbying hard for the 
Sask Party to reinstate their grants-in-lieu to avoid being forced 
to raise taxes again. The Sask Party is refusing to tell them the 
status of grants-in-lieu. They say it’s up to the new premier to 
make that decision, Mr. Speaker, but our cities and towns need 
to know now. 
 
Will the minister commit today that there will be no further cuts 
for cities, towns, and municipalities? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doke: — Mr. Speaker, 257 million in overall 
funding, up 103 per cent; 165.4 million to cities, up 158 per 

cent; 72.8 million to RMs [rural municipalities], up 54.5 per 
cent. Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, municipalities are in charge 
of their own mill rates, and they will look after that. We’ll do 
our share. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Global Transportation Hub and 
Details of Land Transactions 

 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, that minister doesn’t seem to like 
those questions any more than several ministers liked mine 
yesterday. So since the minister doesn’t want to come clean on 
the scandals or the lawsuits, I’ll ask about their real estate 
practices in general. 
 
[14:15] 
 
In 2012 the Yanke Company bought land from the GTH 
[Global Transportation Hub] for $1.6 million. Then in 2013, 
when the company was facing serious financial problems and a 
tax lien was even placed on the property, and then despite or for 
all we can tell because of the financial woes Yanke was facing, 
the Sask Party hired the company’s vice-president, Bryan 
Richards, to run the GTH. But wait, Mr. Speaker, it gets worse 
because then in 2014 under Mr. Richards’s watch, the GTH 
bought the land back from the desperate Yanke and, instead of 
making money on the deal, paid Yanke $200,000 more for the 
land. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister explain why the GTH would let a 
failing company flip land back to them at a loss to 
Saskatchewan people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment, 
GTH, and SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I think as the 
member, I think, knows, Mr. Speaker, this is a generational 
project for the people of Saskatchewan. The Global 
Transportation Hub is going to be able to facilitate continued 
trade for a province that exports more than 95 per cent of the 
products that we produce. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would caution the member who came, I think, 
pretty close to the line in terms of her comments on the hiring 
of the CEO [chief executive officer], the president and CEO, I 
think an individual that is well regarded in the transportation 
industry in this province, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, under his 
leadership, under the board’s leadership and the staff at the 
Global Transportation Hub, they’re working hard. Despite the 
smears from the members opposite, they’re doing hard to 
ensure that this is going to be successful project, one that has 
already seen nearly half a billion dollars in private investment. I 
know that’s hard for the members opposite to even get their 
heads around. They’re used to Crown corporation investment as 
economic drivers. This is private sector investment of nearly 
half a billion dollars in just the first half-dozen years of 
operation. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 



November 28, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3153 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I thought the GTH was supposed 
to be making money by selling land and not losing money by 
buying it back. Mr. Speaker, this wasn’t an isolated incident. 
Here’s another example. In 2015 the GTH sold a parcel of land 
to Skyways Trucking. Good. But then they bought it back less 
than a year later. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no wonder the member from Meadow Lake said 
they should get out of the business and fire Bill Boyd and 
Laurie Pushor. Now normally it’s buy low and sell high. Mr. 
Speaker, understanding that concept should be as easy as selling 
country music in Saskatchewan. But can the minister set aside 
the arrogance, get real, and explain how this business model 
makes any sense at all? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Global 
Transportation Hub. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, for the 
member opposite to want to school the Government of 
Saskatchewan, school the members on this side on buying low 
and selling high, the members opposite may want to refresh the 
public’s memory when it comes to things like Channel Lake. 
How’d that work? Guyana? NST Chicago, Persona, Retx, 
tappedinto.com, Clickabid.com. Yes, that was the one that was 
going to compete against eBay. How’d that work out for the 
province of Saskatchewan? Navigata Communications, 
SPUDCO, mega bingo, Austar Communications, Minds Eye 
Entertainment, and literally the list goes on and on and on, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a generational opportunity for the people of 
Saskatchewan, for a province that exports more than 95 per cent 
of the products that we produce. We need access to the global 
marketplace and that’s why, in less than half a dozen years, 
nearly half a billion dollars in private investment in this entity. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Access to Reproductive Health Services and 
Members’ Views on Abortion 

 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan already has some 
of the worst access to women’s reproductive health services in 
the country. The services that we do have are centred in Regina 
and Saskatoon. And by scrapping STC [Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company], the Sask Party made access even 
worse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we all know, some of the members opposite 
who are running to lead their party and our province called a 
woman’s right to choose into question last week. And yet in the 
six days that have passed, the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health has stayed silent. Yesterday he even refused to answer 
his questions from me or the media. 
 
I want to give him another chance today. Will the minister 
responsible for ensuring equitable access to health services in 
rural and remote areas confirm that he supports a woman’s right 
to actually have access to these services? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I want to share with members 
in the House the contents of a column by Saskatoon 
StarPhoenix columnist Murray Mandryk from January 2013, 
wherein he canvasses the personal opinion on abortion of the 
member for Saskatoon Meewasin, who is currently running to 
be the leader of the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, quite candidly, and I would say quite credibly, this 
then doctor and now current member running for the leadership 
of the party, says that he is pro-life, says that he is, as a Catholic 
. . . Well the member from Nutana just yells. What we have 
here is the height of hypocrisy from members opposite. The 
inference, Mr. Speaker, the inference is that any . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Members will come to order. I 
recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, in the column, the columnist 
says: 
 

But Meili’s personal [I’m quoting] opposition to abortion 
[his personal opposition to abortion] shouldn’t be a bad 
thing for a party that’s hoping to attract a wider swath of 
Saskatchewan voters. 

 
And this is a quote now that he, the member there now running 
for the leadership of the NDP, provided to then reporter Joe 
Couture of the StarPhoenix: “To put it simply, I am a practising 
Catholic, but I’m also a practising physician and a practising 
New Democrat.” 
 
Well these are the words of the individual that she’s supporting 
to be the premier of the province, who has to oversee access to 
the services the same way, if he became premier, the same way 
that a minister of the Crown would. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the candidate for the NDP leadership goes on to 
say that the distinction between personal beliefs and political 
and legal legacy is . . . that it’s something he recognizes, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So apparently, apparently if you’re running to be the premier of 
the province, you can have an anti-abortion stance but still want 
to ensure that the province is providing the service as per the 
law, as per the Supreme Court. You can do that if you’re a New 
Democrat running to be the premier, but not if you live on this 
. . . if you sit on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. That is the 
height of hypocrisy. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — How can the women of Saskatchewan in rural 
and remote areas trust that minister to provide them the 
necessary care if the Premier won’t let that minister even 
answer any questions? The Minister for Rural . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Okay. Mr. Speaker, the Minister for Rural and 
Remote Health is a full minister, a full minister, and as you may 
have guessed, he is responsible for rural and remote health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Charter of Rights and Freedoms is clear, the 



3154 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2017 

Canada Health Act is clear, and the minister needs to be too. 
He’s got one job. And, Mr. Speaker, the fact is that government 
and that minister are failing by not providing sufficient and 
equitable access to reproductive health services. 
 
So again to the Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote 
Health, can he confirm there should be no debate? Will he 
respect the law of the land? And will he take women’s health 
seriously, and will he work to ensure better access to these 
health services all across Saskatchewan? He is responsible for 
rural and remote health, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the abortion services will be 
provided and care will be provided in the province, across the 
province in the same model as it was when members opposite 
were in power, in the same manner. 
 
Now the member that sits immediately behind the member that 
just asked the question is running to be the leader of the New 
Democratic Party, and therefore running to be the premier of 
the province.  
 
The member who just asked the question, her rationale is how 
can you serve as a minister of the Crown, have a anti-abortion 
stance, and still oversee a system that ensures abortion services 
for the province? And yet, Mr. Speaker, just behind her is a 
member of her party that is running to be the New Democratic 
leader that has said that he is opposed to abortion because he’s a 
practising Catholic. Here’s the quote again if the Leader of the 
Opposition wants to hear it. This is what the member for 
Meewasin who wants to be the premier said: 
 

“To put it simply, I am a practising Catholic, but I’m also a 
practising physician and a practising New Democrat,” 
Meili told StarPhoenix reporter Joe Couture. “That means 
I’ve probably had more practise than most actually digging 
into this issue [and I think he’s right], and it is an issue on 
which I still have my own personal beliefs.” 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, the hypocrisy of that member and those 
members is stunning. They can infer that anybody on this side 
of the House that opposes abortion can’t critically and 
objectively administer a system that provides the service; all the 
while they can allow someone to run to be the premier of the 
province and lead their party who holds those exact same views. 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the kind of double standard that will keep 
those members on that side regardless of who their leader is. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Closure of Railway Loading Facilities 
 
Ms. Beck: — I hope that helped the Premier feel better, Mr. 
Speaker, but still no answers or accountability by that minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, agriculture is one of the foundations, not only of 
our economy, but it is a big part of what defines us as a 
province. As an export economy, Saskatchewan producers need 
reliable transportation to get product to market. But CP 
[Canadian Pacific Railway] has announced that they will be 

shutting down at least 10 producer car-loading sites in our 
province.  
 
According to the agricultural groups such as APAS 
[Agricultural Producers Association of Saskatchewan] and the 
wheat and barley commissions, and according to common 
sense, these closures will hurt the agriculture industry, and 
neither industry nor municipalities nor affected producers have 
been consulted. Sound familiar, Mr. Speaker? Last spring the 
Sask Party sold off our profitable Crown grain cars without 
asking the owners — all the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 2005 there were 79 loading sites on CP Rail 
[Canadian Pacific Railway] lines in Saskatchewan, and if these 
cuts go through, there will be no more than 26. To the minister: 
what has been done to ask the federal government for a 
moratorium on these and future site closures until a proper, full 
costing review is complete? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
member for her question. It’s a good question. I think it’s a 
legitimate question.  
 
The Minister of Highways and myself met with CP Rail when 
they announced that they were going to close these loading 
facilities or potential track-loading facilities, and we very 
strongly opposed that action. Following that, we wrote a joint 
letter to the Canadian minister of transportation, which was 
followed some time later by a response which we consider to be 
a non-response. And just this morning we discussed sending a 
second letter to the federal Minister of Transport to demand a 
better answer than what we got in his previous one. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the minister 
for standing up and directly answering the question. It’s 
appreciated. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, on a different topic, yesterday I asked 
whether the Minister of Education would commit to stop cutting 
resources out of our kids’ classrooms. She refused to answer 
and instead defended herself by saying the cuts were “less 
severe than anticipated.” Less severe, Mr. Speaker. It’s like the 
knight in Monty Python who claims it’s just a flesh wound as 
he loses his limbs. 
 
The question was whether she would commit to not cutting the 
number of teachers or the funding going to our kids’ classrooms 
even further next year. So, Mr. Speaker, I will ask again. After 
everything that kids and educators have gone through in this 
province, how can the minister responsible for the education of 
the next generation even contemplate further cuts? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I’ve said, this 
year the number of in-class, full-time employees, which of 



November 28, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3155 

course includes teachers, has increased since ’13-14 and ’14-15 
and is the same as ’16-17, which is relatively balanced in a 
challenging year. And take Saskatoon Public, Mr. Speaker, the 
province’s largest urban division: it has seen an increase of 31 
per cent in school-based FTEs [full-time equivalent] including 
teachers since ’07. Its overall operating grant has increased by 
43 per cent. 
 
Across the province the number of regular teachers has gone up 
by 9 per cent since 2007. The number of all school-based 
educators has increased by 1,000 — nine and a half per cent. 
The number of counsellors, psychologists, occupational 
therapists, medical facilitators, and speech pathologists have all 
gone up. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Divisions, Mr. Speaker, absolutely have minimized impact to 
the classroom. They have taken a hard look at administration 
costs. They have joint bused. They have agreed to joint 
procurement on fuel, which means more money back into the 
classroom, Mr. Speaker, where it belongs. But we’re proud of 
our growth: 20,000 new students under this government. With 
growth comes challenges, but we will meet them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, with answers like that it’s no 
wonder that teachers and parents and students are worried about 
what this government is going to cut next in our classrooms. 
 
The minister seems to like using examples, so let’s look at a 
few. Regina Public was forced to eliminate preschool programs 
for kids living with autism, intellectual and physical disabilities. 
They also had to scrap preschool programs for children who are 
hard of hearing and kids who have experienced severe trauma 
and neglect. Regina Catholic had to phase out their preschool 
for kids with intensive needs, and families have been left 
scrambling as they have been left without busing. Mr. Speaker, 
these cuts are severe and they have significant, immediate, and 
long-term impacts. So again, will the minister commit to stop 
the cuts to education? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By all means, let’s 
talk about our commitment to early years programming. After 
all, we created the first ever early years plan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The overall funding to pre-K [pre-kindergarten] programs since 
we formed government has been significant. It went from 7.6 
million in ’07 to 27 million this year, and that was a challenging 
budget year, Mr. Speaker. 1.6 billion has been provided to 
school divisions for supports for learning since 2012, which 
helps divisions allocate special needs funding where it’s needed 
most, Mr. Speaker: this year, 277.5 million. And then there are 
early childhood intervention programs and KidsFirst for home 
visits and family and transition supports, child and nutrition 
development: 18 million this budget year. This year, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
When she spoke to the media recently, the member opposite did 

not seem aware of these programs which provide intensive 
support outside the K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] system to 
families for literacy, parenting, skills development. Could she 
acknowledge them now, Mr. Speaker? 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 112 — The Miscellaneous Vehicle and Driving 
Statutes (Cannabis Legislation) Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 112, 
The Miscellaneous Vehicle and Driving Statutes (Cannabis 
Legislation) Amendment Act, 2017 be now introduced and read 
a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Crown 
Investments that Bill No. 112 be now introduced and read a first 
time. It is the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion?’ 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Next sitting of the Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I’d like to table the 
Business and Financial Plan for the Year Ended March 31st, 
2019 by the Provincial Auditor. 
 
I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — With leave, to move a motion. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave to move a motion. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Amendments to Rule 14 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The motion 
deals with the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan to be amended by adding the 
following after rule 14: 
 

14.1(1) The Board of Internal Economy (Board) may 



3156 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2017 

report on any matter prescribed by statute.  
 
14.1(2) A report from the Board shall be tabled by the 
Speaker at the conclusion of Routine Proceedings and 
before Orders of the Day. 
 
14.1(3) When the Assembly is not sitting the rules for 
filing and distribution of standing committee reports shall 
apply. 
 
14.1(4) When the Board report recommends that the 
Assembly take action on a matter the Government House 
Leader may move a motion without notice strictly relevant 
to the recommendations of the report. The motion shall be 
debatable except when the subject of the report is a 
recommendation for corrective action in accordance with 
the Board anti-harassment directive. 

 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has put 
forward a motion. We’ll take the motion as read. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 110 — The Animal Protection Act, 2017 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, at 
the end of my remarks I will move second reading of the animal 
protection amendment Act, 2017. Mr. Speaker, our government 
is moving forward with amendments to animal protection 
legislation in Saskatchewan. We are updating The Animal 
Protection Act as part of our government’s commitment to 
animal welfare in our province. 
 
The Act came into force in 1972 to provide a legislative 
framework for animal welfare and animal protection 
enforcement in Saskatchewan. The Act has been amended a 
number of times since 1972. Mr. Speaker, amendments to this 
Act are necessary from time to time to keep pace with changes 
in our society and our expanded knowledge with respect to 
animal welfare. We must be responsive to public expectations 
and the latest evidence supporting the need for better animal 
health and welfare. 
 
In 1999 the Act was rewritten to improve animal protection 
enforcement in our province. By amending the Act, the 

province ensured we were responding effectively to concerns 
and addressing them as needed. In 2010 the Act was amended 
to increase the maximum penalty. This change brought 
Saskatchewan into line with other provinces. The term of 
maximum allowable imprisonment increased to two years. 
Another amendment in 2010 was to ensure that any person 
could be held accountable for neglect or cruelty to an animal, 
not just the person responsible for the animal. 
 
It remains critical that current legislation has sufficient 
authority to address animal cruelty. The Ministry of Agriculture 
is responsible for administering the Act and ensuring that it 
provides clear direction for enforcement of animal protection in 
the province for all animals. The ministry also approves 
humane societies and appoints animal protection officers to 
enforce the Act. Animal protection officers, APOs, must be able 
to respond to and address animal cruelty cases effectively. 
 
Our government is seeking to amend the Act to ensure it is up 
to date, consistent with other jurisdictions, and provides clear 
direction for enforcement agencies. Heightened public scrutiny 
and increased public expectations demand accountability. 
Stakeholders have requested amendments to the Act to improve 
animal protection. We have listened to stakeholders and 
developed a balanced approach with these amendments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is not the only province to amend 
animal protection legislation. Prince Edward Island, Quebec, 
Nova Scotia, and British Columbia have all recently amended 
their animal protection laws and regulations to ensure that they 
meet current animal welfare expectations. 
 
I will outline some of the key amendments to the Act. The 
amendments will provide the Ministry of Agriculture with the 
authority to approve organizations beyond humane societies to 
enforce provisions of the Act. This will provide greater 
flexibility and will expand investigation capacity within the 
province. 
 
The amendments will revise the definition of “distress” to 
broaden the scope of what is considered animal neglect or 
abuse. Animals will not be considered to be in distress when 
they are handled according to accepted codes of practice. Mr. 
Speaker, in the current animal protection regulations 2000, 
there is a list of codes of practice and guidelines that provides 
nationally recognized animal care requirements and 
recommended practices for various species of animals. This list 
will remain in the regulations under the amended animal 
protection Act and will continue to be updated as required. 
 
The Act will clearly state what is required of animal owners and 
their duty of care for any animal they own or are responsible 
for. The Act will also state that animal owners will have met the 
duty of care required if they are following a code of practice or 
guideline listed in the regulations. 
 
The amended legislation also includes a provision for 
mandatory veterinary reporting of animal neglect or abuse. The 
Saskatchewan Veterinary Medical Association requested this 
amendment which aligns with other provincial legislations. 
 
Animal protection officers will be able to order corrective 
actions be taken by the person responsible for the animal to 



November 28, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3157 

relieve it of distress. If corrective actions are not taken by the 
person responsible, the animal protection officer will be able to 
take the necessary steps to relieve the animal of distress, 
including seizing the animal. 
 
Amendments will define an abandoned animal. These changes 
will allow animal protection officers to take an abandoned 
animal into custody prior to it suffering from distress. 
 
The Act will be amended to provide clearer direction to animal 
protection officers on when animals can be returned after they 
have been seized. In order to return an animal to its owner, 
animal protection officers will need to be satisfied the animal 
will not be subjected to further distress. 
 
Inspection powers for animal protection officers will be 
broadened, allowing them to inspect additional sites such as 
transport trailers, slaughter plants, boarding kennels, and other 
sites where animal services are provided. Provision for humane 
slaughter and euthanasia will also be added to the Act. 
 
A prohibition on transporting unfit animals will also be 
included. This will clarify that unfit animals may be loaded and 
transported to obtain veterinary care. 
 
We are increasing fines for second offences. The fine or 
imprisonment time for second or subsequent offences would 
increase based on the numbers of days the offence continues. 
Courts will continue to have the ability to prohibit the guilty 
person from owning or having custody of an animal for a 
specific period of time. 
 
We know there is public concern about animal welfare. Mr. 
Speaker, the agriculture industry recognizes the importance of 
securing and increasing public trust. One of the things we can 
do as government is to ensure our legislation is relevant and 
responsive. These changes will continue to strengthen our 
government’s commitment to improve animal welfare and 
protection in Saskatchewan. For these reasons, Mr. Speaker, I 
move second reading of the animal protection amendment Act, 
2017. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has 
moved that Bill No. 110, the animal protection amendment Act, 
be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 
thank the minister for his notes that accompany this new bill, 
Bill No. 110, The Animal Protection Act, 2017. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s no question that as you look at some of the 
rankings of the province that Saskatchewan has a lot of work 
ahead of itself. I understand that it’s rated second poorest in 
terms of animal protection overall. I understand that the 
territory of Nunavut is the only one that’s lower than 
Saskatchewan as it pertains to the protection of animals overall, 
and that’s something that we obviously have to address, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
As you look at the bill itself, obviously there’ll be a number of 
organizations involved, and certainly a number of people that 
have a special desire to really work hard in protecting a lot of 

the animal rights that we as a just society should certainly pay 
attention to as well. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important to note that there are 
pieces of the old Act that are maintained and you want to 
obviously study what the old Act and part of the pieces that are 
being maintained, whether that is something that is being 
supported by the groups and organizations that certainly 
monitor provinces like Saskatchewan in terms of their rating as 
it pertains to the animal protection that we do as a government. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, what the Act does, it expands the definition for an 
animal in distress, including conditions that would cause the 
animal extreme anxiety or impair the animal’s well-being over 
time. Those criteria or that explanation of how they would 
define those definitions . . . I’m sorry, they define the conditions 
in which the animal would be able to be assessed in terms of the 
anxiety or the well-being over time. 
 
We need to know what parameters are being used and how the 
government arrived at those parameters. Obviously one would 
assume that there’s a number of professional organizations like 
the veterinarians, Mr. Speaker, that have a lot of knowledge 
around animal health and so on and so forth. So I think it’s 
important that we have to really pay attention to how the rules 
are set up and what criteria is being used to determine the future 
well-being of animals, because as some of the animals are put 
down, Mr. Speaker, for lack of a better phrase, there obviously 
has to be certain decisions made to ensure that, not only for the 
animals suffering, but also for our overall view of how society 
should be treating animals that are in danger or are in poor 
health. How we respond to that is also very telling as a 
province, so we have to make sure, Mr. Speaker, that we do this 
right. 
 
It also talks about expanding animal care duties and what is 
expected of people who are responsible for animals. This 
changes the language from “humane society” to “animal 
protection agencies,” and I’m assuming that the animal 
protection agencies is a wider range as opposed to being simply 
viewed as a humane society. There’s probably a number of 
organizations that are involved with animal protection. We need 
to know what those organizations are and of course we also 
need to know what their participation in the design of this bill 
. . . And of course if they didn’t participate or weren’t invited to 
participate, then obviously their opinions matter and we would 
want to seek those particular organizations out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the bill also includes limits on transporting 
animals that would suffer unduly during that transportation. 
And we need to know, is this an ongoing problem? Is there 
some challenges as it pertains to the transportation of animals? 
Is this a continual theme in the province of Saskatchewan? I’m 
assuming that it probably is not, Mr. Speaker, but obviously we 
would need to know why this particular section of the bill 
would talk about transporting animals that would suffer unduly 
during the transportation. 
 
Obviously a section on humane slaughter and euthanasia, Mr. 
Speaker. We need to determine again, as I mentioned, the 
criteria and the parameters that were established as it pertains to 



3158 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2017 

humane slaughter and euthanasia of animals and of all animals, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The bill also spoke very briefly about veterinarians would have 
a duty to report when they have reasonable grounds to believe 
someone isn’t caring for an animal or causing these animals 
distress. Now obviously, Mr. Speaker, veterinarians are the 
front-line professionals that most of us are familiar with. There 
are other animal protection professions that are out there that of 
course would be engaged. I’m thinking of, for example, there 
are many pet shops that groom animals for different 
homeowners. Would they have a role to undertake to report that 
they believe that there is some abuse happening? Well 
obviously, Mr. Speaker, a veterinarian would have, of course, 
more knowledge, but more so would be exposed to potential 
abuse of animals, primarily because of the animal’s health or 
certainly the animal’s condition. So we need to find out. Yes, 
veterinarians need to be engaged, but are there other animal 
protection agencies that are involved, and how we would 
engage them and get their advice. 
 
The bill also talks about the ways that animal protection officers 
can relieve an animal in distress. It talks about entering 
premises and vehicles, etc., as well as the rules that apply to an 
animal protection agency across the province. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, we have to be very cognizant of the fact that there are 
laws that prevent people access to homes and even vehicles. 
Now have we compared those laws as it pertains to being able 
to enter some of these premises or enter some private vehicles? 
And of course, Mr. Speaker, there’s the transporting of animals 
in many different types of vehicles. We need to be able to 
determine what exactly, what laws . . . Is there an infringement 
on people’s personal right, at the same time trying to make sure 
that this law can actually relieve an animal in distress or of 
course being threatened? 
 
So it’s important that we understand that those rules and 
regulations that are being identified in this section of the Act, 
that we certainly find out what they are, what they mean, and 
what potential legal problems that might occur because you’re 
obviously entering premises. 
 
And I’ll point out again, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is the 
lowest ranked province for animal protection ranking, and 
we’re behind Nunavut, of all places, Mr. Speaker. So we know 
that we have to strengthen our legislation. It’s a step in the right 
direction. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s important to note that many 
families are paying very close and special attention to this. 
Many communities, agricultural communities obviously paying 
very close and special attention to this particular bill. And I 
think by and large, a lot of people right across Saskatchewan 
would be surprised to know that we are ranking so low. So any 
effort to improve on this front of course would be greatly 
appreciated. 
 
Now as a family man that had three daughters, and of course 
my wife, they were just crazy over animals and pets, Mr. 
Speaker. My daughter would often bring home hungry or 
injured dogs and cats. And I was never one to, you know, to 
embrace the role of caring for dogs and cats and so on and so 
forth, but I had no choice. My daughter, especially my youngest 
one, had a soft spot for animals, and she loved her cats and her 
dogs, and so overall we had to, as they would say, bear with it 

because your daughter obviously loves animals. 
 
But over time, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that there are many 
occasions where animals are distressed, they are in danger, and 
that we can’t simply hope that there will be a Taylor out there 
that would pick them up and bring them home. Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve got to make sure that there are laws, there are proper 
processes, there are rules and regulations, there’s an overseer 
team, if you will, of veterinarians and other animal protection 
groups that might be of significant help in this regard. 
 
So it’s important that we look at the overall law itself to make 
sure that we’re doing the right thing and the proper thing. So on 
that note, we’ll have more to discuss on this particular bill as 
the session goes on, and I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 
110, The Animal Protection Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill 110, the animal protection 
amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 111 — The Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of Bill No. 111, The Municipal Tax 
Sharing (Potash) Amendment Act. Mr. Speaker, let me begin by 
giving a little background as to why this bill is being amended. 
 
The Act was first introduced in 1968 and established a 
tax-sharing system for municipal taxes on potash mines. The 
intent was to create a system where municipalities closest to the 
mines, and not only the municipality where the mine is located, 
are able to benefit from the municipal tax collected from potash 
mines. 
 
To make sure the taxes were redistributed properly among the 
participating municipalities, the Act also established the 
Municipal Potash Tax Sharing Administration Board. The 
board is responsible for receiving the municipal taxes collected 
from potash mines and redistributing the tax to the 
municipalities within a 20-mile radius from around the mine. 
 
After the initial coming into force of the Act, the Act underwent 
a major revision in 1978. But since then it has remained 
relatively unchanged with the exception of some minor 
housekeeping that was done in 2005 due to changes to The 
Municipalities Act. So to say that the Act is overdue for an 
update is an understatement. 
 
The bill before you today is designed to modernize the Act and 
ensure that provisions of the Act align with current potash 
mining practices and operations of the board into the future. To 
address the outdated language and requirements of the Act, the 
Ministry of Government Relations began an internal review of 



November 28, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3159 

the Act and identified potential changes. The suggestions were 
shared at an interim report called the review of the industry 
financial contributions to RMs, rural road infrastructure, and 
RM accountability, The Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) Act, 
and the associated regulations. The report was distributed to 
both the municipal and potash sectors in late 2015. 
 
Based on initial feedback to the report, government drafted 
amendments and further consulted with both potash and 
municipal sector stakeholders, and the result is the bill tabled 
here today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for this bill, the ministry consulted with the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, the 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, Municipal 
Potash Tax Sharing Administration Board, the Saskatchewan 
Potash Producers Association, and individual potash producers 
including feedback from Mosaic, PotashCorp, Agrium, and 
K+S. 
 
I would like to take a moment to thank these municipal and 
potash stakeholders for working with the government to 
develop this legislation. Contributions by these stakeholders 
have been of great benefit to understanding and changes to this 
bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will now go through the bill, or speak to the 
main highlights of the bill. Now many of these changes 
proposed are simply to bring the Act into the 21st century. The 
prime example of this is converting measurements from 
imperial to metric system. I will not go through these minor 
changes in the House today, but focus on the key changes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the primary reasons for amending the Act 
was to reduce the ambiguity of potash sharing calculation and 
clarify how mill rates are to be calculated by the Municipal 
Potash Tax Sharing Administration Board. This led to the 
change to the definition of the actual municipal mill rate. The 
definition now establishes a standard mill rate formula for all 
municipalities. This is being done to make potash tax sharing 
equitable and possible for potash mines and municipalities. 
Adding a standard calculation will clarify how the mill rate is to 
be calculated and aims to avoid confusion and improper 
calculation into the future. 
 
Another key proposed change in the definition section is the 
addition of resort villages to the definition of urban 
municipalities. Historically towns and villages were the only 
urban municipalities receiving benefits from the municipal 
potash tax-sharing process. This goes back to the outdated 
nature of the bill. In the past, resort villages were excluded from 
the urban municipalities definition because resort villages were 
considered seasonal and not year-round residences. However, 
this is no longer the case and many resort villages offer 
year-round services to residents, the same as other urban 
municipalities. The request for this change came from the 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association and 
government agrees that resort villages should no longer be 
excluded. 
 
The next number of sections of the Act deal with the 
administration of the Municipal Potash Tax Sharing 
Administration Board. Currently the board consists of two 

members from the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities and a provincial representative. The bill 
proposes that the board be expanded to allow the Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association, or SUMA, a member, and 
the potash industry also a member. Other minor administrative 
matters have also been clarified to support this change, such as 
changing the number of quorum in meetings to three instead of 
two. 
 
The main reason for this change is to increase transparency. 
Even though the board is an administration board where actions 
must follow the legislation and regulations, it will be helpful for 
both SUMA and the industry that pays the taxes to be able to 
participate and observe. 
 
Section 3 is also broadened to properly give authority to the 
board to appoint a secretary-treasurer. Though this was done 
previously, the Act did not properly cite this authority. The bill 
also indicates both the board and the secretary-treasurer have to 
follow the rules prescribed in the Act and regulations, and more 
specifically points out actions related to the calculating and 
collecting the redistribution of municipal potash taxes. 
 
The final administrative matter is a proposed change to the 
length of the board member terms. It is proposed that the board 
member terms be increased from one year to two years to 
increase administrative efficiency. 
 
Next the draft bill clarifies several other areas, including a 
section to accommodate the addition of new mines. This covers 
how, when a new mine becomes operational, it will become 
part of the tax-sharing system. The Act now addresses this 
situation when it did not before and provides some transitional 
provisions respecting taxes for the RM in which the mine is 
located. 
 
The bill also now has a section to account for year-to-year 
changes in tax assessment during a re-evaluation year. A new 
subsection is proposed to allow for new additions, whether it be 
equipment, buildings, or other taxable items, to be added to the 
revenue remitted to the board for redistribution to the 
municipalities. Previously it was unclear how these new 
additions were to be handled since legislation was silent on the 
issue. Now it is clearer what the process will be and the board 
can follow these rules in the future. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Finally there are new additions to the Act where the . . . 
specifically suggested by municipal and potash stakeholders to 
help clarify and accommodate the needs of stakeholders going 
forward. For instance a number of potash stakeholders indicated 
they wanted to see the board better communicate mill rates to 
the potash mines by a set date to help improve communication 
and information sharing between the board, municipalities, and 
the potash producers. This change has been included in the bill. 
And the bill clarifies that the board and municipalities are 
prohibited from using tax tools, but municipalities are allowed 
to continue to allow discounts in accordance with The 
Municipalities Act. This is proposed to address the concern that 
some municipalities may use tax tools to disproportionately 
advantage other properties in a municipality while raising the 
taxes on potash mines. It creates a more equitable playing field 



3160 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2017 

and promotes more respectful relationships between the mines 
and surrounding municipalities. 
 
We do not want to discontinue municipal discounts that help 
promote early tax payment and accordingly a competitive tax 
environment for potash mines in the province. Therefore 
municipalities can continue to apply discounts to tax on potash 
mine assessments. 
 
The final issue I want to highlight is that clarity has been given 
as to what happens in the event an assessment appeal is made. 
The Act now clarifies that the assessment appeals shall follow 
the process outlined in The Municipalities Act and the board 
shall accommodate changes required by the decisions. 
 
Consequential amendments will also be made to The 
Municipalities Act. This includes specifying the board will 
receive a copy of an appeal decision related to potash mine 
assessments in order to properly carry out the necessary 
changes. 
 
That concludes my summary of the proposed changes to The 
Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) Act and the consequential 
amendments to The Municipalities Act. And so, Mr. Speaker, I 
move second reading of Bill No. 111, The Municipal Tax 
Sharing (Potash) Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Government Relations has 
moved second reading of Bill No. 111. Is the Assembly ready 
for the question? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to enter into the debate on Bill No. 111, The Municipal 
Tax Sharing (Potash) Act, 2017. 
 
No question, Mr. Speaker, that some of the changes that the 
minister alluded to is modernizing the Act and of course also 
re-engaging a number of important components of the Act. And 
that includes the notion around membership, and actually 
talking about mill rate, and of course some of the language 
changes to the Act itself. It’s important to note that some of the 
portions of the Act are administrative and housekeeping in 
nature. 
 
No question, Mr. Speaker, there’s significant changes around 
this particular bill. It talks about the Municipal Potash Tax 
Sharing Administration Board. Now what happens, Mr. 
Speaker, as the minister made in his comments, that the board 
has been in place for quite some time and that there’s going to 
be a different number of members on that particular board. And 
in fact, Mr. Speaker, the membership now moves from a 
three-member board to a five-member board and then two new 
positions. And representatives on this new board are from 
SUMA and of course from the potash industry. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Act also redefines the actual municipal 
mill rate. And you know, certainly the point that the minister 
made in terms of a definition that sets a standard formula to be 
used for all municipalities, they say that a formula was added to 
make clear how the mill rate is to be calculated for potash tax 
sharing and to avoid improper calculations in the future. And, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s really, really important when we talk about 
improper calculations, what is really meant by that particular 

paragraph. It’s important to know there’s a couple of things that 
come to mind, Mr. Speaker, and that we need to investigate 
further as a result of this particular bill. 
 
As we look at ways and means as a province to attract 
investment, and potash is one of the areas that have given to the 
province of Saskatchewan great opportunity and great hope for 
many, many years, is exactly how we keep that investment in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And people ought to know that the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, many, many people misinterpret the fact that the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan’s owned by the people of 
Saskatchewan, when it fact, Mr. Speaker, it is largely an 
American-based, -owned company and something that’s based 
out of Chicago, Mr. Speaker. But the benefits that we have as a 
province, of course, are on two fronts. Obviously the 
employment created, it’s important that we continue that 
employment and that’s something that we in the opposition 
certainly appreciate, the fact that the potash industry itself is 
robust and creating a lot of great jobs for a lot of families that 
need that income. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the same token, as people often say, it’s 
important that we look at the benefits with the jobs, first and 
foremost, but some of the royalties that we would derive from 
our resources. So that balance is there, Mr. Speaker, to ensure 
that, not only do we attract investment, but we also try and get 
as much as we can from industry to make sure that we’re able to 
fund our education, fund our educational needs. And the list 
goes on as to what we as a province certainly need when it 
comes to developing our resources and benefitting from having 
those resource bases located here. 
 
So on that note it’s important to point out that the balance 
between revenue sharing for some of the communities impacted 
or near the potash mines in the province, and of course 
attracting investment, that that balance must always be carefully 
monitored. And it’s something that we’ve heard time and time 
again. And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about adding 
SUMA to the board, adding the Potash Corporation to the 
board, and the minister using the improper calculations, note on 
this particular bill, we would assume that there’s none of this 
activity occurring and that as a result of expanding the board 
from three to five, including the potash industry as one of the 
new seats on the board, that that I would certainly say is 
probably important to do. 
 
There’s very few minor amendments, Mr. Speaker. Changing 
miles to kilometres; as we all know, we use the metric system 
nowadays. There’s also a new section that outlines a standard 
date to be set for when the board announces the mill rate for the 
year, and that they inform individual potash mines and the 
Potash Producers Association. 
 
And there’s also a new section that clarifies that the tax tools 
are prohibited but that incentives are not. Municipalities can 
continue to apply discounts to tax on potash mine assessments, 
and I’m assuming, Mr. Speaker, that some of the municipalities 
have been doing that for quite some time and they obviously 
have a relationship with the potash industry within their 
particular area of influence, so to speak. 
 



November 28, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3161 

So obviously it shows, Mr. Speaker, that there’s been a 
relationship building for many, many years and obviously we 
want to see the continued investment by the potash sector, the 
continued relationship with SUMA, the continued relationship 
with the municipalities. And, Mr. Speaker, if you engage people 
to the extent that you should on some of these matters, then it’s 
important to note that it is the right thing to do. It’s important to 
note that if you bring the parties together and have true 
meaningful discussions and dialogue, then this is something that 
ought to certainly set a precedence. 
 
Now I want to attach these comments, Mr. Speaker, under The 
Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) Act to what is happening with 
the northern Cumberland House Cree Nation. Obviously the 
chief was in here today to talk about the importance of having 
full engagement with the Cumberland House First Nation as it 
pertains to a licence that SaskPower wants to have in perpetuity 
for operating a number of hydro dams in and around and 
certainly affecting the Cumberland House Cree Nation. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the principles under the Bill 111 where you 
have a cluster of communities benefiting from an activity in and 
around their community, nobody’s decrying that particular 
process at all, Mr. Speaker. And we have seen this happen on 
numerous occasions where activity in a certain sector obviously 
benefits a certain region, Mr. Speaker. A lot of the people 
within that particular region will of course see some good 
benefits. And I think that’s the point that the chief of 
Cumberland House Cree Nation brought forward today, saying, 
look, if you guys want to set up a licence for a dam for the next 
. . . or forever, at least have those discussions with us as to how 
we can formulate a partnership. 
 
Much the same premise behind the establishment of the 
Municipal Potash Tax Sharing Administration Board, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s much the same principle. Here you have 
SaskPower promoting a dam and keeping the dam in perpetuity 
for life, and there’s been no consultation or discussion with the 
Cumberland House Cree Nation or the community or the region 
and for the, you know, for the whole region. And this is 
something that’s really important to the Cumberland House 
Cree Nation. Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of parallels to this 
particular bill, the Act behind this bill, and of course what the 
Cumberland House Cree Nation are advocating for. 
 
What’s really important for the people of Saskatchewan to 
understand is that as we have developments happening on lands 
in and around our community . . . And on this particular bill I’m 
certain that the community of Esterhazy and many other 
communities in the Esterhazy area are probably part of the 
process of the potash revenue-sharing arrangement, Mr. 
Speaker. So as they are looking at this particular agreement and 
they agree to expand the boards and they have a good 
relationship with the potash company, and there is some 
benefits to having potash in the area to these individual 
municipal governments, Mr. Speaker, I would venture so far as 
to say that this is the same principle behind what the 
Cumberland House Cree Nation have brought forward on 
numerous occasions, as other bands have brought forward as 
well. 
 
And the important note I’ll tell the people of Saskatchewan: the 
principle is the same. What the Cumberland House Cree Nation 

are saying to the government is, you’re setting up a dam 
through SaskPower. This dam has been operating for a great 
number of years already. You’re going to grant the licence in 
perpetuity for this particular operation to continue. Can we sit 
down and have a discussion on how the benefits and how this 
whole licensing forever is going to . . . what benefits that we 
could derive as a band impacted by the disruption of water flow 
to our traditional lands. 
 
The principle is much the same, Mr. Speaker. And I noticed 
with a bit of amusement, Mr. Speaker, where we had the 
discussion and the wording from not only the Premier but the 
Minister Responsible for SaskPower in the sense of saying, well 
yes, we should have discussions; we should have these 
meetings, Mr. Speaker. And it’s important to note when we talk 
about meaningful consultation, Mr. Speaker, it’s all about the 
wording. 
 
And this is the important fact that many First Nations and Métis 
leaders across the province are now saying, that meaningful 
consultation also infers that there should be some agreement of 
sorts, Mr. Speaker. And this is the important distinction 
between the language that many of the First Nations and Métis 
leaders bring forward under the duty to consult, the duty to 
accommodate. 
 
And if we’re serious, Mr. Speaker, and if we’re serious about 
reconciliation, the simple fact that many First Nations and 
Aboriginal communities overall are looking for leadership from 
the government to deal with one fundamental point, is that is to 
be able to benefit from some of the resources that have been 
under traditional lands. And they have been shut out of those 
discussions for years and years and years. 
 
So there is a significant difference between the wording used 
today by the Saskatchewan Party when they talked about 
consultation. Mr. Speaker, consultation does not mean 
agreement. And this is where the important distinction remains 
and where many of the First Nations and Métis leaders have 
always made the important note to the media, to the public in 
general. 
 
And as defined in Bill 111, if you’re allowed to have municipal 
revenue sharing for the potash industry in one section of the 
community, is it unfair for us to say no to another section of the 
province involving the First Nations, in this case the 
Cumberland House First Nation, on negotiating a deal and 
having an agreement in perpetuity with the province and with 
SaskPower to make sure that they benefit from that activity, 
from that particular industry in their backyard? And I would 
assume, Mr. Speaker, the answer from the fair perspective 
would be yes. Absolutely. You don’t just have consultations 
and meetings, Mr. Speaker. They have to result in what we say. 
Meaningful consultation has to result in an agreement following 
those discussions and those meetings. 
 
And as I noticed the minister today offering to have a meeting 
with the Cumberland House Cree Nation, Mr. Speaker. Yes, the 
meeting’s important, but the minister has got to go into those 
meetings with the idea that he’s got to hammer out an 
agreement with the Cumberland House Cree Nation. Because 
the dam affects their backyard. The water flow is interrupted, 
and of course, Mr. Speaker, a lot of times the land is never 



3162 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2017 

returned to its normal state. And that affects the economy, the 
livelihood, and the future of that particular First Nation. 
 
So there’s a lot of parallels here that you can draw from Bill 
111, The Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) Act of 2017, Mr. 
Speaker, to what the Cumberland House Cree Nation was 
talking about today, that we have to have those discussions, but 
we have to have those meaningful discussions that result in 
some kind of agreement where each of the parties benefit, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[15:15] 
 
And as was pointed out today by some of my colleagues, the 
chief of the Cumberland House Cree Nation was in the 
audience today. And the important point that they wanted to 
raise is that they weren’t against development, that they weren’t 
trying to stop the ability of SaskPower to generate power to sell 
to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It’s an important 
Crown. 
 
But what they wanted to do is have discussions, meaningful 
discussions, and a dialogue, a respectful dialogue, to talk about 
how they can benefit from the activity in their backyard, and the 
disruption of water, and of course there’s also the notion of 
flooding as well, where they can have the discussion of the 
impacts in their backyard and how they can benefit as well, and 
not just simply the government of Saskatchewan or certainly, 
Mr. Speaker, the rest of the province. In the meantime, the 
Cumberland House Cree Nation and the community of 
Cumberland House continue suffering economic and social 
problems that have been very apparent over the years, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now I’ll point out . . . end on this particular note. The fact is 
that Cumberland House Cree Nation and the community of 
Cumberland House, they have very resilient leaders and very 
strong people. They are the oldest settlement in Western 
Canada. They’ve got a great history, Mr. Speaker. They’ve got 
great leadership, and of course they have a great vision. 
 
Obviously being the Cree Nation and a First Nation, they 
obviously have their federal avenues in which they can pursue 
legal action against the province in the event that this issue is 
not resolved. I know the community of Cumberland House also 
want to be part of the solution, and they have their avenues 
available to them as well. But rest assured, I think that 
Cumberland House Cree Nation are going to fight back. They 
are going to organize. They are going to work together, and 
they do have some very compelling arguments. 
 
And I would dare say that the thought behind Bill 111, when we 
talk about municipal potash-sharing agreements, Mr. Speaker, 
that have been identified throughout the bill, that the parallel 
that I would bring into play of course is the request by the 
Cumberland House Cree Nation to have, not just discussions 
but have an agreement following those discussions. 
 
And if we don’t address those, if we don’t get those issues 
resolved, then, Mr. Speaker, then we go to court. And then 
there’s a long, drawn-out, expensive process when clearly the 
court has compelled the Crown, in this case the province, 
compelled the Crown to deal with this matter. They didn’t spell 

out the parameters of how to deal with this matter, but they’re 
compelling the Crown to work under duty to consult, duty to 
accommodate, Mr. Speaker. And yet again the current 
Saskatchewan Party has ignored those legal precedents, Mr. 
Speaker. They have not been fair to the people of, in this case, 
the Cumberland House Cree Nation. 
 
And on one hand, they have a potash revenue-sharing scheme, 
which we don’t argue with, that we think is very important that 
we share, in that sense, Mr. Speaker. But on the other sense, 
they simply do not want to deal with the Cumberland House 
Cree Nation on the matter of flooding of lands and interruption 
of water services to their traditional lands and to their people. 
 
So I think that there is the practice. I think there is legal 
precedence. There’s a philosophical argument. There’s a benefit 
versus benefit for everyone, Mr. Speaker. It all makes sense to 
have those meaningful discussions with the Cumberland House 
Cree Nation. And this is the reason why I think we use this bill, 
saying you got precedence here with this bill, follow through 
with other areas and in particular to deal with the Cumberland 
House Cree Nation. 
 
So I think, Mr. Speaker, this bill is really, really important to 
our ongoing argument under duty to consult and duty to 
accommodate. It goes under our ongoing argument that if 
there’s resources in your area that, yes, while local 
municipalities can benefit, that clearly that this is a precedent 
that other sectors could easily follow. And I would dare say, 
Mr. Speaker, that when we talk about meaningful discussions 
and dialogue on this side, it also means agreement not just 
discussions. It means agreement. 
 
And that is the significant wording difference that I notice that 
the province of Saskatchewan continually make reference to. 
They always mention the word discussions, Mr. Speaker. That 
does not mean agreement. They always talk about consultation. 
That does not constitute agreement. And that is the significant 
difference when we hear the government language. 
 
And I think people in Saskatchewan, particularly the First 
Nations and Métis communities, they understand that, and they 
see that this government obviously is not serious about 
reconciliation. So they continue using language that devalues 
their argument as we preach about agreement and, Mr. Speaker, 
again reiterate the point that consultation does not constitute 
agreement. 
 
So on this bill I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 111, the 
municipal tax sharing amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 111. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 



November 28, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3163 

Bill No. 85 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 85 — The 
Reclaimed Industrial Sites Amendment Act, 2017 be now read 
a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker, to join in on Bill No. 85, The Reclaimed Industrial 
Sites Amendment Act, 2017. Looking over some of the 
minister’s comments and where he’s going, the amendments 
that are being proposed here and some of the comments that my 
colleague has made, I want to get into . . . I realize there’s a 
process and I know it’s a lengthy process that they go through 
to make sure that we have industrial sites that are out there for 
whatever reason. And I think in there they refer to a few of 
them and you think about oil . . . [inaudible] . . . sites that may 
do business in the province. 
 
And later on, maybe there’s a mine. And I think about Gunnar, 
you know, and I think of the Gunnar mine site. And I know that 
there’s been quite a bit of concern and who should clean it up, 
whether it’s federal, provincial, industry. And at the end of the 
day, they’re doing some work on that and moving forward on 
those. And it’s in my colleague, his riding, the Athabasca 
constituency. It’s in his riding. And I know that there have been 
many people talking, partners, about how they will come 
together to work on cleaning up that site. And there’s different 
things, provisions . . . And I don’t know if it’s 75 per cent, what 
percentage the federal government . . . I don’t know what the 
involvement. I know from the province . . . And I don’t know if 
there’s any money coming in from the province. Is there money 
that’s coming in from industry that will help clean that site up? 
 
But I do know that many have called for that and from my 
understanding, and I don’t have a lot of knowledge of the 
Gunnar. I do know that there has been stuff in the media, people 
talking, meetings, and different people moving forward trying 
to work on cleaning up that site. But having said that, that’s a 
site that one is going on. 
 
I think these amendments that are being proposed here gives the 
minister, and I think it’s the institutional control program and 
after referring to that, they call it the ICP [institutional control 
program] and that’s the term of it that they use, ICP. Now that 
process and here in some of the amendments in that, are giving 
the minister some powers. Should he feel . . . and these are new 
powers is my understanding. Should he feel that this site is in 
this program that’s supposed to protect it, to make sure that, I 
guess, the due diligence on the site — from whether it was 
mining or some type of an industry, a business — was working 
on a site. And once they go through that site and they’re 
abandoning the site and they’re moving on, there is some 
requirements, from my understanding. And I’m no expert on 
this and I know we will have many questions in committee and 
we can ask the minister. 
 
But having said that, you have an abandoned site and, you 
know, they’re going to turn it over, I guess, to government or to 
the program where that site will go into and be, I guess, it’s 
monitored mainly. There’s some monitoring that goes on and 

they monitor that. But let’s just say if it qualifies — the minister 
says yes, it can go into this program; they meet the 
requirements and accepted and the site goes into the program 
that’s going to oversee it — the minister now, with the 
provision, has the power to, if somebody else wants to take 
over, from my understanding, somebody else wants to take over 
that site and the site has an interest why they want to — maybe 
they want to do some development or do some type of a 
business and they require that site — there’s an obligation that 
they have to show to the minister . . . And any time I guess you 
take away from legislation or you take away from the 
legislation and you put the power into the minister, I know 
some people on our side have red flags it raises in them. 
 
And they’re a little concerned sometimes how this came about. 
Who’s asked for this, and what’s the reason? And what are the 
concerns, and what are some of the issues? And like everything 
else, there’s pros and cons, and I think we owe an obligation as 
members in this House to ask those questions. And I know in 
committee, but also as we go through debating it in the House 
on the floor as we are right now, we’ll go back and forth with, 
you know, some comments and getting clarification. But I know 
this needs to be clarified. 
 
So having said that, the minister has these new powers where he 
can say yes, I’m going to grant to another company that they 
will look after this site and they will take the responsibility. We 
move it out, and they will now have the responsibility. But they 
have to meet some obligations, financial obligations, for some, 
you know, I guess for unseen situation where it would arise. I 
guess there’s different ways that could impact that site. 
 
So if there was something that needed to be cleaned up for 
whatever reason — Environment, I guess, was to come out 
later; there’s a problem with the site — that those dollars were 
there. And that’s my understanding, that those dollars would be 
there to make sure that that site, you would deal with those 
situations should something arise. And if it doesn’t, then fine. 
But I guess there’s dollars put away. 
 
Now that takes us to another side. They’re also in here, they’re 
talking about there is a committee. The minister can have a 
funded advisory committee that I guess oversees the long-term 
investments of the dollars that are put . . . And I don’t know if 
it’s from companies. And we’ll have to work this out in 
committee if it’s individual companies that put that or if it’s the 
province, if it’s federal dollars, provincial dollars. But there’s a 
fund. And it’s a long-term fund is what I’m getting. It’s put 
there to make sure that should something happen, they can 
clean up the site. 
 
Now that process, as we talk about it, and I know we’ll have to 
go through that, but those individuals that are asked to sit on 
that and be the fund committee, advisory committee, there are 
some exemptions in here. 
 
Should they make some decisions to invest and, you know, I 
guess due diligence is . . . They’ve done all of this. They’ve 
followed the rules, and they’ve done what they can do to protect 
the investment as it goes on. But I guess where, you know, 
some situations come up and for some reason unknown to 
themselves, or they’ve followed all the rules but now there’s a 
problem and the fund doesn’t have the . . . I guess the 



3164 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2017 

investment doesn’t grow the way it is or achieve what it is or 
. . . and I don’t know if it’s losing money. And we’ll have to 
work through that. But there’s no liability on them. As long as 
they followed the rules and the obligations that have been set 
out by the ministry that oversees it, there is no obligation on 
them. So that’s one area where I noticed they’re making some 
amendments. 
 
But there’s a few other areas that they are making some changes 
and proposals. And I know for ourselves, we will have an 
opportunity in committee, my colleagues, to ask some questions 
and maybe of the minister and his officials to see why, who 
proposed this, what’s the difference, and what the changes are. 
So when I see that, we’ll get an opportunity. And you know, I 
don’t really have any more comments on this bill, but I know in 
committee my colleagues will have, as I’ve said, and we will 
ask some questions and get clarification as to what it is. So at 
this point I’m prepared to adjourn debate on the bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has adjourned 
debate on Bill No. 85. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 86 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Merriman that Bill No. 86 — The 
Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2017 be now read 
a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today and enter into debate on Bill No. 86, The Child and 
Family Services Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a lot of interest of course, having spent 20 
years as a social worker in this city working mainly with 
children, any time we discuss issues of child and family 
services, and certainly members on this side of the aisle have 
paid close attention to this bill. I understand, as the minister 
noted in second reading, that this bill is largely administrative. 
But it does set the groundwork for some further changes, and 
I’d like to focus much of my comments on that and perhaps ask 
some questions and maybe offer some suggestions with that 
regard. 
 
As noted by the minister when the second reading occurred 
with this bill on November the 7th, the minister noted that: 
 

The amendments in Bill 86 are generally administrative in 
nature. They set the stage for us to move forward in a more 
substantive change in the future that we require additional 
policy development, stakeholder consultation, and 
financial analysis prior to introduction. 

 

So certainly, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of administrative 
changes in this bill and I certainly will speak to some of those, 
but also would like to speak to and question what some of those 
substantive changes with regard to The Child and Family 
Services Act are. And certainly this is an area that does require 
our attention. It requires thought. It requires many people 
coming together and being very thoughtful and circumspect as 
to not only how we go forward with the state of child and 
family services in this province, but I think it also bears a lot of 
attention to look at what exactly got us to this place, in this 
province, at this time, and certainly as a country as well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Just looking at some of the changes that are proposed with this 
bill, a number of changes to definitions for example: adding a 
definition for business day, dispute resolution, and peace 
officer, which certainly seems understandable; and it also 
redefines a parent to clarify that it does not include the minister 
or a person providing out-of-home care service on behalf of the 
minister. So that I think is something important, Mr. Speaker, in 
terms of parental rights and defining who constitutes a parent. 
And while a child can be taken into care and treated well, that 
arrangement does not constitute a parental arrangement. 
 
There’s also updates in the section referring to what is in a 
child’s best interest. Changes made to . . . The child’s physical, 
mental, and emotional level of development has been changed 
to the mental, emotional, physical, and educational needs of the 
child and the appropriate care or treatment — or both — to 
meet those needs. 
 
One of the things I wonder if, brought this change about, 
certainly the advocate brought forth some very significant 
concerns with regard to a young man who was hearing impaired 
who was in care, and certainly if those who haven’t read it 
really ought to have a look at that document and understand just 
some of the challenges and really unbelievable conditions, 
frankly, Mr. Speaker, that some children recently have 
experienced in the system. 
 
And I think it is incumbent upon all of us to ensure that those 
type of instances do not happen again. And if we don’t have a 
full airing of them, if we don’t really seek to understand them 
and bring them out into the open, it’s often too easy to disregard 
them or treat them as one-offs, Mr. Speaker. And certainly in 
the case of our child welfare system, this is not a one-off issue. 
This is not a matter of, you know, one parent not having skills. 
This is really a systemic issue and it goes back to really the 
formation of our province. And I’ll get into some of that in a 
few minutes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another . . . and this is something I’m sure that we will have a 
number of questions when we get into committee. I know the 
critic will and a number of my colleagues. This is around 
eliminating the family review panels and boards. These boards 
were brought into existence for a reason, I would suspect, Mr. 
Speaker. The minister noted in his comments that they were not 
being regularly used and had never really been enacted in a 
consistent way across the province. So I wonder if there was a 
way . . . the reasons for them coming into existence in the first 
place, and if there were proper resources or training involved 
with those panels, if it’s something worth saving. Or because 
we didn’t resource it or pay attention to those panels, that they 



November 28, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3165 

are being disregarded and done away with. But that was not 
commented on in the second reading, so I think we’ll have 
some questions about that going into committee. 
 
It also notes that the family service board could be established 
to review cases. So another thing that we would have more 
questions about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It also notes that dispute resolution is being offered in place of 
mediation services, so that is something interesting, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s something that . . . The access to dispute resolution 
is something that I think really benefit a number of areas in our 
province, and sitting parties down and having trained staff and 
proper resources to be able to arrive at less contentious or 
acrimonious proceedings. So I would be more . . . I would be 
interested in hearing a little more about that, Mr. Speaker, as 
well. 
 
It also notes that section 83 and 56 are being repealed. They 
were passed but never proclaimed. And these two sections refer 
to the First Nations authorities and the government were never 
able to come to an agreement on the implementation of these 
two sections. They relate to the transfer of guardianship, 
financial assistance, and transfer of custody, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This bill was substantially changed in 1984, I think, Mr. 
Speaker. I would be willing to be corrected on that. There have 
been a number of changes since then, but we have not really 
addressed the substantive issues within our child welfare 
system, our child and family services system, and really, one of 
the elephants in the room is this, and that is that 15.6 per cent of 
the population of Saskatchewan identifies as First 
Nations/Métis, that 48 per cent of children in care in Canada are 
First Nations, Métis, or Inuit, and in this province 85 per cent of 
the children in care are First Nations or Métis. 
 
And these things, as I said, are not one-off. This is systemic. It 
is far reaching, and to treat it as anything other than as systemic 
really, I think, Mr. Speaker, is missing the point. If we treat 
these instances as one-off cases of parents failing to meet their 
obligations as parents and not look at the larger societal forces 
that have brought us to this place, where fully 85 per cent — 
and I think that’s a shocking number, Mr. Speaker — 85 per 
cent of the children in care in this province are First Nations 
and Métis. 
 
That is a systemic . . . I’m going to name it. It is the most, one 
of the most clear manifestations of systemic racism that I can 
possibly conceive of, Mr. Speaker, the fact that we have 85 per 
cent of children in this province in care having First Nations 
and Métis ancestry. And it is something, as I said in my earlier 
comments, that reaches back to the very formation of this 
province. If we go back to the formation of treaties, of course, 
residential schools, Mr. Speaker, would . . . There were issues 
of course prior to that, but imagining . . . I think we all must 
imagine and look fully at our history in terms of residential 
schools, residential schools that took First Nations children 
away from their families with the expressed goal of “taking the 
Indian out of the child,” Mr. Speaker, was one of the quotes that 
I remember. And you know, imparting a very strong sense of 
shame in many children about their own cultures, about their 
own families, their own communities, their own spiritual 
beliefs, even before you got to the rampant abuse, physical and 

sexual abuse, within those schools. 
 
There were experiments with starvation and near-starvation that 
were inflicted on children. And this is not a far-off history, Mr. 
Speaker. We are a relatively young country. And that type of 
systemic severing of family and community ties have impacts 
today. And lest we think that this is an issue that happened, you 
know, a hundred years ago, we had the last residential school in 
existence in this province that didn’t close until 1998, Mr. 
Speaker. That is not even 20 years ago. And so this is relatively 
recent history. 
 
And I bring this into the context of this bill because I don’t 
think that we can look at our child and family services Act or 
contemplate any substantive changes without involving in a real 
way the voices of First Nations communities and First Nations 
leadership. And certainly we have every indication that those 
communities are wanting to be at the table in a meaningful way 
to come up with solutions. 
 
And of course residential schools were not the end of it, Mr. 
Speaker. We have some indication that the Premier at some 
point — although we are running out of time, Mr. Speaker — 
may be interested in offering an apology for the Sixties Scoop, 
which was again very impactful. You had, between the 1960s 
and 1980s, 20,000 children that were taken from the care of 
their families and placed in the care of non-indigenous families, 
Mr. Speaker. And that again has another impact, a huge impact, 
and continues to have an impact today. 
 
Certainly I knew, I think probably many, many people . . . I had 
friends who were involved in the Sixties Scoop and to watch 
them try to find their siblings, their parents, to dig into their 
roots, and to have a sense of self, Mr. Speaker, even in cases 
where their homes were loving and supportive, it has an impact. 
And that is one of those developmental, I think, necessities that 
people have — to understand where they came from, to have a 
sense of pride in their heritage. And that was denied generation 
after generation in this province, but all the way across this 
country. 
 
And it has an impact. It directly impacts that 85 per cent of 
children in care percentage that I have spoken about, Mr. 
Speaker. And there are a number of voices that would like to 
enter in, would like to have their voices heard with regard to 
where we go from here with regard to child and family services. 
We have right now in this province, I believe it’s 17 agreements 
with First Nations Child and Family Services, which is a step in 
the right direction, Mr. Speaker, but there is some concern 
about the level of co-operation at those tables. 
 
And I’m just going to read a quote from Derald Dubois, who is 
the head of the Touchwood Child and Family Services. He 
noted, “We’re shut out, our leadership is shutout. They have no 
say in policy development.” Mr. Speaker, so here is an 
opportunity if the minister is contemplating further changes to 
The Child and Family Services Act, to sit down with not only 
these 17 First Nations who have child and family services 
agreements with the province, but larger communities 
throughout the province to really start to set right that which 
was set on such a . . . today, almost unimaginable road all those 
years ago in this province. 
 



3166 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2017 

[15:45] 
 
Quoting again from this article referencing Mr. Dubois, he says 
that “. . . agencies can only enforce the ministry’s policies and 
that in order to see . . . [substantive] change, both the 
community and its leaders need to be involved.” 
 
And so there is . . . I noted I might have some suggestions for 
the minister. That would be one. And I hope that that work is 
ongoing, and again that consultation is not just sitting down and 
presenting, you know, a few alternatives, that it’s really 
listening to those communities and understanding the wisdom 
and the history and the wishes of those communities. So 
hopefully we will see that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, someone I’d like to reference and I think really we 
could learn a lot from is Ms. Cindy Blackstock. And Cindy 
Blackstock, for those who don’t know, won a very significant 
battle at the Canadian Human Rights Tribunal about a year and 
a half ago. And that tribunal ruled that First Nations Child and 
Family Services are underfunded and discriminatory, and we 
have yet to see that set right. 
 
And that would be a place where the minister could enter in and 
lend his voice to ensure that children in Saskatchewan get the 
services that the Human Rights Tribunal has ruled that they are 
deserving of, that they are in need of, and up to this point, that 
they have been discriminated against by not receiving that level 
of resourcing and funding. 
 
And of course this also leads us to the issue of underfunding for 
children who attend school on-reserve. That level of funding is 
at about 60 per cent of what it is for children who attend 
provincially run schools. And that is a gap that has impacts of 
course for those children, but has impacts right across this 
province. And I would like to see a stronger voice, if we’re 
looking at things that really will impact the welfare of children, 
that really will impact, you know, moving away from these 
really indefensible numbers with regard to the number of 
children in care. That would be a place to start. And certainly, 
you know, the government has shown that they are more than 
willing to go to bat with the federal government on issues that 
they deem important. I would suggest that this is important. 
 
All of this . . . When you have children in care, regardless of 
what the care looks like, this impacts their schooling. We have 
an education gap in this province that by some studies is costing 
not only those children — depriving them of the right to have 
the education that they deserve — but is costing our economy 
$90 billion. And this has certainly gotten the attention of many 
people in this province. 
 
And I wish that we would see this as an investment, see the 
investment in our children as something that not only is the 
right thing to do, but actually has economic returns for all of us, 
Mr. Speaker. This is something that we very clearly have to 
work out and that we very clearly have not . . . We have not. 
We have failed with regard to children in care in this province. 
And frankly we have not invested in children the way that you 
would expect a civilized and forward-thinking province or 
country to. 
 
But every day is a new day, and we have an opportunity to 

make right. This will not be a quick solution because, as noted, 
the situation we find ourselves in today has its roots far back. 
But the first part of it is acknowledging and understanding that 
we do have an issue. And to suggest, as has been suggested, that 
we do not have a problem with racism in this province really 
defies belief. It is not looking; it is not listening to the facts if 
someone believes that this is not an issue in our province. 
 
And again I will refer back to that number of 85 per cent. It 
doesn’t matter what’s in your heart; it doesn’t matter what’s in 
your intentions. If you as a society allow injustices such as 85 
per cent of children of First Nations and Métis descent to be 
scooped up into foster care regardless of the reason and not look 
at more systemic solutions to that problem, you’re frankly 
turning a blind eye. So I am happy to hear that there is 
contemplation of changes to this legislation and to the way that 
child and family services are undertaken in this province, and I 
hope that this opportunity would be seized. 
 
Another document that I’d like to bring into the discussion here 
is one that has been brought up a lot — though maybe not 
enough — and that is the recommendations of the Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission of Canada, the calls to action. And 
the first section, and I don’t think that this is by chance at all, 
are under the heading of child welfare. Mr. Speaker, this is one 
of the main ways that we can redress and address and start to 
put right all of those decades of wrongs that we have been 
witness to or that we have inherited in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The first call is the call upon the federal government, “. . . the 
federal, provincial, territorial, and Aboriginal governments to 
commit to reducing the number of Aboriginal children in 
care . . .” And there are a number of steps under that, Mr. 
Speaker, and I would suggest if . . . Hopefully there’ll be 
broad-based consultation; there will be meaningful consultation. 
But at least start here. At least start here and read these calls to 
action. 
 
I know at one point we had a list of the calls to action that 
pertained to the province of Saskatchewan particularly. And 
unfortunately what we saw was not only were we not meeting 
all of those, we actually were regressing in some of the areas 
that we had made progress. And that is the wrong way to go, 
regardless. Human rights are human rights. And that doesn’t 
matter what the, you know, frankly what the price of oil is. This 
is an investment in our future. This is an investment in making 
right which has been so wrong for many, many years. And it is 
an opportunity for all of us in this province. 
 
And as has been noted, rightly, we are all treaty people. This is 
a project that we all need to take on in this province. This is 
something that we all need to look forward, look into ourselves, 
and come together in an honest way with honest intentions to 
make this right. And we can do that. Again, every day is a new 
day. We have an opportunity every day to start moving in that 
direction and I would suggest to the minister that this is a good 
place to start. 
 
Some of the other notes here: 
 

We call upon the federal government, in collaboration with 
the provinces and territories, to prepare and publish annual 



November 28, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3167 

reports on the number of Aboriginal children . . . who are 
in care . . . 
 
We call upon all levels of government to fully implement 
Jordan’s Principle. 
 

Again sometimes the medical needs of children are a factor 
impacting the determination that they are in need of care. 
Jordan’s principle, simply put, is the principle that when there is 
a child requiring medical services, that the child is provided 
those services first and we leave it to work out who to send the 
bill to later. Because what was happening and, unfortunately, 
still happens in this country is there is jurisdictional wrangling 
over who pays the bills. And you have children, in the case of 
Jordan of Jordan’s principle, who end up living their whole life 
in a hospital because the adults can’t figure out who needs to 
pay the bill. 
 
It’s not acceptable, Mr. Speaker. We can do better and we need 
to do better as a country. And we need to do better with our 
child and family services system in this province. We have 
everything that it takes in front of us. We just need the political 
will to do it, some time, put our minds to it in a thoughtful way, 
and really start putting kids first in this province. 
 
And it’s what . . . I’ve said this before, but it’s what led me 
here, was the belief and my experience that we were not doing 
that. We were failing to invest in children in this province. We 
were failing to see this as a priority issue, that it’s something 
that you might, you know, divert some funding to when times 
are good. But it’s one of the areas that gets cut back when times 
are not good, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ironically, some of the stressors that lead to having children in 
care are those things: financial issues, issues outside the child 
welfare system, of course. You know, children in care . . . I 
believe, to a person, there is no one here who would like to see 
children suffer. I believe that fully. But we have to understand 
that children don’t exist on their own as entities. They are born 
into families and to communities. And when those families and 
those communities are suffering and they don’t have the 
supports that they need, then children suffer. 
 
You know, it’s one thing to, you know, feel empathy and 
concern for children. I think sometimes that well-meaning, 
misplaced desire leads us to do things that are largely harmful 
in the long run, like taking them out of the care of their 
communities and their families, putting them in residential 
schools, scooping them up and putting them with other families, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we have to understand that in order to support children, we 
have to support families. We have rates of domestic violence in 
this province that are twice the national average. That impacts 
the number of children in care. A child in need of protection, 
one of the . . . Under the Act, one of the conditions that is 
deemed a child in need of protection is a child who witnesses 
family abuse. And so until we address the domestic violence 
issue in the province, you’ll continue to see kids going into care 
because of domestic violence. 
 
Housing is another issue. Some parents are not able to provide 
housing, which means that they are not able to provide the 

necessities of life for their children. And that is also a reason 
that some children are apprehended. 
 
Other issues — addictions. We certainly have not addressed 
addictions issues in this province. We have new opioids and 
other outbreaks of addiction that have not been fully addressed 
that are fuelling crime. They are fuelling incidents with the 
police. They’re fuelling a number of things. But they’re also 
fuelling children going into care, Mr. Speaker. And we saw 
some decline, but we’ve seen that number increase over the last 
several years. And until we address the root causes of child 
neglect and child abuse, we won’t address the number of 
children going into care. 
 
We of course have issues with the number of foster families. 
That’s an end solution. And I have empathy for that and 
certainly have respect for people who open their homes to 
children when that’s needed, but that, you know . . . And there 
has been some effort put there, which is very difficult, to recruit 
those families. But that is an issue after the parental rights have 
broken down, where children go into care. And maybe if we 
address some of the issues that put children into care more 
deliberately, we would have a lessened need. 
 
We have this crux right now where you have a declining 
number of foster homes and an increasing number of children in 
care, which has led to a number of children being placed in 
institutional care. What would have been a 24-hour daycare or 
agencies like that are now the place that children are calling 
home. Unfortunately also hotels at times, Mr. Speaker, we have 
seen. I know the critic on our side has asked a number of 
questions about the number of children who are being housed in 
hotel rooms. 
 
And there are some lovely staff, Mr. Speaker. There are people 
with good intentions. But you simply, as a child, that’s not a 
normal situation for children to spend any time growing up in 
24-hour daycares or growing up in hotel rooms. And it’s 
stressful for the staff. It’s stressful for the children. And I think, 
while I understand and appreciate the need for emergency 
services and emergency care, until we start to address these 
more systemic issues, this is going to be an ongoing issue. 
 
And frankly I’m afraid we’re moving not only toward a 
solution, we’re moving away. As we pull out supports, as we 
reduce funding, this is impacting. And I think it’s reasonably 
foreseeable by anyone who studies these things that as rates of 
poverty increase, as housing, access to housing decreases, as 
domestic violence remains high and climbing in some cases — 
or it’s certainly stable at twice the national rate — as we see 
rates of addiction increasing, as we see rates of mental heath 
issues along with a lack of supports and early intervention with 
regard to those issues, we will continue to see these really 
unacceptable rates. And this is one of those issues where, yes it 
will take some investment. But the returns, both in human terms 
but also in economic terms, if we have the political will to 
invest and to hold that space, if we make this a priority, this is 
something that will benefit all of us long term. 
 
[16:00] 
 
And as I’ve noted, I understand that there are no simple issues 
or no simple solutions here. This is an issue that has been 



3168 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2017 

complex to get us to this point. And it will take persistence, 
consistent resources, and political will. But hopefully we can 
decide as a province that this is not acceptable and that this is 
something we want to put our hearts and our minds to and be 
serious about coming up with a solution here. There are also, 
again, many more minds than mine and many more ideas for 
solutions here. And again, if there is no other document that is 
looked at, the calls to action in the truth and reconciliation. 
 
Another section is around education for reconciliation: 
 

We call upon the federal, provincial, and territorial 
governments, in consultation and collaboration with 
Survivors, Aboriginal peoples, and educators, to: 
 

Make age-appropriate curriculum on residential schools, 
Treaties, and Aboriginal peoples’ historical and 
contemporary contributions to Canada a mandatory 
educational requirement for Kindergarten to Grade 
Twelve students. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I hope that that’s the direction we continue to go 
in, in this province. 
 

Provide the necessary funding to post-secondary 
institutions to educate teachers on how to integrate 
Indigenous knowledge and teaching methods into 
classrooms. 
 
Provide the necessary funding to Aboriginal schools to 
utilize Indigenous knowledge and teaching methods in 
classrooms. 
 
Establish senior-level positions in government at the 
assistant deputy minister level or higher dedicated to 
Aboriginal content in education. 

 
Mr. Speaker, again I speak to this because it’s one of those 
instances where rather moving closer to fulfilling some of our, 
some of the recommendations of the call to action, I fear we’re 
actually lapsing backwards, Mr. Speaker, and it’s the wrong 
direction, and I hope that that changes again. 
 
Every time we enter into looking at changing legislation, 
looking at . . . I’m going to go back to the minister’s comments 
here: “. . . move forward in a more substantive change in the 
future.” 
 
When we’re looking at substantive changes to legislation and to 
how we undertake and think about child and family services in 
the province, it presents an opportunity. So I hope this is an 
opportunity that is fully taken by the minister and sets about the 
consultation looking at root causes of the crisis, the situation 
that we find ourselves in with regard to child and family 
services, and really again put our hearts and minds to finding a 
solution. And those solutions will have to come with resources, 
Mr. Speaker, and they will pay dividends, both again in terms 
of economic cost and as well as in human cost. 
 
And really, you know, when you look at our future, the growth 
of population, the fastest growing segment of population are 
First Nations children under five in this province. We have to 
do better. We have to do better for all children in this province. 

And again, as has been noted by members on both sides, we do 
know that we are all treaty people. All people in this province, 
those who have been here for a long time — the first people of 
this province — as well as newcomers, we are all treaty people, 
and this is a joint task. This is something that is in front of all of 
us that provides a tremendous opportunity should we choose to 
take it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m just going to look at my notes a bit here, Mr. Speaker. 
Again the bill itself is largely administrative but, as the minister 
said, it sets up perhaps some different or more substantive 
changes going into the future. So I hope that that process has 
already started. And I know that members of the opposition will 
have additional questions here. I know that we’ll have questions 
in committee about this bill, but would also be very interested 
in looking at the larger issue here, and that is how we provide 
child and family services in the province. 
 
One thing I would be remiss if I didn’t talk about was the folks 
who work in this area, both on the First Nations child and 
family services agencies that enter into agreement with the 
province, and also those who work within the ministry.  
 
This is one of those ministries that seems to be the last to 
receive additional funding and the first to be cut when times get 
tough. And that impacts all who work there. You look at 
caseloads. You look at workloads for those who work in the 
system. That has to be part of this as well. In order to be able to 
do the very important work that they need to do, there has to be 
some recognition of the size of caseloads, of the ability to 
connect with families. And there have to be some options, other 
than no involvement by the ministry or putting children in care. 
And that is something that really has eroded over the last 
number of years. 
 
If you’ll indulge me a personal story, I was working as a social 
worker, working with children who had witnessed violence, 
when my last daughter was born in 2006. When I left work and 
then when I came back — I had an extended mat leave in about 
2008 — and there was a real noticeable pullout of supports for 
families who were struggling, perhaps not yet in a position 
where they had a child in need of protection, but had indicated 
that they were struggling, and that they needed some additional 
support. And there were some, not enough, but there were some 
supports that families could access at that point in order to help 
them, you know, be it wraparound, some of the parental 
services that were available. 
 
And you’ve seen a real hollowing-out of those services. And I 
hear that from people all over the province that it really has 
become, you know, the people go . . . either aren’t entering into 
the system, or children are being apprehended. And there’s that 
suite, small as it was, and inadequate as it may have been, is 
gone. So either there’s no involvement, or children are 
apprehended in many cases. And that doesn’t leave the 
opportunity for parents to, you know, stick up their hand and 
say, hey I’m struggling; I need some help. 
 
And another thing, again if we’re still indulging the personal 
here, that I’ve noted over 20 years of working with families that 
is constant, is that parents love their kids and they want to do 
well by their children. And some situations make that infinitely 
harder than others to do, and if we can offer parents a little bit 



November 28, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3169 

of support . . . 
 
And the other thing is that the children tend to want to be with 
their families, regardless of what that looks like. So if we can 
provide some support at that level, and hold those families 
together, at least hold children in their communities and wrap 
them with people who care about them and understand them 
and, you know, remember their first steps and those things, 
that’s better for children where we can accommodate that, and 
where we can find our way to ensure that that happens in as 
many cases — if not all cases — as possible, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Kids are resilient, but they are impacted when they’re taken 
away from their communities. And if there are ways that we can 
find our way forward to providing those supports to ensure that 
kids get to stay within their communities . . . This isn’t about 
punishing parents for bad behaviour because that ultimately 
punishes the kids, Mr. Speaker. And you know, as well 
meaning as we may be, when we take children away from their 
families and their communities, there are impacts. And certainly 
that’s been the history of this province that we’ve seen time and 
time again. 
 
Again, we have an opportunity to get this right. I hope that 
we’re on that track. I look forward to further discussion on this 
proposed legislation, but with that, I am going to conclude my 
remarks and move to adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The member from 
Regina Lakeview has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 86, 
The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2017. Is that 
agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 87 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 87 — The Data 
Matching Agreements Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To join in 
on Bill 87, The Data Matching Agreements Act 2017, initially 
I’m going to talk about, I guess, privacy and information. Many 
people, whether it’s opposition, I think media, there’s different 
ways that you can request information from government 
ministries. But for whatever reason, whether it’s journalists, 
people request . . . And this bill is going to . . . There’s different 
ways that they request the information. And it’s almost like 
some of my colleagues have said, you know: trying to get 
answers is almost like pulling teeth from the current 
government, and that we’ve seen how hard it is to get that 
information. 
 
Sometimes, you know, people have to use the Privacy 
Commissioner, which he has a role to do to make sure that the 
information is provided, and get those supports from the 
Privacy Commissioner, you know, and his office to assist 

different individuals whether it’s companies . . . I guess it could 
just be for whatever reason they’re trying to get information 
that, I think, is for the public. And the public has a right to ask 
for certain information. And I think the commissioner, you 
know, does his role, an independent officer does his role as 
making sure that government’s held to account to provide that. 
 
And we’ve seen time and time again, I think of many different 
ones. And I’ll use that as an example before I get into, you 
know, the amount of actual information; sometimes it’s such a 
large amount. But you think about, you know, the GTH and 
trying to get some of the information. My colleagues here have 
been asking questions, trying to get information. Many 
journalists, many people have been trying to get some 
information. 
 
The government on that side of the House has an obligation and 
should have an obligation to the taxpayers of this province to 
provide information. And when they’re being asked, you know, 
they’re acting on behalf of the people. Well it’s the people that 
should have that access, and when they’re asked, should get the 
information. And it should be provided clearly. And I mean 
we’ve seen the kind of tactics that, you know, the government 
has used to not getting . . . Whether it’s the price, it’s just 
unbelievable some of the prices that some people are being 
asked to pay for getting information, a request. 
 
So we see that time and time again the track record of the 
government is not good. When it comes to citizens or people, it 
doesn’t matter who it is requesting information, the government 
sure has not done a very good job. And they said they’d be one 
of the most transparent, one of the upfront, one of the most . . . 
governments in history I believe is how that government . . . 
 
You know, they should be ashamed of themselves for some of 
the stuff that they have done and the hurdles they have put in 
for people to request information that belongs to them. This 
government has, you know . . . Don’t pat yourselves on the 
back because what you have done is an injustice to people who 
think it should be easy to ask your government for information 
that belongs to the public. Now I know there’s certain 
information that’s sensitive, and I understand that. And the 
Privacy Commissioner looks at things and can make a ruling on 
it. And that’s fine. That’s to protect people’s individual 
information. And stuff that’s very personal, I believe, should be 
protected, but there’s been a lot of information that people have 
asked that isn’t. 
 
[16:15] 
 
It’s money that government has used, the GTH, to buy land, to 
do certain things that they have done, to take taxpayers’ dollars, 
taxpayers’ dollars. And they have spent those dollars and used 
those dollars of the . . . You know, the GTH buying land or 
doing whatever, their track record has not been very good. 
 
And we’re still waiting for the RCMP [Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police]. They’ve done their investigation and it’s been 
moved, you know, for someone else to have a look, you know, 
a look at. And we’re hoping at the end of the day, you know, it 
comes back and we’ll hold people accountable. The government 
and ministers and whoever else should be held accountable will 
be held. And that’s what the people demand, of this province 



3170 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2017 

are demanding. And we hope and we’ll do all we can to make 
sure that happens but, like I said, that just goes to show you 
where you’re trying to get information. 
 
But the other side of this is in this case here. And I want to get 
into that because I’ve talked, you know, about how individuals 
get information, but when we’re dealing with this, you know, 
this data matching, what they’re talking about is a large volume 
of information. So you might have — and I’ll give you an 
example — you might have a journalist, you know, that decides 
they want a large piece of data that would come through. So 
you know, giving it the way governments would do, there was a 
way to process that and bring that information, you know . . . 
the way we have technology. Then you might have . . . 
Government would send that electronically, would send that 
information to a journalist. 
 
Now that journalist or whoever it is requesting that information 
— and it’s talking about a large, large volume of data that 
they’re retrieving and getting — government will provide that 
to them. Now should the government provide it or should the 
Privacy Commissioner say the government has to provide that 
and says you need to do that, that large amount of data would 
come forward. Now there is a process, you know, and it talks 
about the tracking. And it’s a program, from my understanding, 
that they would use, and it’s software. It would track it. It would 
actually, you know, analyze it and give them some numbers, I 
guess, what they’re looking for. So there’s a provision in there 
to do that. 
 
But having said that, there’s also a provision in here, with the 
amendments that are being proposed in this agreement, that 
there’s holding that organization or it’s a journalist or whatever, 
it’s giving them the responsibility. The onus is on them to 
protect that information, to make sure that that information and 
data is protected. And if it’s not protected, there’s a provision in 
here that this individual, should they breach that agreement 
that’s in there, they might have and go up to a $50,000 fine. 
They could be held accountable, and the fine is 50,000, should a 
fine be . . . [inaudible] . . . it could be. So when you’re seeing 
that . . . 
 
But it also talks about having somebody almost like a 
coordinator of the access of information, that they have to 
provide information to whoever should that individual be 
working for. And I don’t know if it’s going to belong to a 
ministry or if this is just someone within a Crown would do 
this. So they would be able to, you know, they would be able to 
take that information and provide that. 
 
But what’s interesting is after they get the data and they have 
the data, after two years — two years, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 
they have to I guess it’s delete or make sure to whoever is 
coordinating that, or they have to answer to I guess the ministry 
or the minister, saying how — from my understanding — they 
have dealt with that data and how they got rid of it. And they 
have to get rid of, from my understanding — and we’re going to 
ask some questions — they have to make sure that they get rid 
of the data and it’s done, and the information they have, that it’s 
protected. There’s a way to do it so they’re going to have to 
make sure they comply to the rules and regulations to make sure 
they have . . . When they agree to taking that data, they for two 
years have to agree how are they going to dispose of that data 

and the information. 
 
Now I don’t know. They just can’t take that information, from 
my understanding, and I know we have to ask these questions. 
They can’t just take that information and I think share it with 
anybody. I’m not sure how that process is going to work. And I 
know we’re going to have more questions, and there must be a 
reason why this is coming forward at this time. Maybe it’s 
because of the government’s terrible track record when it comes 
to providing information when the public asks or, you know, 
this side, the official opposition asks or reporters ask for 
information. And there might be a reason why, and they’re 
doing this. 
 
But I don’t know at this point because I haven’t talked to the 
minister. And I know my colleagues and the critics, they will 
get an opportunity and they will ask, you know, some of those 
questions in committee, and we’ll go through this to find out 
exactly. Point by point we’ll consult with people, and we’ll do 
our due diligence on this side. Government needs to do their 
due diligence. 
 
So really at this point, you know, just talking about overall, 
there isn’t a lot. I know we’ll have more questions in 
committee, but I don’t have a lot more on this bill right now, 
87, The Data Matching Agreements Act. So I’m prepared to 
adjourn debate, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The member from 
Cumberland has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 87, The 
Data Matching Agreements Act, 2017. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 88 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 88 — The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And it’s always nice to be able to rise in the House 
and enter into the debates on these bills as they come forward 
— 88, that’s how many keys are on a piano. I just wanted to 
share that with the House. I don’t know if that’s auspicious or 
not. But this is a fairly uneventful bill I guess in some ways. It 
will have impacts on drivers in different situations, so I’ll just 
kind of charge in here and get right to the meat of it. 
 
The minister in his second reading speech indicated that there’s 
a few changes that are coming forward because this Act is the 
one that deals with considerations with respect to people injured 
in vehicle collisions as part of the Act. It’s a large Act, The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Act. 
 
And I guess, just as a commentary, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 
know that when people are injured, innocent people are injured 



November 28, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3171 

in automobile accidents, we do our best to make sure that 
they’re looked after. And that’s what some of these changes are 
doing, for example ensuring families get counselling or have 
access to counselling, different things like that. 
 
And I think one of the saddest things that I have ever 
encountered since I became an MLA and even when I was 
nominated as a candidate before 2011, the election in 2011, I 
met a family in Saskatoon who are also victims. But if they had 
been hit by a drunk driver in a car, they would have been 
covered far greater than they are because the young man in 
question was assaulted and brain injured as an innocent victim. 
It was actually a house party in Saskatoon which was stormed 
and he had just happened to be in the wrong place at the wrong 
time. He spent a considerable amount in the hospital in a coma. 
He was 17 at the time, but his brain injuries are quite severe, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And he’s talked to various ministers through his mother who is 
one of the best advocates I’ve ever come across. Her name is 
Sharlene Lange and his name is Kutler Lange. And also 
Sharlene’s family, her sisters, have been strong advocates for 
Kutler, but he still was only able to access the victims of crime 
funding. Even the judges at the time when the court . . . The 
fellow who assaulted him was found guilty. He spent time. He 
was charged and found guilty. And then he got out of jail and 
he since has been able to take over his father’s business and has 
a family and children. He is a successful businessman in 
Saskatoon. Kutler’s not so lucky, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And his mother Sharlene, along with the sociologist that I met, 
pointed out how as a society we are more inclined to support 
victims of automobile accidents — and he had sociological 
studies that proved that — than young men who are harmed as a 
victim of a crime of assault. And I know there’s another 
gentleman in Saskatoon as well who’s in the same situation. 
Because he’s brain injured, he will never be fully employed. He 
will likely . . . He has all sorts of subsequent health issues and 
will have difficulty having what we would call a normal life, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. But he will never get the support that 
someone who is injured in a car accident would get. 
 
Now it used to be if victims of crime, catastrophic victims of 
crime, or I forget where the catastrophic fit in, but it was in 
those situations where someone was so injured that the $25,000 
that is provided to victims of crime basically got used up in 
physiotherapy, Mr. Speaker, for the first few years. 
 
So I always want to comment on Kutler’s situation when we 
talk about victims of automobile accidents because this is a gap. 
And prior to the no-fault legislation that came in in the early 
’90s, this bill actually was there for people who had 
catastrophic results from —as a victim, an innocent victim — 
from various other crimes. And sadly that bill was repealed and 
now there’s no coverage for someone like Kutler. So I just 
wanted to make sure, Mr. Speaker, that I spoke to that as we 
talk about victims of automobile accidents. 
 
What happens in the changes here is we see once again, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the moving of definitions. And some of the 
clarity we find in the Act is being moved to the regulatory 
authority. And for people . . . I worry because one of the goals 
of this bill as introduced by the minister was to provide more 

clarity around the appeal period, for example, when some sort 
of conviction results in a change in your driver rating. 
 
And I have to confess, Mr. Speaker, I have been below zero on 
my driver rating from time to time, and I know how grumpy I 
get when I get that extra cost, when I have to pay more money 
to get my driver’s licence or my registration. So it is expensive 
and those of us who choose to perhaps go a little faster than we 
should and are charged for that, we know that those are going to 
be extra expenses. But how do you find out the rules for 
complaints if you want to complain about the rating that you’ve 
been given for whatever reason? 
 
Sadly more of that, more and more of that is now being moved 
over to the regulatory side of things. And I feel that it’s difficult 
enough for people to find laws on the Internet and understand 
where the clauses are that affect them. But when you move it 
further off into the regulatory sphere, it becomes more and more 
difficult for members of the public to understand what their 
actual rights are. 
 
So I’m worried that there may be actually a contrary result to 
what the minister is hoping for when it comes to things like 
they’re moving the timing of the appeal to 90 days instead of 30 
days. Well you can’t even find that in the Act anymore, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. So I think it’s going to be difficult unless 
hopefully the website will have some very clear directions and 
will have, you know, hyperlinks or whatever is needed to direct 
people to the right place so they know how long the appeal 
period is. I know the minister said that it used to be 30 days but 
in practice people were allowed 90 days, so they’re just 
reflecting the practice. 
 
And also instead of the board contacting the driver to schedule a 
hearing, the practice is the driver contacts the board, so they’re 
reflecting that as well. But I think it’s being moved over to the 
regulations which will make it more difficult for drivers to 
figure out the ins and outs of the appeal process. 
 
They’re changing . . . “Chargeable incident” in section 6 of the 
existing Act is a fairly lengthy definition. It has some 
implications for drivers. And there’s some, apparently in the 
Criminal Code, some changes that the government made in 
2017 to the rules, needed legislative change as the minister 
indicated. And again, you know, I find that I’m often speaking 
to bills that are correcting oversights, and again this is another 
bill where there was an oversight in January. There were some 
amendments made in January. And I know we weren’t sitting in 
January, but there were two additional offences apparently 
added to the list that triggered payment of pain and suffering 
bereavement damages. 
 
So they didn’t do their homework and didn’t realize that this 
also needed a correction in the bill. So “chargeable incident” is 
now being defined in the regulations which means it will be 
harder to find, but hopefully that they won’t need legislative 
changes. And I think that’s always the saw-off. Once you want 
more flexibility in changing the rules, you don’t want to have to 
come to this House and have it debated on the floor. I always 
worry about the impact on democracy and on the transparency 
and accountability of a government if changes are being moved 
into the regulatory sphere, that only the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council, and that is the cabinet, will have the final say. 



3172 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2017 

And we don’t hear about those changes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
until we get the copy of the regulations as amended. So there’s 
no debates. There’s no ability to debate, and I think that’s 
something that is a loss for democracy ultimately. I understand 
the administrative expediency of those types of legislative 
changes, but I think overall there has to be a balancing, and I 
fear that we’re losing some of that balance with all of these 
moves to the regulations. 
 
[16:30] 
 
A couple of other things that the Act is doing. So as I 
mentioned earlier, they’re changing the “chargeable incident” 
definition, moving it to the regs. We are also changing the 
appeal process and who is to contact who, and those 
amendments are going to reflect that. The changes to offences 
that are added . . . You know, there were offences added to the 
list so we need a statutory change to reflect that. And basically 
it’s how you can recover insurance money for pain and 
suffering or bereavement damages from a third-party liability 
insurance. I’m not sure how that works in Saskatchewan when I 
would think a large number of drivers are covered under SGI 
and I don’t know what the percentage of that is, so I’m not sure 
what kind of numbers this will impact, and perhaps it’s 
something we’ll ask about in committee. 
 
Also because of the changes in funding for people that are good 
drivers and people that are bad drivers, a lot of . . . I think the 
reward for being a “good driver” has been increased, but then 
the negative impact is, if you choose to not be a good driver and 
for whatever reason choose not to follow the law, you’re double 
penalized even further now with some changes. As a result of 
that, some people simply cannot make the payments they need 
to make to SGI to continue driving. So I guess the government 
is being somewhat lenient here because they’re now allowing 
people with these charges to make a payback schedule rather 
than having to pay the amount in full because riskier drivers 
have now had their penalties doubled. It can be very 
challenging. 
 
So I don’t know if that’s a good thing or not. I guess it lessens 
the pain for people who are penalized by choosing to be a risky 
driver. I’m not sure if that changes behaviour or not, and if 
that’s a motivator. I mean nobody likes to go below zero on 
their rating. We all know that, but sometimes you do, and so if 
the penalties are greater . . . I’m not sure why we don’t just fine 
people greater amounts and do it all up front, but somehow 
through the back door SGI is doing this, as I would call it, a 
secondary fine, but it’s meant to be behaviour changing and I 
would like to know whether that is in fact working. 
 
So the final change that the minister talked about was 
counselling costs for family members of someone injured in a 
collision and again, what’s happening there? Guess what, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker? They’re moving it to the regulations. So if you 
look at . . . There’s been a number of changes to section 81, 
which is the regulatory section. It’s a very long section already, 
but we’re adding at least 10, maybe 11 new changes to the 
regulations in terms of what can be done and what rules can be 
established under the regulations. 
 
I hope that when people look at these things and they see the 
word “prescribe,” the common interpretation of the word 

“prescribe” would be get a prescription from a pharmacist. 
That’s what we think of as prescribing. But it actually means, 
when you prescribe in an Act, it means it goes into the 
regulations. So as long as people understand what the word 
“prescribing” means in this context, they will know that they 
have to look further past the Act into the regulations. 
 
So I guess those are basically the changes that are happening 
and at this point I know we’ll have some questions about 
whether the efficacy of these changes, how SGI is considering 
them, and how they’ll make a difference. 
 
And so I’m going to . . . I know that others will want to weigh 
in on this as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So at this point I will 
move that we adjourn the debate on Bill No. 88, An Act to 
amend The Automobile Accident Insurance Act. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The member from 
Saskatoon Nutana has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 88, 
The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2017. Is 
that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 89 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Eyre that Bill No. 89 — The School 
Choice Protection Act/Loi sur la protection du choix d’école 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to stand today 
and add my remarks with regards to the debate for Bill No. 89, 
The School Choice Protection Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of the bills are very important and have a lot of 
relevance but I would have to say that this is a really 
contentious bill that has been in a lot of discussion with many 
groups of people. And I know for myself, I’ve been talking to 
some of the stakeholders and individuals who will be impacted 
with regards to this bill. And I know a lot of the members on 
both sides of this House probably have been as well because 
people have been very vocal about how they feel about the 
issues with regards to this bill. 
 
And I’ll start off by saying, Mr. Speaker, that I truly believe that 
this is just a political move by the Saskatchewan Party because 
they know that they don’t have a lot of good things happening 
for them lately and haven’t been making some decisions that 
are really unpopular with the people in Saskatchewan, and so 
they’re trying to earn some points here. And I believe that the 
stakeholders are really identifying how much this is a political 
move. And I don’t think we should be making decisions just to 
gain some support. We should be making the right decisions, 
and I’ll get into more of that later. 
 
I want to talk a little bit about the context of this bill first, Mr. 
Speaker. Bill No. 89 proposes several amendments to The 



November 28, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3173 

Education Act of 1995. And it is a response from the April 2017 
decision of the Court of Queen’s Bench on the legal challenge 
brought forward by the Good Spirit School Division, also 
known as the Theodore court case. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
encourage every member of this House to look through this 
court decision, to read through the findings. This was put 
forward by Justice Donald Layh, and it was a 242-page 
decision, so it’s a really length decision. He goes into a lot of 
detail. 
 
And I encourage every member of this House to really look into 
that. And I know all the people in education — teachers and 
administrators and school board members — have also, when 
they’ve contacted me, they have also encouraged me to do that. 
And I have had an opportunity to review that. So I think until 
you have all the information, you can’t make a decision, and so 
I’m glad I did look into that. 
 
So with regards to this court case, Mr. Speaker, they found that 
the funding of non-Catholics who attend Catholic separate 
schools to be unconstitutional. And my understanding is, too, it 
applies to other faith-based schools with people who are 
attending that don’t belong to that faith. And so this is a really 
important decision that was made and would have a serious 
impact on both school divisions. So the court found that the 
government funding for non-Catholics attending Catholic 
separate schools “. . . violates sections 2(a) and 15 of the 
Charter, which violates the state’s duty of religious neutrality.” 
 
So that’s what the minister said with regards to her remarks. 
And so if this decision comes into effect, this will potentially 
have a significant effect on attendance in the Catholic separate 
school divisions as well as funding because, as we know, 
there’s a lot of people who attend the Catholic schools that are 
not of the Catholic religion and they’ve chosen to go to those 
schools for whatever reasons that they have. 
 
And I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, that when this came forward and 
the decision was made and the information was brought 
forward, both me and my partner read this decision because, as 
I’ve said before, my partner’s involved in education. He’s a 
principal of a school, and so decisions with regards to education 
have always been something that we talk about within our 
home, and we’re of Catholic religion, both me and my partner. 
But I’ve chosen to send my children to a public school, and he 
chose to send his children to a Catholic school. And so we 
understand the importance of being able to choose the education 
for your children and the importance of that. 
 
And so I think with the Government of Saskatchewan and . . . 
My understanding is the Government of Saskatchewan, along 
with Christ the Teacher Roman Catholic Separate School 
Division, both have filed appeals on this ruling. And so, Mr. 
Speaker, I think that’s definitely the direction to go — go to an 
appeal, follow the judicial system, and ensure that the proper 
due course is being laid out. And I’ve had opportunity to talk to 
the school board, the Catholic school board in Prince Albert 
anyway, and I know they indicated that they felt comfortable 
with that, going in the appeal process and then after the appeal 
process, making a decision. 
 
This just being a decision that was made and, again in my 
opinion, as a political front. So it looks like once again the Sask 

Party is playing politics with our kids’ classrooms, and I don’t 
agree with that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also Bill 89 allows the Saskatchewan government to invoke 
section 33 of the Charter, commonly known as the 
notwithstanding clause, and to allow The Education Act to 
operate notwithstanding sections 2(a) and 15 of the Charter. But 
also section 44 of the Human Rights Code will be declared to 
operate notwithstanding sections 4, 12, and 13 of the Human 
Rights Code. So these are really serious legislation that we have 
here, Mr. Speaker. And the notwithstanding clause is a really 
important tool for government to use in really serious, dire 
situations that they have no other options. But in this situation, 
Mr. Speaker, we do have other options. And the government 
has already followed through with those other options, which is 
filing the appeal and going through the process, the judicial 
process that we should go through. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Premier himself even said and admitted 
that this is not really necessary, and so why the Sask Party 
wants to put politics ahead of our kids’ classrooms makes no 
sense to me. I think this is one way that they could avoid having 
to talk about all the deep cuts that they’ve made into education 
and not feeling that they need to answer to that and the tough 
decisions that they’ve had to put school boards in. I feel for 
every school board in this province that has had to try to 
manage a budget that is unmanageable. 
 
Someone was telling me, it wasn’t perfect under an NDP 
government but at least we had money to fund education and to 
do what was necessary to provide a good quality education for 
our kids. And you know, Mr. Speaker, that’s the main thing is 
ensuring that we have enough funding so that we can provide 
the services that we need to for our kids in the classroom. And 
the school boards have had to really make these tough decisions 
and put themselves in really tough circumstances where parents 
aren’t happy. But what it really comes down to is it’s because of 
the decisions of the members across here, the government, and 
their decision to underfund education that has put us in this 
position. 
 
So again I want to stress the importance that we completely 
support publicly funded education in Saskatchewan, and that 
includes both the Public and the Catholic school systems, and 
that is something that is a core belief for us. But like we said 
before, we feel that you should go through the judicial system, 
the proper way. 
 
And there’s no question that, unchallenged, that this ruling 
would make fundamental changes to education and classrooms, 
not only in Saskatchewan but the entire country, Mr. Speaker, 
because whatever decision and whatever ends up happening 
here with regards to education, I am pretty sure that’s going to 
affect other provinces of how they’re managing education as 
well. And so this will have a long effect, but we know that in 
order to move forward we need both time and clarity, and I 
believe that the appeal provides both of that, provides the time 
and clarity that we need. But again the Sask Party’s just 
grandstanding and providing none of this, and they’re just using 
this as a political tool. 
 
[16:45] 
 



3174 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2017 

And we need to realize that this notwithstanding clause should 
not be something that’s played around with. It’s a really 
important tool. The people need to understand that we can’t just 
use this whenever we feel that our government’s losing ground. 
We need to only put that in when it’s the last option, and in this 
case it’s not the last option, Mr. Speaker. So for the Sask Party 
to throw it around before the appeal has been decided, I feel 
that’s completely irresponsible. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I know the critic that’s involved here. 
She’s already done a lot of work with regards to this profile and 
she has been and will continue to meet with the stakeholders 
and have that dialogue. And I know she’ll have a lot of 
questions to add to the discussion when she’s approaching the 
minister. And I know my other colleagues also have a lot of 
information that they would like to add to this debate, and so at 
this point I will move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 89, The 
School Choice Protection Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert Northcote 
has adjourned debate on Bill No. 89. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 90 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Makowsky that Bill No. 90 — The 
Heritage Property Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure today to enter into a very important bill, Bill No. 90, 
An Act to amend The Heritage Property Act. And it’s one I 
know that we’ll have a lot of discussion about, and we have a 
lot of concerns about what this really means. If on one hand it’s 
as what the minister says, to streamline and make the processes 
more efficient and effective, then how can anybody be against 
that? But I think there’s some unintended consequences and 
some history here that we think we need to be well, well, well 
aware of before we go too far down the road of expressing 
support for this. 
 
And of course as the minister has noted, and of course as we all 
noted, we are so fortunate to be working in a heritage property 
ourselves, the Legislative Building, of which we went through a 
major renovation just a few short years ago — one or two — 
where we had spent . . . I think the actual bill was something 
like $21 million that we saw. 
 
But of course we are very fortunate, and of course in a province 
like ours that since the recent settlement of Europeans we’ve 
seen an increase of heritage properties. But this is not only 
speaking to that type of heritage. It does talk about 
archaeological properties of which I and we have talked about. 
In fact this House has passed a motion to the effect, supporting 
in Saskatoon, Wanuskewin and their goal of being nominated 

for the first UNESCO [United Nations Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization] site here in Saskatchewan because 
of the cultural significance of Wanuskewin. And we are 
certainly hoping that that actually happens. The processes are in 
place and we know that in Ottawa the people there are, within 
the various departments, I think there’s two or three that are 
preparing that case. 
 
In Saskatchewan we are supportive and I do want to recognize 
that, I think it was last year that we had an all-party resolution 
in support of that. And that is actually something that they use 
as part of their information package, that there’s wholehearted 
support in Saskatchewan for Wanuskewin. 
 
So it is of the whole gamut, it runs the whole gamut of what 
speaks to our heritage as a people in our various cultures here in 
Saskatchewan. So we have some interesting pieces and I think 
this one that we need, that we to take some time. But we have 
had a couple of letters. And I know that every, I believe, every 
member here has received a letter from the Saskatchewan 
Heritage Foundation, and I’ll take a minute to review that. 
 
But there was also a letter that was just published just 
November 1st of 2017 by Dr. Merle Massie, a former SHF 
[Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation] director from Biggar, that 
was published in the Regina Leader-Post that talks about what 
the province needs to prove that heritage matters. And I 
certainly agree. I certainly agree with that. But I’ll review that 
and I know that we may not have enough time this afternoon, 
but I do want to speak some points on this because I think it’s 
very, very important. 
 
I want to reflect on the letter that I received, and I do believe 
many others have. It’s so interesting because so many of us in 
our own ridings have heritage properties. And I think this was 
the intent of what heritage means in our own constituencies. 
The writer here — and the writer is the executive director or the 
Chair of the boards, Neil Russell — sent one to all of us, but it 
was also copied to the Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport. So 
we’re all well aware of the significance of heritage in our 
constituencies, and he writes that he wants to share with us the 
investment has been made in preserving and conserving 
Saskatchewan heritage in our constituencies. 
 
And he writes, and I quote: 
 

By way of background, the SHF is a Crown agency with a 
legislative mandate through The Heritage Property Act and 
related regulations to invest in conservation of 
Saskatchewan’s unique history. The foundation’s strategic 
direction is entrusted to a Lieutenant Governor in Council 
appointed board of directors. 

 
It goes on to say that “The SHF is the only remaining heritage 
conservation and preservation program and thus has a 
significant responsibility in the conservation and preservation of 
Saskatchewan’s historic resources and assets.” 
 
It talks about the provincial impact. The SHF has provided 
grants and programs that support conservation since 1991, 
invested more than $9 million in 1,200 conservation projects 
across Saskatchewan, and celebrated its 25th anniversary in 
2015-16, and in that year gave out over $400,000. 



November 28, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3175 

And it talks about how when you have heritage projects, the 
ability to leverage private sector investment is as much as 12 
to 1, and that’s very significant. And so it goes on but talks 
about the challenging budget that we had in the previous year 
where we saw the impact of the provincial budget where their 
budget was slashed from $504,000 to a mere $289,000, but in 
fact still gave out significant amounts of money. 
 
Now in my own riding, Mr. Speaker — and you would be 
aware of these buildings downtown — 2006, the 
Fairbanks-Morse warehouse restoration conversion. The award 
that year was $13,000 that was able to be given to that project, 
and that was so huge. One was the Doors Open, the city of 
Saskatoon got a $2,000 grant. The two churches — or it’s 
actually one church that I know has been lobbying very, very 
hard for conservation funding — received three grants: over 
2011 they got $49,000; 2012, the Cathedral of St. John the 
Evangelist got 30,000; and then in 2013 again St. John’s 
Cathedral got another 30,000. So they were able to receive 
$109,000 over those three years. But meeting with them 
regularly and their very effective lobbying, they were actually 
asking for over $200,000, in fact it was almost 300,000. It’s not 
quite . . . While it sounds great they got $109,000, they were 
asking actually for more. 
 
And actually what’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, I was looking 
through this list and checked with the Regina folk. We were 
married in St. Matthew’s Church on Winnipeg Street, and it’s 
also a heritage building and got a grant of 25,000. So I don’t 
know what it is about me and heritage, but seems to be 
following me around. So very important. I think about these 
things. 
 
But I do think it’s critical that we do fund these cultural 
landmarks in our communities, and whether they’re 
archaeological digs, archaeological sites such as Wanuskewin. 
And I also think about in my hometown, the Mortlach site, 
which I wonder if it is actually a heritage site. It should be. It 
was the first professionally dug archaeological site in 
Saskatchewan and done in 1955. And I’m just reading about 
that now and thinking that should be protected in some way. 
 
So there’s a lot of work here. And so the two changes that this 
government really is looking for, to do . . . And there’ll be much 
more to talk about because we have some letters that raise some 
concerns. The one is, changes the duty of the review board to 
ensure operational separation from the rest of the foundation. 
And there’s three people who are appointed solely to carry out 
the review board duties. 
 
Now I understand that there has to be some arm’s-length 
distance both from the government and from the foundation, but 
I hope that these people are people who have the technical 
expertise, when they’re making the decisions on the appeals 
around the designation or changes they would like to see to 
heritage properties that they do have some expertise that they 
bring to the table. This is critical. This is critical because when 
you are working with heritage property, it is very important that 
we have the long view in mind. And sometimes we often get 
distracted by short things that are happening right in front of us 
and that we would like to expedite decisions that might have a 
huge impact. 
 

And so this is really important. And I know that this is a bit of a 
concern, particularly as the province is growing quickly, that 
sometimes we don’t see the value in older buildings. We see 
challenges where we really, frankly, should see opportunities, 
opportunities because we all know how we love to go to, when 
we’re out travelling around . . . And I was just talking to folks 
about the fact that we were down to Charlottetown and the fact 
that we saw . . . And many of us, the folks who were there, had 
supper at the Government House, the house where Canada was 
actually founded. And this is the argument Prince Edward 
Island has. They say that it was the birthplace of Confederation, 
but they didn’t actually join. But in Ottawa, it talks about it 
being, you know, the home of our country. 
 
But these are important things. Charlottetown or Regina or 
Wanuskewin or Mortlach or some of the other places that were 
mentioned, like the town of Hague, the water tower there — all 
of these are critically, critically important that we get this right. 
 
And so I hope that next time when I’m able to speak to this, I 
can talk a little about the letter that Dr. Merle Massie wrote 
because while he talks about the good things that have 
happened, for example the refurbishment of the dome here, that 
in fact that we are putting a lot of our heritage property at risk 
because we are not investing, we are not investing the dollars 
that should be. 
 
Now the government on the other side says, well, you know, we 
always want to spend, spend, spend. This is something that 
you’re looking at the long-term investments, long-term 
investments. And we saw a budget that was slashed from about 
600,000 to about 200,000 or 300,000, and it is a dangerous 
thing. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there will be lots that need to be said about 
this particular bill. It is one that we cannot just go quietly. So 
with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we adjourn Bill No. 
90, An Act to amend The Heritage Property Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 90. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So the 
committee may sit this evening, I move that this House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It being near 5 o’clock, it has been moved this 
Assembly do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly now stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:59.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3145 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3145 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3145 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3146 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3146 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3146 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3146 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 3146 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3146 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3147 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3147 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3147 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3147 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3147 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3147 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3148 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3148 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3148 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Diabetes Awareness Month 
  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3148 
 Saskatoon Advocate Recognized for Contributions to Gender Equality 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3149 
 New Computerized Tomography Scanner in Lloydminster 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3149 
 Regina Philanthropist Invested Into the Order of Canada 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3149 
 Physician Named Cameco Chair in Indigenous Health 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3150 
 North Battleford Vikings Win 3A Provincial Championship 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3150 
 Saskatchewan Highly Ranked in Investment Attractiveness Survey 
  Carr .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3150 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 SaskPower Project and Consultation With First Nations 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3151 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3151 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3151 
 Funding for Municipalities 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3152 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3152 
 Global Transportation Hub and Details of Land Transactions 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3152 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3152 
 Access to Reproductive Health Services and Members’ Views on Abortion 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3153 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3153 
 Closure of Railway Loading Facilities 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3154 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3154 
 Funding for Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3154 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3154 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 112 — The Miscellaneous Vehicle and Driving Statutes (Cannabis Legislation) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3155 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3155 
MOTIONS 
 Amendments to Rule 14 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3155 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 110 — The Animal Protection Act, 2017 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3156 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3157 
 Bill No. 111 — The Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3158 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3160 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 85 — The Reclaimed Industrial Sites Amendment Act, 2017 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3163 
 Bill No. 86 — The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2017 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3164 
 Bill No. 87 — The Data Matching Agreements Act 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3169 
 Bill No. 88 — The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2017 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3170 
 Bill No. 89 — The School Choice Protection Act/Loi sur la protection du choix d’école  
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3172 
 Bill No. 90 — The Heritage Property Amendment Act, 2017 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3174 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

 
Hon. Steven Bonk 

Minister of the Economy 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 
Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Larry Doke 
Minister of Government Relations  

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 
Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Nancy Heppner 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Gene Makowsky 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  
and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 


