






















































Hansard: November 15, 2017


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 12A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 15, 2017, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Nicole Sarauer 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Hon. Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Hon. Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 
Vacancies — Kindersley, Melfort 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 47; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 2 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2917 
 November 15, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave, I would 
like to make a personal statement. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Apology  
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Facts as they were 
related to me about an in-class presentation are now in dispute 
from another account. Erring on the side of caution, probity, 
and the honour of the Assembly, I apologize unequivocally to 
this House for the disputed account I included in my Throne 
Speech reply. 
 
I want to be clear that our government implemented and 
continues to support, also unequivocally, mandatory treaty 
education in our system. We were the first government in 
Canada to implement such curriculum, and I will continue to 
work toward its continuation and its strengthening, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I’ll take this opportunity. We do have a guest 
in from Manitoba, the Deputy Speaker, Doyle Piwniuk. Would 
you give a wave? He had the opportunity to come out and visit 
us yesterday, and today we had a good visit again in my office. 
And I believe he’s going to be meeting with the Minister of 
Energy and Resources later today. So could everyone please 
welcome Doyle to his . . . or not his Assembly, our Assembly. 
We’re getting him over. He’s going to be cheering for the 
Riders soon enough, but please welcome him to our Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize our Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
join with you in welcoming my colleague the Deputy Speaker 
from Manitoba. We had an opportunity to have quite a good 
visit and compare notes as to how their legislature operates, 
particularly from a Deputy Speaker’s point of view. And I must 
say, Mr. Speaker, that I will certainly prefer our system here 
because Doyle had indicated that he had a very long night very 
recently, just to get some of the business of their House done. I 
believe they were sitting beyond 4 a.m. here just very recently, 
and I don’t think we want to do that. But I would certainly ask 
all members of the Assembly to welcome Doyle to our 
legislature. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like 
to, on behalf of the official opposition, welcome the Deputy 
Speaker from Manitoba here to the Assembly. Always good to 
see someone from friendly Manitoba here in the great province 
of Saskatchewan. And certainly on behalf of the official 
opposition I’d welcome this individual to our Legislative 
Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 
you and through you to all members of the Assembly, I would 
like to introduce some special guests to us seated in your 
gallery. With us today from the Saskatchewan Wildlife 
Federation are Executive Director Darrell Crabbe. 
Accompanying Darrell, Darren Newberry, James Villeneuve, 
Doug Gibson, and Chelsea Walters. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation is here 
today for Camo Day. It’s a new tradition to celebrate Hunting, 
Fishing and Trapping Heritage Day. And I want to thank 
members that have taken part in wearing some camo today, 
some scarves and some pocket squares. I was hoping for a full 
jacket, but unfortunately the Duck Dynasty clothing line only 
extends to T-shirts and hats. Not jackets yet, but we can always 
hope. 
 
You’re going to hear more about this special day that’s being 
proclaimed in a member’s statement, and I would ask all 
members to join with me in welcoming these guests to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to 
all members of the Assembly, another special guest seated in 
your gallery, Matthea Mlynarski. Matthea is from Weyburn 
originally. She’s a student at the University of Regina where 
she’s studying business as well as taking a minor in political 
science.  
 
She has expressed a keen interest in politics, in governance in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. In fact I know that from the tender 
age of four years old she started watching question period with 
her mother. Now, Mr. Speaker, as a parent to young children, 
I’m going to take this in mind in some ideas for perhaps putting 
our children to sleep for a nap. We’ll try to employ this 
technique. But it apparently didn’t put her to sleep; it awoken 
an interest in politics in Matthea. 
 
Matthea is a very talented young lady. She’s a talented singer. 
She took part in choir in high school, including the Stars Choir 
at the Weyburn Comprehensive, and she’s starting to write her 
own music as well. And so we wish Matthea all the best in her 
studies. I don’t think she’ll be a stranger to the Assembly now 
that she’s attending school here in Regina. So I’d ask all 
members to join with me in welcoming Matthea to her 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 



2918 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2017 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And on behalf of the 
official opposition I too would like to welcome the individuals 
behind the clock from the Wildlife Federation to their 
Legislative Assembly, and I’m looking forward to the 
announcement coming up here in members’ statements. But we 
do appreciate and rely on the work that you do, Mr. Crabbe, and 
your staff in terms of ensuring that the wildlife in our province 
are properly stewarded and looked after. So on behalf of the 
official opposition, I would like to extend a warm welcome to 
your Legislative Assembly, and would ask all members to do 
the same. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like 
all members to join me in welcoming a class of grade 8 
students, 36 of them from George Lee School in the beautiful 
constituency of Walsh Acres. They’re accompanied by their 
teachers, Jennie Davies and Natalie Schapansky. I’m looking 
forward to having a conversation with the students after 
question period in the Qu’Appelle Gallery. So I ask all 
members to join me in welcoming them to their Legislative 
Assembly, and I think we might have another introduction after. 
So welcome. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Makowsky: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker, just briefly 
following up with the member from Walsh Acres is a couple of 
folks I know up there personally. One of them’s Tyrone Elek. 
He was on our football team this year, Mr. Speaker. A very 
good player for us and did a good job, and of course city 
champ. So also a good friend of mine, a very good friend of 
mine’s son — I’ve known him since he was a baby — Master 
Tyson O’Day is up there. My good buddy Jeremy is out in 
Ottawa right now, but welcome, Tyson, to the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
University. 
 
Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Very 
briefly, I’d just like to join with the member from Weyburn-Big 
Muddy and welcome Matthea to her Legislative Assembly. 
Matthea has reached out to me as someone who’s very 
interested in politics, and I just want to say how gratifying it is 
to know that there are some very young and promising women 
out there who are really getting interested in politics. And it’s 
wonderful to see, and I would like to welcome you to your 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure today to introduce someone who’s been seated in your 
gallery for two days now, Mr. Austin MacNally. If you can give 
us a wave, Austin. 
 
Austin is our constituency president in Saskatoon Fairview, and 
he also sits as a vice-president for the youth wing on the 

Saskatchewan New Democrats, so for our party. So he’s a very 
active individual in the political realm. He’s also involved with 
the Saskatchewan Youth Parliament, so he’ll be back here in 
December and sitting in this Chamber. And he joins us this 
week. He’s a university student in political science from the 
University of Saskatchewan. He joins us this week because he’s 
on reading week and thought that this was where he wanted to 
spend his time and take it all in. So I would ask all members to 
join me in welcoming Austin to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I wish to inform the Assembly that we have a 
new Page. Nengi Allison will be joining us as a Page for the 
session. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to present a petition as it pertains to the Buffalo Narrows 
Correctional Centre. And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have 
presented this petition for the Legislative Assembly have the 
following prayer or the following points to make before the 
prayer: that the closure of the Buffalo Narrows Correctional 
Centre left 15 people out of work, and financial impacts on their 
family and to a lot of local businesses. That the closure also hurt 
the part-time workers and elders within our community, with 
the help of inmates doing odd jobs throughout the community 
and for elders. 
 
That the closure of the Buffalo Narrows Correctional Centre 
hurt the families of the inmates while learning new skills and 
working with skilled employers to obtain employment upon 
release. That the closure of the correctional centre took the 
inmates far away from their families, which makes visitation 
difficult or not existent at all. And that the closure of the 
Buffalo Narrows Correctional Centre also took away from 
inmates the ability to get treatment and to obtain training tickets 
while there. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the people read the following prayer: 
 

To immediately reopen the Buffalo Narrows Correctional 
Centre to better our community for future generations to 
come. 

 
And the people that have signed this petition are from all 
throughout the region, and the page that I’m presenting today, 
the people that have signed are primarily from Buffalo 
Narrows. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 



November 15, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2919 

Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Lloydminster, 
Paradise Hill, Frenchman Butte, and St. Walburg. I do so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition calling for critical supports for survivors of 
domestic violence. Those that signed the petition wish to bring 
attention to the following: Saskatchewan has the highest rate of 
domestic violence amongst the provinces in Canada. Employers 
should be obligated to reasonably accommodate survivors of 
domestic violence in the workplace. Employees who are 
survivors of domestic violence should be able to take a leave of 
absence from their employment without penalty. And 
Saskatchewan must do more to protect survivors of domestic 
violence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are the provisions we’ve called for in our 
private members’ bill, Bill No. 605, which I’m very optimistic 
that the government will take on and pass. I’m hopeful that the 
Minister of Justice and the Minister of Labour, who is 
conveniently the same person right now, will see the benefit of 
this legislation and call for it to be passed by his government 
colleagues. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Legislative Assembly to pass legislation providing critical 
support for survivors of domestic violence. 
 

The individuals signing the petition today come from Regina. I 
do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present a 
petition today to get big money out of Saskatchewan politics. 
And the undersigned residents of the province here want to 
bring to our attention the following: that Saskatchewan’s 
outdated election Act allows corporations, unions, and 
individuals, even those outside the province, to make unlimited 
donations in our province’s political parties; that the people of 
Saskatchewan deserve to live in a fair province where all voices 
are equal and money can’t influence politics. 
 
And we know that Saskatchewan politics should belong to 
Saskatchewan people and that the federal government and the 
provinces of Alberta, Manitoba, Quebec, Nova Scotia, and now 
British Columbia have moved to limit this influence and level 
the playing field by banning corporate and union donations to 
political parties. Mr. Speaker, I would like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan call on the Sask 
Party to overhaul Saskatchewan’s campaign finance laws 
to end out-of-province donations, to put a ban on donations 
from corporations and unions, and to put a donation limit 

on individual donations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from the city 
of Regina. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to stand 
in my place today to present a petition for a second bridge in 
Prince Albert. The individuals that signed this particular 
petition want me to draw the following points to your attention: 
that the Diefenbaker bridge in Prince Albert is the primary link 
that connects the southern part of the province to the North; and 
that the need for a second bridge in Prince Albert has never 
been clearer than it is today. 
 
Prince Albert the community, and north of Prince Albert, and 
the businesses that send people and products through Prince 
Albert require a solution; that the support of people across the 
province, municipal governments, and the neighbouring 
communities for a second bridge is overwhelming and has been 
joined by the support from industry groups, the Prince Albert 
association of regional municipalities, and many others; and 
that the Sask Party government refuses to stand up for Prince 
Albert and this critical infrastructure issue. I’ll read the prayer, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan ask that the 
Saskatchewan Party government stop stalling, hiding 
behind rhetoric and refusing to listen to the people calling 
for action, and begin immediately to plan and then quickly 
commence the construction of a second bridge for Prince 
Albert using federal and provincial dollars. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing this particular petition 
come from the communities of Regina and Prince Albert. I do 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition calling on the government to stop cuts to our kids’ 
classrooms. Those who signed this petition wish to draw our 
attention to the following: 
 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 
Saskatchewan, wish to bring your attention to the 
following: that the Sask Party has cut at least $674 in 
government funding for every student across this province; 
that the Sask Party hiked education property taxes by 67 
million, but cut total government funding for education by 
$54 million; that even though the Sask Party is making us 
all pay more, our kids are actually getting less; and that the 
Sask Party cuts mean that students will lose much needed 
supports in their classroom, including funding for buses for 
kindergartners, and programs to help with special needs 
such as autism. 

 



2920 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2017 

Those who have signed this petition call upon this certain 
prayer: 

 
We, the undersigned, call upon the government to reverse 
the senseless cuts to our kids’ classrooms and to stop 
making families, teachers, and everyone who works in 
education pay the price for the Sask Party’s 
mismanagement, their scandal, and waste. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those who have signed this petition today reside in 
Yorkton. I do so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Hunting, Fishing, and Trapping Heritage Day 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, every November 15th 
Saskatchewan residents and visitors celebrate Hunting, Fishing, 
and Trapping Heritage Day. This day recognizes the important 
role hunting, fishing, and trapping has played in Canada’s 
history, and how these activities continue to have significant 
economic, cultural, and social contributions to this province. 
This includes contributing more than 500 million to 
Saskatchewan’s economy every year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since The Hunting, Fishing and Trapping 
Heritage Act was passed in the fall of 2009, the Saskatchewan 
Wildlife Federation has been our partner in recognizing this 
day. Last week the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation launched 
a Camo Day initiative in conjunction with their Saskatchewan 
Hunting, Trapping, and Fishing Heritage Day announcement. 
Anyone can take part, and people are encouraged to wear 
camouflage and share their stories with friends and colleagues. 
 
As you can see by my pocket square today, Mr. Speaker, I’m 
helping mark Camo Day in my own way. Thanks to all the 
members in the House today who are wearing the camo also. 
By working together we will ensure the ongoing success of this 
relationship as we continue to raise awareness and promote the 
integral role that hunters, anglers, and trappers play as stewards 
of our environment and recognize the significant impact that 
these activities have for our residents, communities, business, 
and visitors. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Sisters in Spirit Vigil Held in Prince Albert 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On October 4th, a 
Sisters in Spirit vigil was held at the Prince Albert Friendship 
Centre. October 4th is now recognized as the official day to 
honour missing and murdered indigenous women and girls 
across Canada. The vigil in Prince Albert was one of dozens 
held across Canada aiming to raise awareness about the impact 
of missing and murdered indigenous women and girls on local 
communities. 
 
As of October 4th, Mr. Speaker, there are currently 35 
investigations into missing women and girls from northern 

Saskatchewan. The vigil was well attended with representation 
from the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police], Prince 
Albert city police, Prince Albert City Council, Prince Albert 
Police Indigenous Women’s Advisory Council, Prince Albert 
Grand Council, Prince Albert Indian Métis Friendship Centre, 
Métis Nation-Saskatchewan, and concerned community 
members. They came together for a sharing circle, speeches, 
and a candlelight vigil followed by the sharing of food provided 
by Prince Albert Indian Métis Friendship Centre. 
 
Events like the vigil remind us that everyone is affected when 
an indigenous woman or girl goes missing or is killed. Families 
and loved ones, but also police officers, first responders, 
medical professionals, and community members are all 
impacted by the loss. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in 
congratulating the organizers of the Sisters in Spirit vigil and all 
those who participated in the event honouring missing and 
murdered indigenous women and girls. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 

International Education Week 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to announce that November 13th to 17th is International 
Education Week. This week is recognized in more than 100 
countries to showcase the benefits international education has in 
our schools and communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan plan for growth identified 
international study as a cornerstone for our province’s 
immigration strategy. Last year there were nearly 7,000 
international students studying in Saskatchewan from over 130 
countries. These students contribute more than $150 million 
each year to Saskatchewan’s economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also encourage our students to study abroad. In 
2016-17, close to 1,000 Saskatchewan post-secondary students 
travelled to over 60 different countries for study-abroad 
experiences. International education connects Saskatchewan to 
other parts of the world. It gives students the opportunity to 
develop new skills and learn about new languages, cultures, and 
traditions. Mr. Speaker, international education is important to 
our province and to our country. I ask all members to join me in 
recognizing the importance of international education and 
celebrating the many contributions it makes to Saskatchewan 
throughout the week. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

Bullying Awareness Week 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in this House today to 
recognize Bullying Awareness Week in Saskatchewan, taking 
place from November 12th to the 18th. Bullying is a serious 
issue across our province and our country, and we on this side 
of the House are working hard every day to create an 
environment where our children can feel safe in our schools and 
our communities. 



November 15, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2921 

A recent report from the Saskatchewan Alliance for Youth and 
Community Well-Being found that almost 65 per cent of 
students experienced bullying at least once in the past year. 
Furthermore, according to the same report, nearly one in five 
students have also considered suicide. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to use this opportunity to encourage all 
members of this Assembly to reach out to those who are 
particularly vulnerable to homophobic and transphobic 
bullying. The lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender 
communities have as much right as anyone to feel safe and free, 
and we should do whatever we can to secure that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that we need to do more to create a 
positive culture within our school system. While proclaiming 
the 12th to the 18th as Bullying Awareness Week in our 
province is a positive start, I’d like to take this opportunity and 
encourage all members to take a stand against bullying. We 
know that bullying is not only limited to our classrooms but 
also happens in our workplaces, homes, and communities. 
Together we can work to resolve this issue and effectively bring 
about a society where we all thrive. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Willowgrove. 
 

Saskatoon Hilltops Win Fourth Straight Canada Bowl 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past 
weekend, the Saskatoon Hilltops won their fourth straight 
Canadian Bowl championship, defeating the Windsor AKO 
Fratmen by a score of 56 to 11. This dominant win puts the 
Hilltops in the history books. In the 110-year history of the 
Canadian Junior Football League, no other team has won four 
in a row. This also marks the 20th championship for the team, 
the most victories by one team in the league’s history. 
 
Starting quarterback Jordan Walls was named the offensive 
MVP [most valuable player]. The defensive back Luke Melnyk 
was named the defensive MVP after securing two interceptions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to recognize the Hilltops coaching 
staff, and in particular, head coach Tom Sargeant. Any time a 
team experiences this kind of unprecedented success as the 
Hilltops have experienced, preparation, hard work, and 
determination are essential factors. As coach Sargeant told the 
media in a recent interview, his first planning meeting for next 
season is already scheduled for this coming Monday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of all members of this Assembly, I’d 
like to congratulate coach Sargeant, his coaching staff, the 
Hilltops players, alumni, and entire organization on their 
remarkable achievement, and wish them the best of luck in their 
drive for five, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
University. 
 

Campbell Tartans Win Provincial 4A Championship 
 
Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
You know it’s not very often when you get to be both a proud 
mom and a proud constituency representative. But this past 

weekend, one of the schools in my constituency, the Campbell 
Tartans, won the provincial 4A football championship, 
trouncing the Saskatoon Centennial Chargers by a score of 
44-15.  
 
Tartans quarterback Matt Rivers accounted for four 
touchdowns, and a stout defence forced nine turnovers. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to recognize one of the players, Josh White, a 
senior and the team’s captain. Josh lives down the street from 
us and led the Schwann Conference in defensive points. He has 
also played on Team Saskatchewan, where he has twice been 
the silver medallist linebacker in the Canada cup. Josh has been 
a great leader on this team, and I wish him well in his varsity 
career. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the dedicated coaching staff 
for their commitment and time to the young men on this 
football team, as this experience was unforgettable, especially 
for a young quarterback I happen to know and love. 
Congratulations to the Campbell Tartans. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 
Resources. 
 

Joint-Use School Openings 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
stand today to say that both of the joint-use schools in the cities 
of Martensville and Warman have opened for the school year. 
Prairie Spirit division’s Lake Vista School and Greater 
Saskatoon Catholic’s École Holy Mary Catholic School are the 
two new schools in Martensville. Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to 
announce that this P3 [public-private partnership] build finished 
on time and on budget. The P3 model enabled our government 
to build more schools at the same time, which wouldn’t have 
been possible through a traditional approach. 
 
This build was made possible through the hard work and 
collaboration that included input from the students, teachers, 
parents, school divisions, and community members. In the last 
decade this government has made education a priority. We have 
opened a total of 40 new schools — five in my own 
constituency — along with 25 major renovations to existing 
schools. These schools, along with the 17 billion invested from 
kindergarten to grade 12 and 875 new teachers, shows that our 
government doesn’t just talk about making education a priority. 
It truly is a priority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the difference between our party and the members 
opposite is that they closed schools over their tenure. I think 
that speaks to their commitment to education as well, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re proud of our record. Thank you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Education Curriculum 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re all back here 
today to do the job we were elected to do. And on that front, I 
have a question for the Premier. Mr. Speaker, there’s been 
much said about the Minister of Education’s disturbing 



2922 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2017 

comments, and she has now made an apology of sorts. It’s 
November 15th, Mr. Speaker. It took this many weeks and 
thousands signing a petition calling for her resignation to finally 
have her stand up and apologize. 
 
But her apology today was to the Assembly. She did not 
apologize to the teacher who she singled out. She did not 
apologize to all those who support indigenous education or to 
those who support the accurate teaching of history for that 
matter. And, Mr. Speaker, she did not apologize to other 
teachers and students who are teaching and learning from the 
same curriculum which you can find, by the way, on the 
ministry’s own website. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister could have found the facts if she 
wanted them, but she did not. She used the assignment to 
question the very idea of indigenous education in our 
classrooms. Mr. Speaker, does the Premier still stand by this 
minister or will he do the right thing and remove her from 
cabinet? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, thank you. Mr. 
Speaker, I thank the Leader of the Opposition for the question. 
The short answer is absolutely I stand by the Minister of 
Education, Mr. Speaker. And moreover I would highlight for 
members, as the Leader of the Opposition alluded to just 
moments ago, that when it was clear that there was a dispute in 
terms of the account of a class presentation, the Minister of 
Education rose in her place before the session began today to 
ensure the honour of the Assembly and apologize, which is, I 
think, the correct thing to do. 
 
Moreover, Mr. Speaker, I’m looking forward to the work of the 
minister and the ministry in the months ahead. As you will 
know, the Speech from the Throne highlighted our intention to 
ensure that math curriculum is better serving students. This will 
be led . . . This is an issue that the Minister of Education 
actually spoke to prior to her time in the role. She feels strongly 
about it as do members on this side of the House. 
 
She also feels strongly about the importance of school choice in 
this province, and the reference in the Speech from the Throne 
to the use of the notwithstanding clause and its introduction 
since is also an important part of her education agenda, in 
addition to what has been, over the last 10 years, huge increases 
in operating dollars and significant capital investments, Mr. 
Speaker, building new schools in this province versus the days 
when they would be closed. 
 
And so our commitment to education remains strong, to treaty 
curriculum in the K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] system, 
that remains strong —it was started by this government, Mr. 
Speaker — and so does the support I have for the Minister of 
Education. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, that is simply not good enough 
and those words ring hollow while that minister stays in 

cabinet. We should all be proud, both sides of the House, that 
Saskatchewan was a leader in adopting indigenous education 
into our classrooms, but the minister is running in the opposite 
direction. 
 
We were also sent a description of the assignment from a 
parent. Her child got an A and said that the class was asked to 
explore the differences between two world views and then write 
about their own world view and how they fit in each of them. 
Mr. Speaker, the students were being asked to open their minds 
and consider what their own perspectives mean. But instead of 
doing what the students were asked to do, the minister twisted 
the assignment and doubled down on her own ideas. That is 
dangerous, and frankly when you consider what she is 
overseeing — an entire curriculum review — that is very scary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are all treaty people. By letting that minister 
keep her job, what message does the Premier think he’s sending 
to indigenous peoples across this province and to all 
Saskatchewan people? And most importantly, what message is 
he sending to our kids? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I want to send a very strong 
signal, not just to the students across the province, to our 
teachers, to all the stakeholders involved in education, but to 
my hon. friends opposite when I indicate to them that when we 
were first elected in 2007, treaty curriculum was not mandatory 
in the province of Saskatchewan. In fact it was the 
Saskatchewan Party — it was this party — that campaigned in 
the election to fix that problem, a problem that had been there I 
think for some time when members had the chance to change it. 
When they had the chance to be in government they had the 
chance to ensure that this province, among the highest per 
capita First Nations population, would ensure that there would 
be mandatory treaty . . . Well members are heckling from their 
seat. The fact of the matter is they had a chance to do the right 
thing, but they didn’t, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’m proud to say that working with the school system, with 
the Ministry of Education, working together with the Treaty 
Commissioner, that has changed in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan was the first province to make 
treaty education mandatory, to make that part of the 
Saskatchewan curriculum. That is not subject to change. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Global Transportation Hub and Government Initiatives 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, this minister’s comments are a 
symbol of the greater problem. They are a tired and arrogant 
government that doesn’t get it. From that minister, to their 
heartless cuts and their unfair tax hikes, to their use of emails to 
avoid transparency and accountability, and the bypass and the 
GTH [Global Transportation Hub] — these are all matters of 
trust. And ministers being plagued by scandal is now becoming 
their legacy. 
 
Even the newest candidate to lead their party says they are all 
tied up in scandals. In the same way that minister is denying 
what she said, what she said, Bill Boyd, the Premier, the former 



November 15, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2923 

and current GTH ministers and every Sask Party PAC [Public 
Accounts Committee] member have refused to come clean to 
Saskatchewan people about what they knew about the GTH 
land scandal. Rob Clarke is right. They aren’t working for 
Saskatchewan people. Don’t hide behind the auditor’s report. 
She said, and the RCMP have confirmed, there are more 
questions to be asked. Don’t hide behind the RCMP because 
Saskatchewan people have more questions. 
 
Knowing what he knows now, does the Premier wish he had 
fired Bill Boyd and Laurie Pushor instead of trusting them with 
the GTH? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I am grateful for the question 
because, Mr. Speaker, it goes right to what we’ve seen, I think, 
over the last number of weeks in the House beginning with the 
Speech from the Throne. In the Speech from the Throne, we 
saw over a dozen brand new ideas or new initiatives coming 
forward from this government, that admittedly has been in place 
— and we’re grateful to have been able to serve — now for 10 
years. 
 
New ideas coming forward on this side of the House, almost all 
of them by the way opposed by the NDP [New Democratic 
Party], including such crazy concepts as Uber in the province of 
Saskatchewan — supported by 80 per cent of the people, 
opposed by the NDP. Including invoking the notwithstanding 
clause so that we can protect choice for Saskatchewan families 
and parents, so parents can make a choice for education and we 
can preserve that for the province — supported by members on 
this side, opposed by members on that side. The seniors’ tax 
deferral credit program, which we’ll be talking more about in 
this session, any number of initiatives in the Throne Speech. 
 
And what do we hear from the NDP, Mr. Speaker? It’s the same 
old thing we’ve heard for 20 years. She wants to talk about a 
leadership race. I’m proud of the diverse leadership race that’s 
going on in the Saskatchewan Party, now with someone who is 
a member of a First Nation, two women, Mr. Speaker, a total of 
six candidates. Compare that to members opposite where run 
and rerun are the leadership candidates there — two White, 
middle-aged men, Mr. Speaker. If you want renewal and new 
ideas, look to this side, not to that side of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 

Education Curriculum Review 
 
Mr. Meili: — Well, Mr. Speaker, regardless of our 
backgrounds, everyone in Saskatchewan, we are all treaty 
people. And the deep concerns of people around this province 
are not just about one errant comment in the House or about a 
minister minimizing the experience of indigenous peoples, even 
while she shut down NORTEP [northern teacher education 
program]. It’s not even about a reluctant apology. It’s about 
what she actually believes and what that means as she’s 
responsible for a full review of our kids’ curriculum. 
 
Given her record, Mr. Speaker, an ongoing pattern of 
backward-looking commentary, how can the Premier have 

confidence in this minister leading the review of a curriculum 
that is designed to move us forward? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Because, Mr. Speaker, the only two areas of 
review are in math and in coding, Mr. Speaker. And I simply 
refer back to my earlier apology today, and my commitment, 
our commitment, Mr. Speaker, to unequivocally support 
continued, mandated treaty education in schools in our province 
as we have. 
 
I also refer to my apology, my expressions of regret of two days 
ago for having raised my son in a public forum, my undertaking 
to not do so again, Mr. Speaker, and finally to my remarks last 
Thursday in this House, that our government was the first to 
implement mandated treaty education, and we will continue to 
do so. 
 
I reiterated this commitment yesterday to the SSBA 
[Saskatchewan School Boards Association], to northern 
education leaders, as I did to the head of the FSIN [Federation 
of Sovereign Indigenous Nations], Chief Bobby Cameron, last 
week, who said of my comments, quote, very graciously: her 
stance is that teaching treaty has to continue. It’s about working 
together. And it is, Mr. Speaker. Build on what we’ve achieved 
together. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 

Support for Schools in La Loche 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan School Boards 
Association met here in Regina earlier this week. I had a chance 
to chat with education leaders from northern Saskatchewan. 
They talked about La Loche, that how two years after the tragic 
events, nearly two years after the events of January 2016, the 
high school still shows the scars. And they’re still waiting for 
the money to renovate that facility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll be visiting La Loche later this week. I want to 
know what kind of a message, as I’m meeting with community 
leaders, I can bring. Am I able to tell them that we’re ready to 
fix that facility? Or should I tell them that the healing of their 
community isn’t a priority and they’ll have to wait even more 
years? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
spoke with the mayor of La Loche, Robert St. Pierre, this 
morning. We had a very productive conversation as I did with 
him a few weeks ago. I spoke with northern education leaders 
yesterday and the matter of the school came up. So we will be 
working with this in the next week or so, Mr. Speaker, and to 
do our utmost to do good by that community and by that school. 
Our hearts will always go out, as we have said before, Mr. 
Speaker, to those who were affected by the tragedy in La 
Loche. It was a heartbreaking tragedy. 
 
And it is important to appreciate the words of Mayor Robert St. 
Pierre, who has said that we care and we want to move forward, 



2924 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2017 

and who acknowledged that, and we appreciate that because 
that is our intention, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Following the tragedy, in the meantime the number of student 
counsellors at the school has increased from two to six. We 
increased administrative supports at both schools, invested over 
100,000 to improve security, and put in place an RCMP school 
resource officer at Dene High School — some real attempted 
supports, Mr. Speaker, as we work together. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Northern Teacher Education Program 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. That 
whole government is failing to work for indigenous peoples. 
The Throne Speech had nothing for the North. They are 
refusing to take the necessary steps towards reconciliation, and 
instead of apologizing for the Sixties Scoop they are now 
blaming the FSIN and the Métis Nation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Education minister is the same minister who 
helped that government shut down NORTEP, a program that 
worked for four decades. It provided education and teachers in 
the North, and more than that, Mr. Speaker, it provided hope. 
But the Saskatchewan Party cut took the number of people in 
the first-year education program from 35 to 5. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now that the minister has made her bias against 
indigenous education well known, and if the Premier won’t fire 
her, and if they truly care at all about reconciliation, will the 
new Minister of Advanced Education immediately restore 
funding for NORTEP-NORPAC [northern teacher education 
program-Northern Professional Access College]? Will he do 
that? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’ll just say at 
the outset that teacher education in the North is very important 
to this government and will continue to be. And the 
consolidation of that education program in the North is about 
expanding the programs and enhancing access to northern 
students, while also ensuring that those programs are going to 
be high quality and sustainable. And, Mr. Speaker, I would just 
like to say as well that since 2007 the enrolment in the 
university education program has increased in that Northlands 
College in La Ronge by 226 per cent. 
 
But part of that was done, Mr. Speaker, was simply because 
there was 3,700 people in La Ronge and Air Ronge, and it was 
done to reduce duplication and by achieving 500,000 in 
administration savings. So, Mr. Speaker, we believe that this 
was the right thing to do. We’re going to continue on. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Support for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, if the need for teaching our shared 
history wasn’t clear enough before, the government’s comments 

and lack of leadership as of late make it obvious. More and 
more people are speaking out against the Education minister 
and her recent comments around indigenous education in this 
province. She has belatedly apologized for her comments in the 
House, but the consequences are much broader than that. She 
told the media, “I found it regrettable that the world vision of 
European pioneers, for example, that every single one of them 
in the assignment was 100 per cent negative.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister called into question the entire 
curriculum without cause. It’s unacceptable, Mr. Speaker. 
Thousands of people are calling for her resignation and even a 
former prime minister has condemned her remarks. So will the 
minister genuinely accept responsibility for the damage done by 
her words and will she resign from cabinet? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Once again, Mr. Speaker, I extend my 
heartfelt apology. It was never my intention to create any 
confusion or mislead this House in any way. 
 
And I would simply refer back to the TRC’s [Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission] call to action no. 62, which calls 
on educators to create K to 12 curriculum on indigenous 
history, treaties, and residential schools. And, Mr. Speaker, 
once again, it was this government that mandated that. We 
stand by that. That will continue, Mr. Speaker. And we’ll 
continue on building all the foundations that we have begun to 
establish for the future, for all parties in this discussion. 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, it is my sincere wish that that 
minister would spend a little more time with the 
recommendations of the TRC. And let’s be clear, that she 
repeated for weeks and weeks that the assignment presented 
said “the following facts . . . as facts.” She claimed, Mr. 
Speaker, “that European and European settlers were 
colonialists, pillagers of the land . . .” Mr. Speaker, we know 
now that it did not say that. 
 
The actual assignment asked the students to “Analyze the 
relationship between the traditional Aboriginal concept of land 
and the . . . [traditional] Western European notion of land . . . ” 
Again, Mr. Speaker, it’s all online. 
 
She could have looked up the facts earlier. Instead, she used her 
own interpretation as justification to question how we’re 
addressing indigenous education and propose upending the 
whole curriculum. If she won’t resign and do the right thing, 
will the minister at least commit to not unilaterally removing 
the infusion of indigenous knowledge within the curriculum, 
referring to the committee that she spoke about yesterday in the 
scrum at the SSBA? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — The answer is absolutely, Mr. Speaker. And 
as I did say yesterday, this is a collaborative effort. Curriculum 



November 15, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2925 

development is never up to one person, nor was it ever my 
intention to suggest that it was. We’ve been talking about math, 
and we’ve been talking about coding in the context of 
curriculum development, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in the context of this social studies course, it’s First 
Nations and elders and ministry and ultimately cabinet who are 
all hands on deck in terms of developing curriculum. And 
certainly it was never my intention, Mr. Speaker, to indicate 
that one person, one assignment would ever, of course, form 
any curriculum development in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let’s recall that across education, our record demonstrates a 
clear commitment to First Nations in education which we are all 
extremely proud of. The First Nations and Métis education fund 
that we created, increased graduation rates for First Nations and 
Métis students, and as well the invitational shared services 
initiative which helps bands access literacy and other online 
resources — some of many, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, to be clear, she’s already 
contradicted herself with regard to just exactly what is under 
review, and I hope she gets that straightened out. 
 
Last spring the Sask Party took away input and power from 
local school boards and local communities and put it all in the 
hands of their Education minister and their cabinet. Teachers 
and parents across this province are understandably concerned 
with this minister’s comments and her refusal to fully accept 
responsibility for the damage that she has done. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, at the SSBA AGM [annual general meeting] 
yesterday, the minister gave educators even more reason for 
concern. After acknowledging the damage that was done by the 
Sask Party’s cuts, the minister said, and I quote, “You rose to 
the challenge this year and whatever lies ahead, I am confident 
in your ability to do it again.” Mr. Speaker, “whatever lies 
ahead” and “again” — really. 
 
The fact that Saskatchewan school boards, trustees, principals, 
teachers, staff, and parents are finding their way through cuts, 
it’s no excuse to threaten them again with more damage. Since 
the minister has shown no willingness to work with our 
educators and no understanding of the damage that her 
government’s cuts have caused, what makes her think that she 
deserves to be the Minister of Education? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, of 
course we acknowledge that school divisions continue to have 
to make difficult decisions. And that was what I was 
referencing yesterday to the SSBA, that we appreciate their 
efforts, their ongoing efforts to deal with the fiscal challenges. 
And we always hope they make the right decisions, particularly 
when it comes to staffing the classroom. 
 
Mr. Speaker, of course we don’t get involved in the day-to-day 
operations of divisions, although certainly we cheer when for 
example members of Saskatoon Public and members of 

Saskatoon Catholic literally stand together at joint-use school 
openings; or decide to joint bus, which other divisions are doing 
as well; or when 28 school divisions come together to save $1 
million on joint fuel procurement as they did this fall. That’s the 
power of collaboration, Mr. Speaker. Those savings go right 
back into the classroom. 
 
We have built. We have invested in education. Big picture 
across the board, more than any other province, 2.2 billion in 
2017, up 114 per cent. We are proud of that record, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Services for Special Dietary Needs 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party’s deep cuts to 
the province’s vulnerable continue. On October 1st the Sask 
Party quietly cut funding for more than 1,300 people who need 
special diets. These are people living with disabilities, with 
long-term illnesses, and some are pregnant. Now the Sask Party 
is forcing them to jump through hoops to try and get an 
appointment with dietitians to get the food they so desperately 
need. Why is the Sask Party literally taking food out of the 
mouths of Saskatchewan’s most vulnerable to make up for their 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As 
everybody is aware, this was a very difficult budget year, Mr. 
Speaker. We made the decision to revalidate the 3,000-calorie 
diet, but I also want to state for the record, Mr. Speaker, that 
there is a broad range of food that is available, different diets 
that are available for specific individuals. The 3,000-calorie 
diet, Mr. Speaker, we are making sure that the people that get 
the proper protein, that they’re able to make sure that all of their 
dietary needs are met. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, this has not been an easy 
process, particularly for the most vulnerable. We’re talking 
about real people with medical needs who have been cut off and 
have no idea where they will get their next meal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as former CEO [chief executive officer] of the 
Saskatoon Food Bank, the minister should already know that 
food insecurity is a real problem in this province. And, Mr. 
Speaker, over the last several years, food bank usage has 
skyrocketed and Saskatchewan has the highest rate of children’s 
food bank usage in the country. This will cost the government 
more in the long run. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister should know better, so how can he 
justify cutting the already inadequate funding for people living 
with disabilities and medical needs? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And again, 



2926 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2017 

in a tough budget year we actually increased the funding to 
social services because this government takes vulnerable people 
as a priority. And as far as my time at the food bank, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m very proud of my record . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very 
proud of my record of the work at the food bank. I was on the 
front line, Mr. Speaker, working with the people of Saskatoon, 
also across this province, Mr. Speaker, and across the country to 
make sure that the food got to the people that needed it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
All we’re asking is for the 3,000-calorie diet, Mr. Speaker, is 
that they go back and visit their doctor, get a doctor’s note, 
bring it back to their social worker and then we will reinstitute 
the 3,000-calorie diet. All we’re looking for is some medical 
verification for the 3,000-calorie diet to make sure they’re on 
one of the multiple programs that we have. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 

Fees for Trapping Licences 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, on this Saskatchewan Hunting, 
Fishing, and Trapping Heritage Day, I want to talk about the 
importance of maintaining a connection to our lands and to our 
traditions. It comes up a lot in my constituency and across the 
province, Mr. Speaker. There is no requirement for people over 
the age of 65 to pay a fee for a fishing licence, but trappers over 
65 still have to pay a fee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the government make this a fair policy, and 
will they eliminate the fee for trappers who are over the age of 
65 and give them the same treatment they give to seniors who 
fish? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I would certainly like to have a conversation with the 
member opposite about this particular topic. It’s something that 
hasn’t come up in the short time that I’ve been in this position, 
the second time around. And I don’t recall having a discussion 
with the trappers about this the last time I was the minister. So 
I’d be pleased to have a conversation with the member opposite 
in looking for a resolution to this issue that he’s raised today. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 94 — The Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for 
Education Savings (SAGES) Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
No. 94, The Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education 
Savings (SAGES) Amendment Act, 2017 be now introduced and 

read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Advanced Education that Bill No. 94 be now introduced and 
read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cox: — Next sitting of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 96 — The Choice of Court Agreements  
(Hague Convention Implementation) Act 

Loi sur les accords d’élection de for (mise en œuvre  
de la Convention de La Haye) 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 96, The 
Choice of Court Agreements (Hague Convention 
Implementation) Act be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
has moved Bill No. 96 be now introduced and read a first time. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 95 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal  
and Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 95, 
The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal and Amendment Act, 2017 
be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Attorney General has moved Bill No. 95 
be now introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 



November 15, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2927 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Question of Privilege 
 
The Speaker: — Earlier today, the Opposition House Leader 
gave notice of a question of privilege. The Opposition House 
Leader’s argument is the Minister of Education breached the 
privileges of this Assembly by intentionally using misleading 
and false statements to support a personal opinion. The House 
Leader states that by presenting misleading information, the 
minister breached the trust of members who rely on information 
presented in the Assembly to perform their legislative duties. 
 
I remind all hon. members that it is not the role of the Speaker 
to decide if a breach of privilege or contempt has been 
committed. This is a question that only the Assembly can 
decide. It is the Speaker’s role to decide whether a prima facie 
case has been established. What that means is the Speaker is to 
judge whether there is sufficient evidence to merit setting aside 
the regular business of the Assembly to debate the matter. If the 
Speaker finds a prima facie case has been established, then the 
question is put to the Assembly in the form of the motion 
proposed as part of the Opposition House Leader’s case. 
 
At the centre of the Opposition’s House Leader’s case is the 
minister’s response to the address-in-reply to the Throne 
Speech made on November 1st, 2017. In that speech the 
minister commented on a homework sheet brought home by her 
son and notes copied from the board. The minister then went on 
to provide her personal views and perceptions of a number of 
matters connected to education. 
 
The Opposition House Leader claims that the minister’s 
personal views about the curriculum caused her to mislead the 
Assembly by presenting false information. In making his case, 
he cites what he perceives to be the minister’s point of view on 
a number of subjects. 
 
First, I want to state that the presentation of personally held 
views, beliefs, and even perceptions are fundamentally part of 
debate. It is not up to the Speaker to decide if the views of the 
members are supported by facts. It is through debate the 
members make each other accountable for what is said in this 
Chamber. 
 
The question for the Speaker is whether there was a deliberate 
intent to mislead the Assembly. In the past, Speakers have ruled 
that unless evidence can be produced that demonstrates 
knowing and deliberate deception of the Assembly, there is no 
question of privilege. There is a very high threshold of proof 
when it comes to determining if a member has crossed the line 
between presenting the facts, as the member knows or 
perceives, to knowingly deceive the Assembly. The primary 
threshold of proof is the member’s own admission of guilt or 
direct contradictory evidence. 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Opposition House Leader bases his case on media reports 
and social media to refute what the minister stated in debate. He 
has not provided direct evidence sufficient to demonstrate the 

intention of the minister. Whether or not information presented 
was misleading is not for the Speaker to decide. The member 
has not convinced the Speaker that the minister set out to 
deliberately and knowingly mislead the Assembly. For this 
reason, I find the member’s case has not achieved the threshold 
of evidence needed for me to find a prima facie case of 
privilege. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 89 — The School Choice Protection Act 
Loi sur la protection du choix d’école 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of Bill No. 89, The School Choice 
Protection Act, 2017 which proposes several amendments to 
The Education Act, 1995 in order to provide certainty to parents 
and students that the government can continue funding students 
who attend Catholic separate schools regardless of their 
religious affiliation. 
 
These amendments are in response to the April 2017 Court of 
Queen’s Bench decision on the legal challenge brought forward 
by the Good Spirit School Division known as the Theodore 
court case. The decision found the funding of non-Catholics 
who attend Catholic separate schools to be unconstitutional. 
While the court found that non-Catholic students could be 
admitted to Catholic separate schools, the court also found that 
government funding for the attendance of those students 
violates sections 2(a) and 15 of the Charter, which violates the 
state’s duty of religious neutrality. If the Court of Queen’s 
Bench decision were to come into force, there would likely be a 
significant shift in funding between the public and Catholic 
separate school divisions, which in turn would cause significant 
disruption in the education sector. 
 
Bill 89 will allow the Government of Saskatchewan to invoke 
section 33 of the Charter, commonly known as the 
notwithstanding clause, to allow The Education Act to operate 
notwithstanding sections 2(a) and 15 of the Charter. Similarly 
section 44 of the Human Rights Code will be declared to 
operate notwithstanding sections 4, 12, and 13 of the Human 
Rights Code. 
 
Invoking the notwithstanding clause will ensure the government 
can continue to fund public and separate school divisions based 
on the current funding model which takes into account how 
many students are in the division but does not discriminate 
based on religious affiliation. School divisions will continue to 
be responsible for determining their own attendance and 
admittance policies. 
 
Both the Government of Saskatchewan and Christ the Teacher 
Roman Catholic Separate School Division have filed appeals on 
this ruling. It is anticipated the appeal could take between 6 to 
18 months. Any decision would likely be delivered well after 
the June 30, 2018 date that the court decision is set to come into 



2928 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2017 

force. Having to wait for a decision on the appeal could leave 
parents and students with a great deal of uncertainty about the 
future, not knowing if they would continue to be funded to 
attend a separate school. 
 
It is important to invoke the notwithstanding clause now in 
order to provide certainty to parents and to students so that they 
can be assured that they will continue to be funded to attend 
their school without having to wait for the outcome of an 
appeal. Introducing the bill now will allow for Royal Assent in 
the spring, prior to the June 30, 2018 coming into force date of 
the court decision. Mr. Speaker, thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Education has moved second 
reading of Bill No. 89. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Obviously the Bill No. 89, The School Choice Protection Act 
bill is a bill that’s fundamentally very, very important to the 
Assembly and very, very important as to where we move this 
bill towards the debate in the Assembly. This is a bill that needs 
a lot of attention by many, many people and certainly, from the 
opposition’s perspective, we have some very learned colleagues 
of mine that have paid very close attention to this particular bill 
as it really does merit a lot of our time, a lot of our attention, 
and a lot of the research, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to say at the outset, as the Deputy Leader of the Official 
Opposition, that the official opposition supports publicly funded 
education in Saskatchewan, which includes both our public and 
our Catholic systems. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s very important that I reiterate this to the 
public. We obviously want to ensure that people certainly 
interpret correctly what I’m sure that the Saskatchewan Party 
might try and mix up for their political purposes what our 
position is. So I want to reiterate to the people of Saskatchewan, 
very clearly: as it pertains to Bill 89, we support publicly 
funded education in Saskatchewan, which includes both our 
public and our Catholic systems, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And certainly, as I mentioned at the outset, we’ve had a lot of 
our caucus colleagues that have entered this debate over time. 
They have researched much of the findings, and they have 
certainly been subjected to a lot of interviews and certainly a lot 
of media on this particular matter, Mr. Speaker. So we must be 
very, very clear and careful as we embark, the official 
opposition, on certainly the comments we make on this 
particular bill, and to make sure we fundamentally try and 
achieve the objective that we believe in wholeheartedly, and 
that is the continued public support of public funded education 
for both the public and the Catholic systems. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s no question that as a result of this 
bill, Bill 89, that if unchallenged the ruling would make 
fundamental changes to education in classrooms, not only in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, but across the whole country. 
From the beginning, as we have said, in order to move forward, 
both time and clarity are needed. We support the appeal because 
it provides both. The Saskatchewan Party’s grandstanding 
provides neither. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as we’ve indicated and as I indicated at the 
outset, our caucus colleagues have been in consult with various 
organizations. They have been in consult with the SSBA. They 
have been in consult with trustees of local school divisions. 
They have been in consult with teachers, and of course the 
students that grace our schools throughout the province. And 
there’s no question that, on this particular matter, time and 
clarity are needed. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, the Premier 
himself said last spring, and I quote, “There’s time. There’s 
going to be an appeal and the ruling is stayed because of the 
appeal.” 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, invoking the notwithstanding clause is 
almost without precedent on this particular bill. And that’s why 
it’s important to note even the Premier last spring indicated that 
there is going to be time. And that’s one of the reasons why, 
Mr. Speaker, that we ought to be able to see how the courts and 
the ruling comes across. There is obviously an appeal to the 
process. And as I pointed out, the Premier himself, the words he 
used, and I quote again for the members opposite, “There’s 
time. There’s going to be an appeal and the ruling is stayed 
because of the appeal.” 
 
So now, Mr. Speaker, we see Bill 89, and obviously for the 
Sask Party to throw it around before the appeal has been 
decided is irresponsible. Mr. Speaker, this once again points out 
that the Saskatchewan Party is playing politics with our kids’ 
classroom. The Premier himself has admitted that it is not really 
necessary. While the appeal is being considered, there is no 
legitimate need to jump to the notwithstanding clause. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I tell the people of Saskatchewan this: that this is a 
clear example of how the Saskatchewan Party has not provided 
clear and concise leadership on matters that tend to threaten 
Saskatchewan’s unity. They’ve put politics ahead of our kids’ 
classroom. And again, as I pointed out from the official 
opposition, we support publicly funded education in the 
province of Saskatchewan, which includes both our public and 
Catholic systems. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the notwithstanding 
clause, it’s a tool worth considering, always. But, Mr. Speaker, 
it is a very large tool in the tool box, and the question we have 
to ask is, do we need to go there yet? Mr. Speaker, as the 
Premier has indicated and as many other people have indicated 
throughout time, the courts have given us enough time for 
reflection, for thought, and for leadership. And we should 
follow the appeal to make sure that it is supported as much as 
possible. That should be a priority. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve indicated at the outset, as you begin 
to see the agenda of the Saskatchewan Party, much to the 
chagrin of many, many people including the official opposition, 
we are accustomed to see bills of this sort coming forward, and 
much of it, in its own way, is intended to change the channel. 
And I say, shame. Shame on the Premier and the Saskatchewan 
Party for not resolving this matter over the last 10 years that 
he’s served as our Premier. Granted, on this side of the 
Assembly, we can say this issue was before the Saskatchewan 
Party were elected. And obviously they didn’t manage to find 
the ability and certainly the time to provide leadership on this 
file, and therefore we are before the courts and of course the 
appeal is under way. 



November 15, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2929 

That goes to my earlier point, Mr. Speaker, that it is being used 
as a political tool to distract people’s attention from the real 
crisis hitting Saskatchewan, whether it’s the sale of the Crowns 
or whether it’s the miserable state of our finances and the 
incredible debt being heaped on the future generation by the 
Saskatchewan Party. This very critical matter, this important 
issue, not only for Saskatchewan but for all the country, is a 
way for the Premier and the Saskatchewan Party to change the 
channel and be basically on the history books as somebody that 
used the notwithstanding clause. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as I said at the outset, we support publicly 
funded education in Saskatchewan, which includes both our 
public and our Catholic systems. And I would say to the people 
of Saskatchewan, this is an issue that we must pay very close 
attention to. It is something that’s going to be important, as I 
mentioned at the outset, for all of us, and that goes for the entire 
country. So I would encourage people to pay very close 
attention to Bill No. 89. 
 
And I’ll also point out that advice is needed as we stand in this 
Assembly. As the official opposition, we will seek out that 
advice. We’ll seek out the valued opinion of many people and 
then we will return. And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have had 
incredible insight into this particular issue, from the official 
opposition, will certainly be standing in their place in due time 
to present their matters and their issues of concern as it pertains 
to Bill 89, and certainly a message I think of hope and optimism 
and leadership. So I look forward to my caucus colleagues 
presenting their issues on Bill 89. So on that note I move that 
we adjourn debate on Bill 89, The School Choice Protection 
Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 89. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 90 — The Heritage Property Amendment Act, 2017 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Today I rise to speak about The Heritage Property Amendment 
Act, 2017. The Heritage Property Act was passed in 1980 and is 
the primary statute that governs the protection, conservation, 
development of heritage property in our province. This 
comprehensive enabling legislation empowers both the 
province and municipal governments to recognize, preserve, 
and manage heritage properties. 
 
Under the Act, heritage property is broadly defined as any 
property that is of interest on account of its historical, 
architectural, archaeological, paleontological, and other 
scientific or cultural value. This includes historic buildings 
including the beautiful building that we stand in today, 
archaeological heritage, as well as the vertebrate and 
invertebrate fossils from the geological past. 
 

Among other purposes and provisions, the Act provides for the 
formal designation of heritage property by both municipalities 
and the province, the conservation and investigation of the 
archaeological and paleontological heritage, the operation of the 
Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation, and the official naming of 
geographical features in Saskatchewan such as lakes, rivers, and 
streams. 
 
[14:45] 
 
While The Heritage Property Act continues to serve our 
province and municipal authorities well in protecting and 
conserving heritage, like all of our legislation, Mr. Speaker, 
improvements are required from time to time. Today I’d like to 
bring forward two specific changes that I believe will benefit all 
heritage stakeholders, including heritage property owners. 
 
The first proposed amendment will implement an operational 
separation between the review board and the Saskatchewan 
Heritage Foundation in order to avoid any potential conflicts of 
interest between these two entities. The review board serves as 
an impartial tribunal that conducts public hearings to consider 
formal public objections to proposed designations of heritage 
property, or appeal of existing designations and the alteration or 
demolition of designated property, then makes non-binding 
recommendations to the designated authority. The primary role 
of the Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation, on the other hand, is 
to champion heritage preservation by providing financial 
assistance to protect and conserve heritage property. The 
proposed amendments will ensure that the review board 
hearings are handled in an objective, impartial, and transparent 
manner by clearly establishing the review board as a body that 
operates separately and independently from the rest of the 
Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second proposed amendment will provide an 
efficient and cost-effective process for amending existing 
provincial heritage property designations such as alterations to 
designation, boundaries, and name changes. 
 
It’s important to appreciate that provincial heritage property 
designation creates a partnership between the province and a 
willing private property owner in protecting and conserving 
some of Saskatchewan’s most significant historic places. 
Owners of provincial heritage property often request additions 
or removal of land or other alterations to the boundaries of the 
designated area to accommodate their commercial, residential, 
or other needs. Unfortunately, at present even the simplest of 
changes can only be made by repealing the entire designation 
and redesignating the property with the desired changes, a 
lengthy and potentially costly process for those involved. 
 
The proposed amendment will allow appropriate changes — 
those that in no way diminish the property’s heritage value or 
otherwise relegate the original reasons for designation — to be 
made efficiently and cost-effectively and in a way that will not 
jeopardize the working relationship between property owners 
and the province. 
 
Provincial heritage property owners support establishing a more 
convenient process for amending their heritage property 
designations. Mr. Speaker, these measures will reduce red tape 
by eliminating the current need to repeal and redesignate 



2930 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2017 

property in order to effect simple property name and boundary 
changes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing, these proposed improvements to The 
Heritage Property Act will strengthen heritage property 
protection in Saskatchewan, improve effectiveness and 
transparency in handling property disputes, increase efficiency, 
help maintain co-operative relations with property owners, 
reduce red tape, and require no new funds from government to 
administer. 
 
So to conclude, I’m pleased to move second reading of The 
Heritage Property Amendment Act. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport has 
moved second reading of Bill No. 90. Is the Assembly ready for 
the question? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Again as now my duty as the member of the official opposition, 
I’m going to again respond firstly to Bill No. 90 on behalf of 
the opposition caucus. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as always, as we’ve indicated time and time 
again, it’s important as a province that we have certain values 
when we look at the history of our province overall. And 
certainly from northern Saskatchewan, as we ponder our future 
we also look back at our history. And in northern Saskatchewan 
there are two prominent communities that over time have been 
historically recognized as some of the oldest settlements not just 
in Saskatchewan, but across Western Canada as well. And I 
speak of Cumberland House and of course my home 
community of Ile-a-la-Crosse. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s important to note that a lot of the history 
over time in some of these communities, you know, certainly 
have not been treasured and therefore not protected as best and 
as good as could possibly be. And that’s one of the reasons why 
I point out today that it’s always interesting that as the 
opposition we look at some of the changes to The Heritage 
Property Act in any way, shape, or form. 
 
Because this is something that is important to a lot of people 
throughout our province is . . . Our history will teach us many, 
many lessons, Mr. Speaker, and that’s one of the reasons why, 
when we look at heritage property as the bill is speaking of, that 
we have a very good system in place to protect that historical 
information, and more so to protect the assets of that history, if 
you will. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that there are a lot of mistakes 
people make. And when I was a young mayor back home in 
Ile-a-la-Crosse, we had planned to build a new nurses’ 
residence as part of our agenda to attract professional people. 
And there was this older building on the property, and 
unbeknownst to me at the time this building had been around 
for quite some time. And it was obviously very expensive to 
dismantle it or to move it and I didn’t know at the time that this 
was a historical piece of property. I don’t know if it was 
designated historical but because it was on the same property 
we wished to build a new nurses’ residence on, I got the fire 
department to practise some of their firefighting technique and 
we basically lit that house on fire. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we’re not certain, we’re not certain if that 
was a historical building, but as I said, you know, in the past 
people come up and tell you, well that building was well over 
100 years old. But, Mr. Speaker, I, as a young mayor, did not 
know that. And that’s one of the reasons why it’s important that 
we continue to identify historical buildings, to refine our 
system, to protect some of the treasures of our history, as many 
people, including people in this Assembly, as I’ve just admitted, 
that we don’t take the time and certainly research the history of 
these buildings. And I’m not saying that it was a historical 
building but many of the older people said that building had 
been around for quite some time. 
 
And I look at the community of Cumberland House, Mr. 
Speaker. They have a lot of historical buildings there as well, 
but there’s nobody there, no resources there to help celebrate 
Cumberland House’s incredible role in settling Western 
Canada. And so there’s always the history that people ought to 
pay attention to. 
 
And when there are errors made in certain Acts and there’s 
changes necessary to strengthen the legislation that would 
protect that history and educate young mayors such as myself, 
Mr. Speaker, at the time, then a lot of these historical treasures 
may be lost and certainly lost forever. So it’s important that we 
pay attention to all legislation that comes forward and certainly 
The Heritage Property Act is something that we must pay 
attention to. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, don’t forget that heritage and celebrating 
history is important, not only for ourselves and upon reflection 
of trying to learn lessons of our history. It helps us forge the 
future, as we’ve always understood. And it also helps with 
tourism, Mr. Speaker, and some of the examples I would use 
. . . And thank goodness, thank goodness we’ve had a lot of 
elders in our community pull me aside at the time and explain 
some of the history of Ile-a-la-Crosse overall. And I can tell 
you, Mr. Speaker, that the father of Louis Riel, Louis Riel 
Senior, was born in Ile-a-la-Crosse. And his sister who became 
a nun, she was also stationed in Ile-a-la-Crosse, and Sister 
Sarah Riel is buried at the Ile-a-la-Crosse cemetery. And, Mr. 
Speaker, these are some of the examples of the rich history we 
have in these northern communities. 
 
And I’ve been privy to visiting Cumberland House on 
numerous occasions and, Mr. Speaker, they are very proud, 
they’re very proud of being designated the oldest settlement in 
Western Canada. It is from there that the western part of our 
country became settled, Mr. Speaker. Not to demean and to 
diminish the Aboriginal people who were here and their 
recognition through treaty and certainly through the sharing of 
the land, Mr. Speaker, but certainly, as records indicate, 
Cumberland House is one of the oldest settlements in Western 
Canada. And certainly Ile-a-la-Crosse was a close second, but 
both of them celebrate their rich history and the heritage they 
have and the contributions they’ve made to our country. 
 
So it’s important to note that heritage is something that we 
value and that everything that is being proposed under any 
aspect of heritage protection, we must pay very close attention 
to, to add some of these lessons and cautions and certainly 
warnings of what could occur if we don’t do so. 
 



November 15, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2931 

As I look through Bill No. 90, there are changes of duties to the 
review board to ensure operational separation from the rest of 
the foundation. The review board will now consist of at least 
three people who are appointed solely to carry out the review 
board duties. Also we’re updating the rules for hearings before 
the review board, including a party’s right to be heard and the 
ability to accept any evidence deemed relevant, and also 
updates how the board will notify the public of the time, date, 
location of a heritage property hearing. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, Bill 90 also adds a section to allow 
for a more efficient process for amending the existing 
provincial heritage property designations, which I think . . . 
Being efficient in identifying and protecting some of these 
heritage property areas, Mr. Speaker, is something that we have 
to also follow through and ensure that the plan in the bill meets 
its stated objectives. And, Mr. Speaker, I think a lot of people in 
Saskatchewan would want to see their provincial heritage 
respected and protection of such lands and sites and buildings 
be something that’s important to government. 
 
And on that note, Mr. Speaker, we’ll have much more to say on 
Bill 90, but I move that we adjourn debate on this bill at this 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has adjourned 
debate on Bill No. 90. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 91 — The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2017 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of SGI 
[Saskatchewan Government Insurance]. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to rise today to move second reading of The 
Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2017. The Act, administered by 
Saskatchewan Government Insurance, outlines considerations 
around the operation of snowmobiles. The most significant 
amendment to this Act, Mr. Speaker, restricts snowmobile trail 
use to only snowmobiles and trail maintenance equipment 
between December 1st and April 15th each year. The change is 
required to ensure the Saskatchewan Snowmobile Association 
and law enforcement have the authority to discourage drivers of 
other vehicles from using snowmobile trails. This helps ensure 
those trails aren’t damaged, keeping them safe for 
snowmobilers. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, a further amendment transfers certain 
authorities from the Highway Traffic Board to SGI. For 
example, the amendment clarifies that it’s SGI, not the 
Highway Traffic Board, which sets the expiry date on 
certificates of registration and licences for snowmobiles, 
prescribes the form in which collisions are to be reported, and 
receives collision reports. In January 2016 an order of the 
Highway Traffic Board delegated these authorities to SGI. So 
these amendments to the Act are keeping up with what is 
already happening in practice. 
 

There are a number of other housekeeping amendments, 
including updated definitions for the term “snowmobile” and 
“licence plate.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Snowmobile 
Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of SGI has moved second 
reading of Bill No. 91. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This is a 
very interesting bill from many aspects and the particular aspect 
that I wanted to attach my comments to is as it relates to 
northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. The first point I would 
make is that as we embark on the review and analysis of Bill 
91, I want to reiterate to the people that we are having a lot of 
these bills being proposed to SGI by a minister that wants to 
sell SGI, Mr. Speaker, and not only sell SGI, but sell 
SaskPower, sell SaskTel, and sell pretty much any Crown in the 
province of Saskatchewan that he can get his hands on, Mr. 
Speaker. And this is the reason why, when we have any Crown 
corporations bills coming from that particular minister, we pay 
very close attention to what he’s got planned and what his 
issues are, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I want to remind that minister, you are here to sell off our 
Crowns and we will continue challenging you and we’ll 
continue looking at these bills as you propose ways and means 
in which you would weaken our Crowns, weaken them to a 
point where they can’t perform as they have performed in the 
past, and make it much easier for that minister and that 
government to sell them all off. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Bill 91, The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 
some of the changes on this particular bill, Mr. Speaker, talks 
about the responsibilities of the Highway Traffic Board that are 
being transferred to SGI. It also updates the definition of 
non-resident to make it consistent with The Traffic Safety Act. It 
updates the definition of snowmobile to conform with current 
standards, and we need to know what those standards are, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[15:00] 
 
It removes the definition of trail permits, as they’re no longer 
issued. It requires licence plates to be displayed on a 
snowmobile or carry a registration permit that the snowmobile 
is registered by permit. SGI, not the Highway Traffic Board, 
sets the expiry date on certificates of registration and licences, 
and between December 1st and April 15th snowmobile trails are 
restricted to snowmobiles and trail maintenance equipment 
only. And obviously, Mr. Speaker, having all kinds of vehicles 
on the snowmobile trail is not something that we would want to 
see happen. As we mentioned, there is an incredible cost for 
maintaining some of the snowmobile trails. And for somebody 
to foolishly use their four-wheeler on these trails, that, Mr. 
Speaker, we agree is a bit silly and certainly irresponsible and 
of course that shouldn’t be tolerated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the bill also removes the authority of trail 
managers to set trail permit fees. Snowmobile trails are funded 
through these registration fees, and that certainly gives the trail 



2932 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2017 

managers the ability to set some of those fees. And again, Mr. 
Speaker, it clarifies that SGI, not the Highway Traffic Board, 
prescribes the form in which accidents are to be reported. It 
clarifies that SGI, not the Highway Traffic Board, receives 
accident reports. And again it clarifies SGI, and not the 
Highway Traffic Board, has the authority to restrict or prohibit 
snowmobile use for safety concerns. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that I would advise the 
minister of as it pertains to different perspectives, and I open up 
my statement on that note, is that in northern Saskatchewan 
obviously every leader in northern Saskatchewan, myself 
included, would suggest that safety is paramount when we talk 
about any type of vehicle use in northern Saskatchewan. And in 
northern Saskatchewan, light trucks and certainly motorbikes, 
four-wheelers, and the like, Mr. Speaker, we all use these 
valuable tools in the North for a number of reasons. 
 
And one of the more important vehicle I’ve used in the North is 
of course the Ski-Doo. As the minister may or may not know, 
we have a successful commercial fishing industry that many of 
the trappers use to subsidize their income. There’s also the 
notion, Mr. Speaker, that hunting and gathering using Ski-Doos 
are an important aspect of northern life. If you go into a 
northern community, there are Ski-Doos in probably every 
second yard, Mr. Speaker. So the Ski-Doo is a valuable tool that 
is being used to not only sustain our economy but certainly to 
continue some of the traditional practices of our First Nations 
and the Métis people of the area in terms of hunting and 
gathering and certainly staying connected to the land through 
issues of commercial fishing and trapping as well. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as you look at the age of some of the trappers, 
they’re getting on in their years. And the fact that the Ski-Doo 
is largely viewed not so much as a vehicle on the road, Mr. 
Speaker, but an important transportation tool for a number of 
reasons, you’ve got to be very, very careful how you approach 
some of the, not just the northern people but farmers as well — 
they use a lot of Ski-Doos for a variety of purposes — that you 
can’t be too onerous in terms of the rules and the permits and all 
the different, you know, requirements that SGI or the minister 
may have on the people that use the Ski-Doo. There has to be 
some appreciation and some recognition of some of the industry 
and some of the activities they do as it pertains to the Ski-Doo, 
and especially when it comes to operating Ski-Doos in the 
remote areas such as rural Saskatchewan and northern 
Saskatchewan as a whole. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we want to know what responsibilities are 
being transferred to the Highway Traffic Board. We want to 
know as to the manner in which trail managers can set the rate, 
that it’s fair and consistent throughout the province. We want to 
know also about the definition of trail permits, how they’re 
going to change that. We want to know which responsibilities 
are being transferred from SGI . . . or transferred to SGI from 
the Highway Traffic Board, and how that implicates or impacts 
a lot of the Ski-Doo users in the province and, as I had 
mentioned earlier, how to incorporate some of the demands as it 
pertains to the different uses of Ski-Doos, from recreational to 
hunting to livestock monitoring to hunting, as I had mentioned, 
in the North, and the variety of uses we have for Ski-Doos. 
 
So there’s so many things at stake, Mr. Speaker, that we have to 

take the time to talk to different groups on Bill 91. So on that 
note, I move that we adjourn debate on The Snowmobile 
Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 91. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 92 — The Saskatchewan Telecommunications 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 
to rise today to move second reading of The Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications Amendment Act. Mr. Speaker, this bill 
serves to amend subsection 32(1) of the SaskTel, The 
Saskatchewan Telecommunications Act with a change that will 
increase SaskTel and SaskTel Holdco’s maximum aggregate 
borrowing limit from 1.3 billion to 1.8 billion. 
 
Unchanged since 1991, the current borrowing limit no longer 
allows the flexibility that SaskTel needs to continue to grow 
and have the capacity to respond to any future financial 
demands on their business activities and other business 
investments. SaskTel is currently in the first year of a five-year 
capital investment plan that calls for the corporation to invest 
1.4 billion from 2017-18 through to 2021-22, with 300 million 
of investments scheduled for the 2017-18 fiscal year alone. 
 
Under this current plan, SaskTel predicts that through 2017-18 
to 2021-22, it will see the corporation’s debt peak at 1.25 billion 
in fiscal 2019 and ’20, leaving it little room to manoeuvre 
within the current debt limit of 1.3 billion. There are potential 
business investments that could be required in the future that 
have not been included in the plan because the timing cost of 
these investments is unknown. Some of these investments 
include funding for a spectrum auction to increase wireless 
capabilities, funds for the development of a 5G wireless 
network, and other technological changes that SaskTel could be 
required to implement in order to serve our fine province. 
 
Based on SaskTel’s approved plan, the debt ratios are forecast 
to be 51.2 per cent for 2017-18, 52.6 per cent for 2018-19, 53.1 
per cent for 2019-20, 52.6 per cent for 2020-21, and 52.2 per 
cent for 2021-22. These are well within industry standards, 
which range from 47 to 76 per cent. If borrowing did total 1.8 
billion, SaskTel debt ratio is forecast to climb to 63 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendment to the Act being put forth for 
second reading today is essential to ensuring that SaskTel can 
continue to grow and maintain the flexibility it needs to adjust 
to changing market conditions today and in the future. 
 
Given that the corporation’s robust financial health will allow it 
to support up to 1.8 billion of total debt and the need to 
maintain the flexibility of its operations, authorizing the change 
to the debt ceiling is the prudent choice for this government to 



November 15, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2933 

make. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications Amendment Act. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Crown Investments has 
moved second reading of Bill No. 92. Is the Assembly ready for 
the question? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well, 
well, well, here we go again, Mr. Speaker. The same minister 
that has been trying to sell off our Crown corporations once 
again is putting another nail in the coffin of the viability of the 
Crown corporation by adding more debt, allowing them to get 
into more debt from 1.3 billion to $1.8 billion, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s half a billion dollars more that this government is 
allowing SaskTel to go into debt, Mr. Speaker. And the 
question people have to ask is . . . And we’re going to ask these 
questions as time goes on. 
 
The minister alludes to a couple of things, that there’s some 
investment projects under way. We would like to know what 
those investment projects are going to cost. What exactly are 
the impacts of the extra half a billion dollars needed for SaskTel 
to borrow, Mr. Speaker? And we also want to know whether 
they have any opportunity or any discussions or any meetings 
as to how SaskTel could partner with another firm that would 
weaken SaskTel’s market overall, if there are discussions for 
any other company that might want to buy a piece of SaskTel or 
buy SaskTel altogether, Mr. Speaker. Has that minister had any 
of those types of meetings? And is any of the debt limit that is 
being proposed today, does that have any effect or impact on 
how the Crown corporation will perform into the future? 
 
And there’s two trains of thoughts we have on that, Mr. 
Speaker. And we’ve seen this act before by the Sask Party 
where they allow our Crowns to go into deeper debt. And they 
allow the Crowns to go into deeper debt because they’re, on one 
hand, giving the Crowns greater debt and, on the other hand, 
they’re taking out greater dividends from the Crowns because 
of their scandals, mismanagement, and waste on the general 
revenue. What happens, Mr. Speaker, is they allow the Crowns 
to go deeper in debt; at the same time they’re taking more and 
more of the retained earnings of the Crowns to cover for their 
mismanagement and scandal and waste. So what happens is our 
Crown corporations have to operate under greater debt, less 
opportunities for success in the future, and still continue feeding 
the General Revenue Fund of which the Saskatchewan Party 
control. 
 
And another fact, Mr. Speaker, is that the province is going into 
deeper debt. Cuts are still occurring, and yet the Crown 
corporations are allowed to increase their debt at substantial 
amounts because they’re paying much more dividends out the 
back door to the Sask Party for them to spend on their scandals, 
mismanagement, and waste. 
 
And that’s exactly the point that we would raise around this 
particular bill is that the people of Saskatchewan ought to know 
that the trust from the people and the trust from the opposition 
is the same, Mr. Speaker, is that it’s not there. We have zero 
faith and they have zero credibility in their notion that they’re 
going to protect the Crowns, Mr. Speaker. The people of 

Saskatchewan know that. We know that. 
 
So when they come along and propose a bill that allows 
SaskTel to increase their debt by half a billion dollars, Mr. 
Speaker, we begin to wonder what the projects are, what the 
cost of each of those individual programs. And does this mean 
that the Sask Party’s taking out more dividends out the back 
door to cover up for their poor financial management on the 
GRF [General Revenue Fund] side? 
 
And more importantly, Mr. Speaker, as SaskTel begins to 
embark on these projects, are they planning on selling SaskTel? 
Or the people of Saskatchewan pay for the improvements and 
then later on whoever buys SaskTel purchases the company for 
a song and all the projects, all the investment, and all the debt 
that we see under Bill No. 92, we pay for that and some other 
private company later on gets it for 10 cents on the dollar? 
 
This is typical of the Saskatchewan Party economics, Mr. 
Speaker, when it comes to the Crowns, and that’s why I tell the 
people of Saskatchewan, we have to be very careful. Again, Mr. 
Speaker, this is further evidence of saddling our Crowns with 
incredible debt while they take out more equity out the back 
door. This is the operation of the Saskatchewan Party, what 
they’ve done time and time again. And this bill further lends 
credibility to our arguments that we should not trust them with 
the Crowns. 
 
And I do not take for one second, Mr. Speaker, the minister’s 
assertion that the debt ratio that SaskTel has in 2018 is 51.24 
per cent, 52.66 in 2019, 53.1 in 2020, 52.6 in 2021. Mr. 
Speaker, he indicates that’s the norm in this particular field, in 
this particular telco industry. But, Mr. Speaker, we don’t take 
that minister for one second at his word that these are the 
norms. Obviously borrowing half a billion dollars one year, 
that’s going to affect the debt ratios of any company. And we 
need to know what the effect, the long-term effect is on 
SaskTel, the stability, Mr. Speaker, and certainly the strength of 
SaskTel over time saddled with that kind of debt. We need to 
make sure that they’re able to survive for years to come, and 
again we don’t have that assurance. We don’t have that 
confidence, and we certainly don’t have that belief that the 
Saskatchewan Party is going to protect our Crowns to this 
extent. 
 
So on that note, we have much more to say on Bill 92, and I 
move that we adjourn debate on Bill 92, The Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications Amendment Act. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Government House 
Leader. 
 
Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Deputy Leader 
of the NDP said just a moment ago that he doesn’t take the 
minister at his word. I would make reference to June 6th, 2016 
Hansard, 580, in which that very same phrase was used and the 
member was asked to withdraw and apologize. 
 
[15:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 



2934 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2017 

rephrase my comment to indicate that I don’t have confidence 
in the minister’s ability to point out that these are the norms for 
this particular industry. 
 
The Speaker: — I’ll let the member from Athabasca have a 
second chance at this one. I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
apologize and I withdraw that comment. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would go on to add that it’s important that 
as the minister presents this information to the public indicating 
that these debt ratios are the norm of this particular . . . or the 
telco industry overall — I’m assuming he’s referring to the 
telco industry — Mr. Speaker, I would challenge the minister to 
bring his comparisons of other telco companies across the 
province and bring it forward so the opposition can indeed see 
what he has asserted in this particular Assembly. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s important that we have that information, so I 
would certainly ask the minister to do so. 
 
I don’t suspect that the minister will be providing that 
information, but I think it’s incumbent upon the House that 
when a minister asserts that these debt ratios are the norm, that 
they must also, when requested, assert that information by 
providing us the information which he bases his statement 
upon. So I think it’s important to tell the minister, if you believe 
that these debt ratios are the norm for the telcos such as 
SaskTel, I would ask him to share that information with my 
office and see how and see who he is comparing that 
information with, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s a very essential part 
of what we do in the Assembly, and that’s why it’s important to 
challenge the minister on that front. 
 
So on that note, Mr. Speaker, we have much more to add to Bill 
No. 92. So obviously my colleagues will have an opportunity to 
discuss how half a billion dollars are going to affect the bottom 
line of SaskTel, and if it’s all about improving the services and 
reinvesting in technology and not meant to give the 
Saskatchewan Party more earnings out the back door to cover 
up for their scandals, mismanagement, and waste on the GRF 
side, Mr. Speaker, then that’s something that we need to find 
out and determine, and this of course will take some time. And 
we will certainly take the time to research that thoroughly to see 
how this impact of further debt to SaskTel will impact our great 
Crown. So on that note, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 
No. 92, The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Amendment 
Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 92. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 93 — The Saskatchewan Telecommunications 
Holding Corporation Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 

Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 
to rise today to move second reading of The Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications Holding Corporation Amendment Act. Mr. 
Speaker, this bill serves as amendment subsection 17(1) of The 
Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding Corporation Act 
with the change that will increase SaskTel and SaskTel 
Holdco’s minimum aggregate borrowing limit from 1.3 billion 
to 1.8 billion. This is the same amendment as in Bill 92, The 
Saskatchewan Telecommunications Act. 
 
Because of the borrowing limit of 1.3 billion contained in both 
Acts today is the aggregate borrowing limit for both SaskTel 
and SaskTel Holdco. Both of the Acts need to be amended to 
provide for a new maximum aggregate borrowing limit of 1.8 
billion. The reasons for increasing the borrowing limit to 1.8 
billion are the same reasons that I provided in Bill 92. The 
amendment of the holdco Act being put forth for second 
reading today is essential to ensuring that SaskTel can continue 
to grow and maintain the flexibility it needs to adjust to 
changing market conditions today and in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications Holding Corporation Amendment Act. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Crown Investments has 
moved second reading on Bill No. 93. Is it the pleasure . . . Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Obviously the minister alluded to this particular bill is attached 
to Bill 92 as it indicated in Bill 93, the existing provision: 
 

Neither the Minister of Finance nor the corporation may 
borrow any moneys by the issue and sale of bonds, 
debentures or other securities or by way of temporary loans 
or otherwise, under the authority of this Act, where that 
borrowing would cause the aggregate principal amount of: 
 

(a) the outstanding bonds, debentures or other securities; 
and 
 
(b) the outstanding temporary loans; 

 
of the corporation and Saskatchewan Telecommunications, 
continued pursuant to The Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications Act, to exceed the aggregate sum of 
$1,300,000,000 unless the borrowing is for the purpose of 
paying in whole or in part any indebtedness previously 
incurred for the purpose of this Act and The Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications Act.  

 
So, Mr. Speaker, this is obviously an administrative Act that 
should certainly be in support of Bill 92. And one of the 
explanations, and I want to quote the explanation, Mr. Speaker, 
which is really important to do, and I quote the explanation: 
 

As SaskTel continues to grow, it needs to borrow money to 
fund its capital program as it continues to invest in 
provincial infrastructure. The increase in the debt limit will 
provide flexibility to respond to future cash demands for 
this infrastructure and other business activities. It is 



November 15, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2935 

proposed to set the debt limit at a $1.8 Billion ceiling to 
provide sufficient room to stay within the debt ceiling for 
the foreseeable future. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the part I want to really focus on, obviously, 
and I mentioned and I alluded to it a bit under Bill 92, is the 
words in the actual explanation, and I quote, “The increase in 
the debt limit will provide flexibility to respond to future cash 
demands for this infrastructure and other business activities.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s important to note that we’re borrowing half a 
billion dollars. Half a billion dollars for SaskTel is a lot of 
money. For any government across the country, it’s a lot of 
money. For Saskatchewan, it’s a lot of money. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I think it’s important to note that it is incumbent upon 
the opposition and the people of Saskatchewan to pay very 
close attention as to where our monies are going. When I say 
where our monies are going, Mr. Speaker, it is to our Crown 
corporations that this money is being flowed to and obviously 
used, as the note would suggest, for continuing to invest in 
provincial infrastructure. 
 
Now the other business activities identified in this particular 
bill, Mr. Speaker, we have to know what those are. It’s 
important to know what we’re spending our money on. And 
that’s why, one of the reasons we need the opportunity through 
committee is to ask the executives within SaskTel for a 
breakdown of that particular cost and how it’ll affect their 
bottom line, and certainly whether their debt ratio is on par with 
other telco companies across the country of similar size and 
abilities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it’s important to have the opportunity during committee, 
which we look forward to doing, is to break down those costs 
and see exactly whether or not what we are determining is the 
practice of the Sask Party, is that if they can’t take every 
possible penny out of our Crowns while saddling it with debt, 
what is the impact going to be overall on the future health of 
our Crowns? And that’s what we see the practice of the 
Saskatchewan Party doing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we must take the time to see where they’re investing and 
what is meant by “other business activities.” That’s the purpose 
of this Assembly and that’s our role as the opposition. And I 
certainly look forward to asking those very direct questions of 
the minister when we’re in the committee phase so they, or him 
and the SaskTel officials, could explain in greater detail how 
this affects not only their bottom line but their debt ratio and 
certainly the future growth and success of SaskTel. 
 
That’s paramount to us as the opposition, and we will continue 
playing that role to hold this government to account because of 
their miserable failure at managing our finances and protecting 
our Crowns. So on that note, I move that we adjourn debate on 
Bill 93. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has adjourned 
debate on Bill No. 93. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 84 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 84 — The 
Income Tax (Business Income) Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to stand 
in my place today to have a discussion with regards to Bill No. 
84, The Income Tax Amendment Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have to admit that income tax is not something 
that I have a real extensive knowledge about. I am very thankful 
to have an accountant that does all that work for me, and all I 
need to do is collect all of my receipts and everything and 
submit that. But I did enjoy having a little bit of . . . learning a 
little bit while I was reading through this bill and looking at 
some of the changes. 
 
And it was very interesting with the Minister of Finance’s 
comments about the changes to this bill, Mr. Speaker. It’s pretty 
obvious that the budget that they put forward in the spring, 
they’re backpedalling on a lot of issues and a lot of things that 
they presented there. And it just again shows the fact that this 
government doesn’t consult and isn’t making decisions based 
on best practices or well-researched information. And now 
they’re coming to terms that they have to make a lot of changes, 
and so presenting a lot of this new legislation in order to 
provide for that. 
 
It’s unfortunate that we have to go through this process without 
them first making those informed decisions when they’re 
implementing a budget. But one of the biggest impacts I found 
when I was reading through this literature, Mr. Speaker, was on 
some of the changes for the small businesses. And the minister 
indicated small businesses are important for the Saskatchewan 
economy, and I definitely would agree with her on that aspect, 
Mr. Speaker. We know that small businesses, they create the 
majority of the employment and jobs that we have in our 
province, and it’s really important as a government that we 
really keep that in mind when we’re making legislation or 
decisions in the budgets. 
 
But we see that small businesses were really hit hard by this 
budget, Mr. Speaker. Small businesses have been struggling 
with the increase to the PST [provincial sales tax]. Even one 
percentage means a big difference in businesses and the sales 
that they’ll get. Individuals are struggling with the poor 
economy, but also the addition of the PST to different services. 
 
I’ve talked to a lot of restaurant owners indicating the impact 
that it had on their businesses when people know that they’re 
going to be paying even more for restaurant meals, or some 
people who own businesses, construction businesses, and the 
impact that the increase of PST has on their business with 
regards to material and how they’ve had to make arrangements 



2936 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2017 

with some deals that they had with individuals, and the issues 
that they had with regards to that. And so I know the members 
across have also heard a lot of those issues. 
 
But also a big one too is the PST on insurances, Mr. Speaker. 
The increase of insurances for families in this province, but also 
for businesses — and small businesses in particular — is a huge 
cost. And we’re the only province that implements the 6 per 
cent PST on insurances, which has had a big impact on 
businesses. 
 
And so when I look at the increase of the threshold for small 
businesses here from 500,000 to 600,000 come January 1st of 
2018, that helps, but we can’t forget about the impacts that 
these businesses have had in a lot of different other areas. And 
those impacts are a straight result from the decisions made from 
this government and they need to be held accountable for that. 
 
So I guess, Mr. Speaker . . . oh there was a comment, a quote 
that the Minister of Finance said was, “. . . enhance the 
Saskatchewan advantage.” That was her quote when she made 
the statement here. Well you know, when businesses are having 
to lay off staff or even close their businesses because of how 
they’ve been hit hard by this government, I don’t believe that’s 
a real advantage, you know. And so they need to take that into 
account. 
 
There’s been some housekeeping items with regards to this bill. 
And I know a lot of my colleagues have some input that they 
want to have with regards to the changes to this bill. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I know our colleague, the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana, is going to do an excellent job with looking into this 
bill and asking committee a lot of good questions with regards 
to the impacts that the changes in this Act will have. So with 
that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am going to . . . I’ll move the 
adjournment of this debate, thank you, on this bill. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The member from 
Prince Albert Northcote has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 
No. 84, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2017. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
[15:30] 
 

Bill No. 76 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Makowsky that Bill No. 76 — The 
Parks Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and I’m pleased to rise today to enter into the debate on Bill No. 
76 which is An Act to amend The Parks Act. I think the primary 
focus of this bill, of course, is the establishment of yet another 
provincial park here in Saskatchewan. And there’s also a 
number of housekeeping changes plus some clarification on 
park boundary descriptions. 
 
So just to highlight that for the first part of my discussion here, 

just a note that the legal descriptions are being brought forward 
with minor amendments to Christopher Lake, protected area at 
Candle Lake Provincial Park, Danielson Provincial Park, and 
Greenwater Lake Provincial Park with some minor exclusions 
being proposed. And this is in relation to some work that the 
ministry is doing in regards to roadway widening, canal 
expansion, and description corrections. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I spent many years in my prior career looking at 
legal descriptions of proposed Indian reserves and past Indian 
reserves, and this is indeed an ongoing process as we become 
better . . . more technology to refine legal descriptions using 
GPS [global positioning system] and various other technologies 
to be much more accurate. We can then describe things much 
better. And quite often some of these errors in legal descriptions 
from the past cause considerable work for lawyers, which in 
some ways keeps lawyers employed — which is I suppose a 
good thing — but it is a conundrum and a lot of work to make 
sure that these areas are actually corrected properly. 
 
And surveyors as well, I mean especially with park boundaries. 
As you can imagine, a lot of these are in undeveloped areas. So 
I know that disputes regarding park boundaries lead to disputes 
regarding oil and gas interests, for example, and that certainly is 
the case in the southeast corner of the province. So it’s 
important to continue on with this work, and I think it’s obvious 
that it’s necessary to keep being diligent in that respect. 
 
Of course the same can be said for the housekeeping 
amendments that we find throughout the bill, and I’ll speak to 
some of those as I get into the bill itself. 
 
And then the new park itself, Porcupine Hills Area Provincial 
Park is the proposed new park. And the minister indicates that 
this is a temporary name and there will be an intention to have 
Aboriginal communities included in the discussion regarding 
the change, what name the park should actually have. 
 
Now we’ve seen differing opinions from the First Nations 
communities as to the appropriateness of this park and the 
adequacy of the consultation that was done by the ministry and 
by the government. This is an area of great concern, Mr. 
Speaker, because as you know, the duty to consult and 
accommodate is one that’s been articulated quite clearly — well 
extensively — by the Supreme Court of Canada. And I think 
there’s still an outstanding dispute vis-à-vis Saskatchewan First 
Nations and the provincial government’s policy regarding duty 
to consult and accommodate. So this is again another iterative 
process. 
 
And I think if we infuse the treaty relationship and the 
principles of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission into our 
dealings and changes within the boundaries of these parks, 
changes with any Crown land, it’s very, very important to 
ensure that we do infuse the negotiations with the obligations 
that are articulated in the duty to consult and accommodate. 
 
Now as you know, Mr. Speaker, the duty to consult and 
accommodate is probably a narrow legal definition. And I 
believe that many governments have gone beyond that and 
taken opportunity to use that requirement for the duty to consult 
and accommodate with respect to the treaty relationships here in 
Saskatchewan, as we have . . . all of our land within the 



November 15, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2937 

geographical area of Saskatchewan is actually covered by one 
of the numbered treaties that were negotiated in the late 1800s. 
 
So I think when we have government agencies and ministry 
officials dealing with Crown land and dealing with changes to 
the use of Crown land, it’s always important to ensure that that 
full and complete engagement with First Nations people and the 
impact on their treaty rights which they continue to have, that 
we have those full and meaningful discussions and not just a 
rubber-stamp process where First Nations are feeling 
disregarded and left out, and that the true meaning of the treaty 
relationship is being brushed aside, so to speak, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
So as you know, these are important discussions to have and I 
think we see, through the media and reports, that there are 
concerns about the creation of this new park. Some First 
Nations feel, you know, fully engaged or they have minimal 
concerns. But others have concerns that need to be treated 
respectfully and, as I say, infused with the treaty relationship 
that we have here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I think we have much to learn from some of the young 
people that we see in the news these days who understand our 
treaty relationship way better than my generation certainly did. 
And in fact, I don’t think I was ever told in school that we even 
had treaties in Saskatchewan. So it’s interesting to see our 
young folks now who have had the benefit of the treaty 
education, who’ve had the . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I 
think someone is questioning how old I am over there, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
  
An Hon. Member: — You can say, “none of your beeswax.” 
 
Ms. Sproule: — That’s right. With the help from the member 
from Regina Rochdale, “none of his beeswax” would be the 
appropriate response. 
 
So it is important for the new generation to inform us about the 
meaning of the treaty relationship, and I think we have the TRC 
which has the guiding principles. There are a number of 
recommendations within the Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission recommendations that do have a direct provincial 
implication. And we need the leadership from our elected 
officials; we need leadership from our community leaders to 
ensure that those children are able to continue to be infused, as 
the current word is, with the meaning of their treaty 
relationship. 
 
The first time I think I ever heard, you know, we are all treaty 
people, was back in the early 2000s when he was then the treaty 
commissioner, Judge Arnot. And he came to our office and we 
did a session on the treaty, the meaning of the treaty and the 
treaty relationship. And he really turned his attention in those 
days to the notion that we are all treaty people, that it’s a 
two-sided arrangement. 
 
And I say with pride that I come from a settler background. And 
I think it’s important to acknowledge that my grandfather 
wasn’t able to homestead without the existence of the treaty. 
And in this case, he homesteaded in Treaty 4 area, which is the 
area we’re in right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, here in Regina. 
 

So it’s important for that relationship to be nourished and that 
we can feel proud of what we’ve done today but that there is 
still work to be done. And I think when we have a government 
creating a new park, taking Crown land and changing its use, 
that is paramount when it comes to the treaty relationship in 
terms of the existing rights that are being infringed upon. 
 
When the land surrender took place in the treaty negotiations in 
the 1870s, it was very clear that First Nations could continue to 
exercise their rights that weren’t being surrendered. And in the 
case of Crown lands in Saskatchewan, it’s certainly the hunting 
and fishing rights as well as some other rights that were 
preserved, and that was, I think, much to many of our surprise 
in my generation. I continue to learn. I think we all need to 
continue to learn and listen and understand and be open to a 
different way of looking at things, Mr. Speaker. And yes, my 
grandparents worked hard and they suffered and they came 
from a place where they were looking for a better life. That’s 
exactly what happens, Mr. Speaker. But that’s part of the story. 
 
I remember a few years ago at Ness Creek, there was a theatre 
piece that opened up the Ness Creek Music Festival. And it was 
a beautiful story about engagement between settler families and 
First Nations who came together and shared when the settler 
families arrived. And I think those are the kinds of stories that I 
feel are positive and can enhance the understanding of our 
treaty relationships. So I really hope that we see more of those 
stories of understanding and reaching out. 
 
I remember stories that, I think it’s up in the One Arrow area in 
your riding, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the Doukhobors settled, 
and they came to the North Saskatchewan River and were 
basically starving. And the First Nations at One Arrow wanted 
to help them out, but they weren’t allowed to leave the reserve 
without the permission of the Indian agent. So the story I’ve 
heard — and I don’t know if this is this story — is that they 
actually snuck off the reserve at night to give horses and cattle 
to the Doukhobor community that was suffering and needed 
animals to work the land. They saw the women pulling the 
plow. And I think you’ve heard those stories, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And that was the spirit of giving and sharing that I 
think was the understanding. 
 
And again the concept of First Nations concept of land as 
opposed to the John Locke version of land . . . I did a paper in 
university about that and about ownership and about what that 
means from a Eurocentric and British parliamentary concepts 
vis-á-vis the concepts that First Nations had within their 
governance. And they are opposing world views, Mr. Speaker. 
And certainly I think with the advent of the Dominion 
government here in Canada, perhaps the European version is 
the one that’s prevailing, but it doesn’t mean that we can just 
necessarily discount wholly that perspective that comes from a 
First Nation understanding. 
 
And I’m no expert, and I think it’s a complicated issue, but 
when we see these kinds of concerns coming out with the 
introduction of a bill like this in our legislature, that maybe we 
don’t have it right yet. Maybe we need to continue to examine 
this relationship and examine what our obligation is as a Crown, 
as one partner in a treaty relationship. So that’s something, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. I think that maybe the mark was missed on 
this one, and the government needs to do a little more 



2938 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2017 

homework and a little more listening and perhaps a little more 
openness to some of the concerns that are being raised through 
the narrow focus of the duty to consult and accommodate, but I 
think through the larger lens of the principles of the Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission. 
 
So the new park, I’m kind of glad to say I’ve had a bit of a role 
in the McBride Lake area because back in 1989, I planted 
several thousand trees right in the McBride Lake area. And it 
was probably the muddiest contract that I can recall in my short 
tree-planting career. But we had to do a lot of walking in muck 
because even the equipment that the tree-planting company had 
weren’t able to deal with the beaver dams and the former trails 
that had become basically swamp.  
 
But certainly I remember that was where I was inspired to pick 
up a guitar and start learning to play music around the campfire, 
and that was because of the wonderful people that I had the 
opportunity meeting at that particular camp. I remember hearing 
that was when Tiananmen Square, the murders in Tiananmen 
Square happened, and we were all shocked, and it’s just a 
flashback in my own mind. But that’s a beautiful area of the 
province, the McBride Lake area. 
 
I also did a survey, a regeneration survey just a little bit west of 
there, at the Pepaw Lake area, and had an opportunity to look at 
some of the work that had been done in years past when 
MacMillan Bloedel was basically the logging company in the 
area. And because of the nature of the mixed boreal forest, 
much of the conifers had not regenerated at all, and what you 
see is the deciduous trees taking over and dominating. So I got 
to see first-hand, I think, some of the man-made changes to our 
forests that can occur when we have massive logging operations 
and not thinking carefully about the regeneration of the species 
that are being removed. So that’s something that I carry with 
me. 
 
And when I think about the McBride Lake area, I certainly have 
those memories, and memories of a really truly beautiful park. 
The Porcupine Hills are definitely a beautiful part of our 
province, and I hope that as we work through these treaty 
discussions that we allow other people in the province of 
Saskatchewan to have that opportunity to enjoy that part of the 
province. 
 
So you know, courage to all the parties that are involved and to 
speak the truths that we need to speak in order to ensure that our 
treaty relationship is one that is iterative. It didn’t end in 1876 
or in, I think this would be in Treaty 4 area, 1874. That wasn’t 
the end, Mr. Speaker, of the treaty relationship. That was the 
beginning of the treaty relationship, and that’s something that 
we are able to continue and work on and continue to build upon 
in sort of a shared way. 
 
[15:45] 
 
So again, I think these are opportunities that the government has 
to make a difference and to advance, I guess, our treaty 
relationship in a meaningful way and one that respects and 
listens to the First Nations. 
 
Just a few comments on some of the housekeeping changes that 
are being made. I do question . . . There’s a couple of references 

to Her Majesty’s Court of Queen’s Bench for Saskatchewan, 
and they’ve taken out “Her Majesty.” In the explanatory notes, 
they are taking out the reference to Her Majesty because we 
know that our next king or queen was likely going to be a king 
if the succession line works. So I think there’s some 
pre-emptive work being done here. 
 
So they’re taking out the reference to Her Majesty, and they’re 
just saying the Court of Queen’s Bench. But won’t it be King’s 
Bench, Mr. Deputy Speaker? So I’m not sure why they’re 
taking out “Her Majesty,” but they’re not taking out the 
reference to the Queen. So I’m a little confused about that. I 
don’t think it quite covers the changes that are needed to make 
it completely generic or non-gendered. So I’m not sure I 
understand. 
 
That’s for example in section 19.1(1), which in this amending 
Act is found . . . I’ll just find the reference. Yes, it’s section 11 
of the amendment Act . . . oh, pardon me, section 12 where 
they’re striking: 
 

. . . repealing “Her Majesty’s Court of Queen’s Bench for 
Saskatchewan” and substituting the “Court of Queen’s 
Bench”. 

 
But I think we still have a gender reference there that could be 
problematic if and when we switch from having a queen to a 
king. So that’s something I found interesting. 
 
A lot of the housekeeping changes here are things where they 
change the word “where” to “if.” I think the meaning is pretty 
clear with the word “where,” but if “if” is more popular these 
days, that’s fine. Good to see a lot of changes to gender neutral 
language so wherever it says “him” or “he,” which occurs in a 
surprisingly number of places in this bill or in the existing Act, 
they’re being changed to reference either “him” or “her” or the 
noun of the person that’s being referred to. 
 
Some changes. There’s a new clause 25.1 and I think the 
minister talked about that a little bit in his comments, but I just 
want to find the right reference again, 25.1. Yes, the existing 
clause is being repealed and now it’s being a little more 
prescriptive about cutting, harvesting, and removing timber. So 
it’s kind of going from positive language to negative language, 
and we’ll certainly have an opportunity to speak to the minister 
in committee on that. 
 
The drafter seemed to have a problem with the word “time” and 
they’re switching that to the word “period.” So for example 
“within the time and in the manner directed” would now 
become “within the period and in the manner directed.” 
 
Also the word “such” is no longer acceptable and it’s now the 
word “those.” So those are quite a few of the changes that we 
see throughout the Act, and some cleaning up. 
 
Section 32 of the existing Act deals with evictions of persons, 
and there’s a little more clarity here now where the enforcement 
officers are definitely going to be able to evict people in 
relationship to the alcohol and gaming regulations. So currently 
there’s no reference to the alcohol and gaming regulations, but 
now there is a specific reference being added under order, under 
section 107.1 of the alcohol and gaming regulations. So I think 



November 15, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2939 

that is something that will allow the enforcement officers to do 
their job more effectively and make it absolutely clear. 
 
Again there’s a bit of a drafting issue, and I don’t understand it. 
Section 19(1) of the amendment Act actually fully repeals 
subsection 31(1), but the only change I can find is changing the 
word “where” to “if.” So throughout the whole bill, wherever 
“where” exists, it is substituted with “if.” But in this case they 
repeal the whole clause, and I’m just not sure how on earth that 
could happen. It’s enough to drive a law clerk crazy, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
So just little things that we notice from some of the drafting 
changes that are being brought forward, and we’ll have an 
opportunity to ask questions about the thinking on that with the 
drafters or at least the ministerial staff and the minister and his 
officials, when we are in committee on this bill. 
 
So at this point in time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that I’ve 
exhausted what I have to say. Many happy memories of times at 
McBride Lake, and perhaps we’ll have an opportunity to visit 
Porcupine Hills again once this park is established. But I do 
encourage this government to take the intent and spirit of the 
treaties as far as they can and then beyond that. Because I think 
it’s time to make sure that those treaties are interpreted in the 
spirit that will move us forward as all people of the treaty. We 
are all treaty people. And so I look forward to more work from 
the government on that aspect, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So at this 
point I think I will move that we adjourn the debate on Bill No. 
76, An Act to amend The Parks Act. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The member from 
Saskatoon Nutana has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 76, 
The Parks Amendment Act, 2017. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 77 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 77 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Superannuation Plans) Amendment 
Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to enter into adjourned debates on Bill 77, The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Superannuation Plans) Amendment 
Act, 2017. I understand this proposed legislation intends to 
dissolve the Liquor Board Superannuation Commission, 
considering the plan is near to having zero members. These are 
people who were enrolled on October 1st, 1977 and who did not 
elect to transfer to PEPP [public employees pension plan] prior 
to October 1st, 1978.  
 
The minister proposes to now solely be managing the 
superannuation plan for the remaining employees. The previous 
commission was composed of . . . Previously the commission 
was composed by three members that were appointed by 

order-in-council appointments and one member needed to be an 
employee of the Liquor Board. So this bill proposes to change 
that. It seems reasonable considering, I understand, there are 
only two active members of this plan. And it seems that there 
are many other amendments that are reasonable housekeeping 
items as well. 
 
When the minister spoke to second reading on this bill, she 
identified that, although the Liquor Board Superannuation 
Commission is responsible for the administration of this plan, 
the day-to-day administration of the plan is delegated to PEBA 
[Public Employees Benefits Agency]. She also indicated that a 
third party has reviewed this plan with a key recommendation, 
and one that is being accepted here, being that the minister 
should be designated as the sole member of the commission, 
understanding that day-to-day members are still going to be 
handled by PEBA. 
 
I thought my colleague from Athabasca had a good point when 
he raised that it would be interesting to hear from the remaining 
active members of this plan. Considering there are only two, I 
think this effort should be made to reach out to these individuals 
and hear from these folks before this legislation is processed. 
 
I understand that the current role of the plan is primarily to pay 
pensions and that in December 2016 there were 177 retired 
members registered through the plan. I had a chance to review 
the Saskatchewan Liquor Board Superannuation Commission’s 
annual report for 2016, Mr. Speaker. One discrepancy I did note 
was that this report identified three active employers and 177 
retired employees . . . employees sorry . . . three active 
employees and 177 retired employees for a total of 180 
employees as of December 31st, 2016. In the explanatory notes 
provided with this bill, it was identified that there are two active 
employees still paying into the plan, so this is a discrepancy 
from the three. Things change over time, perhaps that person 
has retired since then. But I did note that discrepancy and I 
wanted to raise it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know my colleagues are going to have more to 
say about this particular bill. These are people’s retirements that 
we’re talking about. This is the livelihood of people who have 
worked hard in our province for the Liquor Board, so it’s an 
important piece of legislation. For now I will move that we 
adjourn debates on Bill 77, The Miscellaneous Statutes 
(Superannuation Plans) Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The member from 
Saskatoon Fairview has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 
77, the miscellaneous statutes amendment Act, 2017. Is that 
agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 78 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 78 — The 
Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time.] 
 



2940 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2017 

The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today to enter 
into adjourned debates on Bill 78, The Municipal Employees’ 
Pension Amendment Act, 2017. When the minister spoke to 
second reading on this bill, she identified that this bill proposes 
to eliminate provisions that impact the financial stability of the 
pension plan, stating that there were 25,000 plan members in 
MEPP [municipal employees’ pension plan] as of March 31st, 
and indicating that these changes are coming forward from the 
Municipal Employees’ Pension Commission. She cites that the 
ability of plan members to remove lump sums of money “. . . at 
retirement is a financial drain on the pension plan.” I think 
some stakeholder consultation on the impact of this statement 
and this change is important. 
 
As someone who recently retired from the Canadian Armed 
Forces, one of my options in my pension was to receive some of 
that as a lump sum payment. I thought it was a nice option to 
have. You know, people have different experiences that are 
coming at different times in their life. And I know that there 
may have been many individuals who have positively benefited 
from being able to receive this lump sum. I didn’t personally do 
that, but I did appreciate having that opportunity despite the fact 
that it may have led to some instability in the overall pension 
plan. So I think some looking into the impact of this decision is 
important. 
 
The minister also identifies how the amendments propose to 
remove unforeseen liabilities by requiring members “. . . to 
move their excess contributions out of the pension plan within 
two years of the termination date or immediately upon their 
retirement.” 
 
And she identifies other amendments that are more 
administrative in nature, such as electing a chairperson for the 
commission for two years rather than one, adding two 
additional members to the commission, one from the 
firefighters and police officers and one from Saskatchewan 
locals of CUPE [Canadian Union of Public Employees] that 
represent MEPP members. This change is coming forward as a 
recommendation coming from a report. I understand that a 
review is required every five years by The Municipal 
Employees’ Pension Act and that this report came out of one of 
these regular reviews to examine committee composition. The 
justification that’s provided for these changes is that they will “ 
. . . ensure more equitable representation for stakeholders and 
will enhance the continuity of . . . operations . . .” year over 
year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I appreciate several of the language updates that 
ensure gender neutrality and modernizing the language. As my 
colleague from Saskatoon Riversdale identified, “gender 
neutrality language is important because it is involved in 
changing perceptions.” As someone who comes from a 
sociology background, I definitely appreciate that language is 
important in terms of our overall perceptions of a particular 
idea. So these changes, although they may seem small to some 
of the members here, are significant. 
 
It also makes sense to me that this Act legislates the existing 
board requirements by legislating changes to committee 

composition. Considering the commission is seeking approval 
to amend legislation to amend the plan, I think a key 
consideration is the potential for unintended consequences and 
whether all these recommendations were aligned with 
stakeholders’ opinions and commission recommendations. 
 
I also understand there’s a provision in this Act that allows an 
employee to transfer their existing pension plan from another 
employer to the municipal plan provided it does not cause the 
previous plan to default. Considering the amount of members 
— 25,000, Mr. Speaker — I think we should take care to ensure 
that we’re carefully examining these changes that affect their 
pensions. 
 
When we talk about pensions in this province, Mr. Speaker, 
even what is presented as sometimes small housekeeping 
changes, it’s crucially important for us as opposition members 
to hold the Sask Party government to account, especially during 
this current political climate where we have seen a government 
that will cut anything and everything to save a dime. We need 
to ensure that our hard-working municipal employees are being 
looked after. They are hard-working people of our province, 
and we need to look after the futures of these people who have 
worked so hard to serve us in our municipalities. 
 
So I think we will need to further discuss these details in 
committee and to delve deeper into what consultations have 
taken place, and what if any unintended consequences will 
result for these 25,000 individuals. I am sure my colleagues will 
have more to say on this particular bill but with that, Mr. 
Speaker, I move that we adjourn debates on Bill No. 78, The 
Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
[16:00] 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The member from 
Saskatoon Fairview has moved to adjourn debate of the 
municipal employments pension amendment Act, 2017. Is that 
agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 79 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 79 — The 
Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Prince Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m proud 
to stand in my place today to have some discussion with regards 
to Bill No. 79, the public employees pension plan, some of the 
amendments to this Act. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Finance minister indicated that the 
reason why they were making some changes and amendments 
to this Act was because they want to improve the rights for the 
public employees pension plan — and they call it PEPP, like 



November 15, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2941 

P-E-P-P, for short — members. And they wanted to improve 
services for the spouses and services for previous members. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this bill is actually really quite 
important for a person like myself. I previously was employed 
by SaskTel and SaskPower, so I am a PEPP member, and so 
this has some implications on my pension. And I’m really 
happy and proud to have served for these Crown corporations. 
They’re very important in our communities and they provide 
good, stable, family supporting jobs and helped me provide for 
my family while I was a single mom as well. 
 
And so pensions was not something that I thought about back in 
my younger days, but it’s definitely something that I’m thinking 
about right now. And I admit that I need to learn a lot more 
about that. But it is something that’s really important, and I do 
realize how privileged I am to be able to have a pension. Not 
everybody has that benefit that they can rely on and know that 
when they get older, that they can have that consistent funding 
while they enjoy their later years of life. And I know how we all 
realize that that’s very special and really important. 
 
The Minister of Finance indicated that as of March 31st there 
was 6,500 members and 146 employers involved with the PEPP 
pension plan. And so that’s quite a few people, a lot of people 
that are involved and this will impact. So there were six 
amendments proposed with regards to the changes in this Act. 
So I’ll kind of talk a little bit about each one. 
 
The first one is to provide immediate vesting or locking in of 
member and employer contributions. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
previously members had to wait one year to become vested into 
the pension plan. And I remember that when I first started my 
employment and being told that. And like I said before, I was a 
lot younger back then and didn’t realize the importance of being 
invested into a pension plan. But when I heard about that first 
amendment, it got me thinking a little bit about how the 
changes to this amendment will have an impact on some of the 
employees. And I’m not quite sure if there’s been a lot of 
consultation with regards to how that will have an impact on 
them. I was thinking what about the people who are in 
temporary jobs. We know in some of these employers that they 
might hire people for short periods of time or seasonal. And so 
that one-year period, I guess, gave people an option of whether 
they wanted to be invested in this plan or not and they had that 
opportunity for whatever decision of theirs it was. So I don’t 
know if this is going to have an impact on them. 
 
Also I was wondering, there’s staff that are on probation at that 
period of time and my understanding, when they said it was 
about a year before you were vested in, I thought that had a role 
and played a big part of it was because you were on a little bit 
of a probation as an employee. And so I don’t know, if a person 
doesn’t fulfil the contracts of what their probationary period of 
time, if that would have an impact on that, then they would be 
vested in. If they can’t pull back their investment, will this 
increase the case loads for the PEPP staff or the administration 
of this pension plan? How much more costs will that have or 
will a lot of members get lost in the system? 
 
I know some people, they get jobs and they don’t realize, like I 
said, especially in your younger years, you don’t realize that 
you’ve been paying into certain programs and such and then 

you move on in life. And then, will there be a hard time 
tracking down some of these people that come in and out of 
these businesses and employees? And right now, if we have 
65,000 members, I wonder how many more members that will 
increase over the years. And then again, like, people who 
terminate their employment within that first year, how are you 
going to keep track of where these people go and how they’re 
going to be maintained? 
 
There is some talk, I know in this Act, about people who live 
outside of the province and there’s a lot of that too; a lot of 
people moving out of country, out of province. And how will 
we keep track of that? 
 
I know when my father passed away, my dad in his younger 
years had many different jobs, and so when he passed away, we 
were trying to think about any potential pensions or any benefit 
plans that he could have contributed to. And we thought we had 
it all figured out until about six years after his death and we got 
a letter saying, oh there’s this pension plan that we didn’t know 
about, and it existed. And my mother had to do all the 
paperwork to collect that. So these kind of situations do exist. 
 
And there was also another pension plan that my dad didn’t 
realize that he invested in when he was in his early 20s. Well he 
was still alive at that point, and they gave him a call and said, 
hey did you know you have this pension plan? Because that was 
back when he was in BC [British Columbia]. And so it wasn’t a 
big one, but every dollar counts when you’re in those later years 
and so it was a pleasant surprise. Oftentimes you get phone 
calls that are saying that you owe people money, not necessarily 
that they owe you. And oftentimes when you get those calls that 
they owe you money, you’ve got to question them, like you 
won a trip. But no, this one was valid and he had a pension that 
he didn’t know about. 
 
And so I wonder about, like, the difficulties of administrating 
all these pensions, and when you have all these people and how 
to maintain that. So I think about the administration aspect as 
well, you know, and I hope the people who are going to have to 
implement these amendments have been consulted. And I know 
our critic will do a good job with consulting the people that she 
believes are needed to consult with, with the stakeholders. 
 
So the second amendment . . . Actually the second and the third 
amendments are both supposed to be providing spouses’ 
additional rights. So the second amendment is with regards to 
the case of a member’s death and allowing the spouse to keep 
any amount left in the plan. And so I just . . . I kind of, I guess, 
thought that that was the process already, but it seems like it 
was something that was important to implement in this. So I 
think if you’ve contributed into a plan, that it really is important 
that the people that you leave behind have the ability to benefit 
from that, because we know it’s really important to take care of 
our loved ones even after we’ve passed on. 
 
The third amendment is in case of a breakdown in a spousal 
relationship. That ex-spouse can keep the PEPP pension plan, 
any amount resulting from the division of that member’s 
account balance within the PEPP plan. And they would have the 
same rights as any other non-working member. And so I think 
this is also a really interesting aspect. I wonder how this will be 
administered. So if you are a PEPP person as well, if that could 



2942 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2017 

be just added to your existing plan, or if this would be a 
secondary plan, or how is that going to look like, Mr. Speaker. 
I’ve been thinking about that. 
 
Also I’m wondering will the ex-spouse have options with 
regards to whether they want to keep the benefits within that 
existing plan, or maybe they want to invest it into a different 
plan, and what their options will be. Or will it be changed that 
they don’t have that option? That’s another question I have. 
And I’m sure our critic will be looking into that because I think 
you have the right to decide how you would like that money to 
be spent or invested, you know. And I know it’s really 
important that if it’s taken out of there to invest it back into a 
pension, but I think we need to respect the rights of the 
ex-spouse on how they want to manage that. And again how is 
this going to be administered? He’ll increase the number of 
memberships within the plan. And will there be, like, increased 
costs with regards to staffing and managing these changes? 
 
The fourth amendment removes the 15-day waiting period for 
the unlocking of voluntary contributions on termination of 
employment. So if it’s removing that 15-day waiting period 
could like . . . To me that sounds then you can take it out right 
away. And again I want to ask like, what was the reasons for 
having these rules and regulations to begin with? Obviously 
they were in place for a reason, and we can’t forget about the 
fact that these rules were administered for a reason. Like, so the 
15-day waiting period, is it so that people have a period of time 
to calm down or to make good, valid decisions? Or was that 
because the agency needed about a 15-day period of time to 
kind of handle all of the dealings with someone terminating 
their employment? We know there’s a lot of paperwork, a lot of 
the things that need to be dealt with, and we can’t forget about 
that administrative aspect. 
 
And then number five was that the Public Employees Pension 
Board may make a policy to administer PEPP with respect to 
out-of-province members and their monies which is subject to 
the laws of the other provinces. My understanding from what 
the notes that the Minister of Justice provided in her speech was 
that these were recommendations from the board, and the board 
is made up of people from all different aspects of the PEPP 
plan. 
 
[16:15] 
 
And so it sounds like they wanted to have a little bit more 
ability to administer the PEPP, allowing the PEPP benefits so 
that when people are from out of province, and it brings back to 
the fact that I brought up before, Mr. Speaker, the fact that we 
have to take into account that people could be moving all over 
the place and so there’s also the laws in those areas, those 
provinces. And in here they don’t talk about it, but also what 
about other countries, you know? And there could be some laws 
and legislation that need to be dealt with in that aspect. 
 
And the sixth one is to update, and we know when we’re 
looking at Acts it’s really important to look at the housekeeping 
aspects of them and change some of the language and the 
wording that is in there because oftentimes some of these bills 
or these Acts aren’t looked at for years and years and things 
change within our processes. So some of the housekeeping 
aspects of updating this Act is to reflect the new name from the 

CEP [Communications, Energy and Paperworkers Union of 
Canada] members to Unifor. So my understanding is that’s a lot 
of the SaskTel employees used to be a CEP member, but now 
they went to Unifor union, so they want to update that because 
some of those members are also on the board and so they have 
to make sure that that’s updated. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I guess when we’re looking at this Act, it’s 
really important that we can’t just instantly say that the 
recommendations are good and fine. I think it’s really important 
that we talk to the stakeholders, talk to some of the PEPP 
members, the people potentially that work there, some of the 
people who would be really impacted by some of these 
amendments to this Act, and ensure that what we’re placing in 
here is going to work well, you know, for the members and the 
spouses that they may leave behind if they die. And we have to 
make sure that this is going to work with other provisions and 
other rules and laws that are in other provinces as well, and how 
does that look compared to other pension plans and such. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I also know pension plans got hit hard 
with the increase to the PST to insurances and such. I got a 
letter with regards to that just the other day, and so we’ve got to 
keep that in mind as well. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I am going to allow my colleagues to 
have time to add their remarks with regards to the changes to 
this legislation. And so I am going to move adjournment for this 
bill and I’m interested to hear what my colleagues have to say. 
So thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert Northcote 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 79. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 80 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 80 — The 
Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment Act, 2017 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I’m happy 
to be here today and to stand and discuss, participate in this 
discussion with bills and this particular bill, Bill No. 80, The 
Municipal Financing Corporation Act, amendments to this Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this particular bill I found very interesting because 
of my critic portfolio with regards to the critic for Government 
Relations, so municipal relations. And I’ve had an opportunity 
through my time as being the critic to go across the province 
and talk to municipal leaders around the province, and talk to 
them about some of the concerns that they have with regards to 
decisions that are made at this level. And we know that there’s 
been a lot of decisions quite recently that have really impacted 
municipalities and they’ve been really hit hard. And I believe 



November 15, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2943 

this government has downloaded a lot of their issues back onto 
municipalities. They’re needing to face the issues that their 
residents are coming to them with concerns with increases in 
taxes and cuts to services. And that is due to the fact that this 
government, especially in this past budget when they did the 
cuts to the grants-in-lieu, that was huge, Mr. Speaker. That was 
a huge impact to communities and to municipalities, and they’re 
still really struggling with that and not knowing how they’re 
going to manage their budgets coming forward. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when I look at this bill and I look at the fact 
that this government is increasing the allotment for Municipal 
Financing Corporation of Saskatchewan to give out 500 million, 
it’s an increase from 350 million for municipalities looking for 
financing. I brought this up when I met with some community 
leaders in the last few weeks and asked them what they thought 
about this themselves. And they said to me, if this is a way for 
this government to try to justify the cuts that they’ve given to 
these municipalities in the past year, they don’t want more debt, 
they don’t need more debt, and that’s not good governance. 
 
And so the municipal leaders realize by increasing debt is not 
the way you manage financially. What they want from this 
government is they want support and they want consultation. 
And they realize that our economy is struggling right now and 
that this government is faced with some really challenging 
decisions. But to be notified on the floor of the Assembly here 
that their communities are losing millions and millions of 
dollars was a real slap in the face, you know. And that’s not the 
way you treat leaders in your province and that’s not the way 
you treat our municipal leaders. 
 
And so I am not in favour with the increase of debt. What I 
think this government really needs to do and what communities 
are still waiting for is the capital project fund. They want 
municipalities to have consistent and reliable provincial funding 
to help with infrastructure costs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I went on a regional tour with SUMA 
[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] and listened 
to community leaders. And I sat back and I just listened. And I 
think that’s what good leaders do, is listen. And that was 
consistent across the board, was that they said that they want 
consistent infrastructure funding that they know they could 
count on, and that they’re all struggling with challenges with 
their infrastructure because our province is aging and our 
infrastructure within our municipalities is struggling. And this 
government has a role and duty to help with that, and it’s not 
helping when you increase their debt load. 
 
And so I know the critic responsible for this portfolio will have 
a lot more to add to it. I know she will consult with the 
stakeholders, and I’m sure me and her will have a lot more 
discussion as well. And I know a lot of my colleagues have a lot 
of input that they want to put with in regards to this particular 
bill. But with that, Mr. Speaker, I am going to adjourn my 
comments and allow my colleagues to have their input with 
regards to this discussion. So I adjourn debate with this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert Northcote 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 80. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 81 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 81 — The 
Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise and to debate on Bill No. 81, The Traffic Safety 
(Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2017. And this is a very, very 
important piece of legislation that we have before us and, as all 
governments, try to get the right balance in terms of making 
sure our streets are safe in dealing with the issue of impaired 
driving. 
 
And particularly here in Saskatchewan, we seem to have a 
problem that we really have a hard time getting right down to 
the solutions on it that could really solve the issue. It’s just a 
tragic situation when people die in a vehicle accident, and it’s 
doubly tragic when you find out that there was alcohol involved 
and that there was potentially no reason for that accident 
because people were just drinking. And we think we should do 
as much as we can to make sure that we resolve that scourge of 
society. It is something that really in Saskatchewan we have . . . 
I’m lost for words in terms of, what do you do when you have 
such a bad reputation for being among the worst in 
Saskatchewan? It’s a tough, tough situation. 
 
And I do want to thank my two colleagues that spoke before me 
on this issue, the member from Nutana and the member from 
Riversdale. And the member from Riversdale has done a lot of 
work on this and feels particularly strong about some of the 
solutions that we should have done sooner or quicker, that we 
still need to do. She was a member of the all-party committee, 
along with the member from La Ronge. Rough work. Some 
very strong ideas. But the government drew back and decided 
not to do them right away, but has in fact moved quickly on 
some of the ones in the past years. But still there is much more 
work to do. 
 
And I look at the press release that came out: tougher 
consequences for impaired drivers who transport children. And 
that is something that I think we need to make sure that if the 
adults in the car have been drinking and they’re driving with 
children, that they really should be hit with stronger penalties. 
Children being in the vulnerable circumstances they are, have 
not the ability to say, hey, Dad or Mom, you probably shouldn’t 
be driving. They don’t know. They don’t know. And it’s a 
tragic situation that arises if they are caught in a vehicle 
accident that then, themselves, they could in fact lose their lives 
or potentially be injured or have a disability and all these things 
that we just hope never happen to our children. But again it’s 
the senseless, the needless time that it happens because 
somebody has chosen to have a few drinks and take their kids 
for a drive. 
 



2944 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2017 

And that’s something that we’re glad to see — the situation that 
the minister is calling for is a driver with blood alcohol content 
of .04 or higher, who transport children under the age of 16, 
will face longer licence suspensions and longer vehicle seizures. 
And this is very, very important and I think we need to move on 
this. The length of suspensions and seizures increase for repeat 
offenders. And this makes it even . . . underlines the severity of 
the circumstance if there is a repeat offence. 
 
But we know we’re dealing with addictions. We know we’re 
dealing with alcoholism, and we know that we need to deal with 
those issues here in Saskatchewan. And this is something . . . 
there’s one hand that we need to have those stronger penalties, 
but we also need to make sure that there’s appropriate treatment 
for addictions, especially when it comes to alcohol. And this is 
something that’s very, very important. 
 
The minister is also calling for an increased looking-back 
period, extending from five years to 10 years, allowing for 
tougher penalties for repeat offenders. I think that’s a fair 
option. I think that it’s fair enough to say, okay, five years 
wasn’t long enough and that, really, people need to be serious 
about when they’ve been charged and found to be drunk while 
driving, that they really do need to have a more severe, a 
stronger penalty, and that we’re not going to forget and it’s not 
going to go away. So this is very important. 
 
[16:30] 
 
All right, and this also talks about, law enforcement can offer an 
indefinite administration suspension, making roadside 
consequences for those charged with impaired driving under the 
Criminal Code consistent with those charged with having 
exceeding .08 breath BAC [blood alcohol concentration] or 
refusing to comply with a demand for a test. 
 
So all of those deal with drinking and driving, and working 
harder to make sure people understand, drivers understand there 
will be consequences. There will be consequences if you’re a 
repeat offender. There will be stronger consequences if you’re 
driving with children. And the police have stronger penalties 
along the roadside. 
 
Also the minister talks about enforcing new rules around 
slowing to 60 km an hour, and that’ll be required when 
snowplows are stopped on the side of the road and when 
passing other vehicles providing assistance, providing the 
prescribed lights are in place. And we’ve talked about that last 
year with the . . . or in the spring, with the tow trucks, and how 
important that is. 
 
Now, so those are the things that I think that we can get behind. 
But there is one, and I think the member from Nutana really 
talked at length about this. And this is one that came up in the 
spring. You know, one of the consequences of the STC 
[Saskatchewan Transportation Company] wind-down was the 
fact that then we got to see how the Highway Traffic Board 
operated or what effectiveness they were working at. And it 
caused a lot of people to be very concerned about the 
effectiveness of the Highway Traffic Board and really the 
mandate they have and the independence they have. And people 
were surprised and a little bit shocked when they went to some 
of the hearings and found out just how the Highway Traffic 

Board operates. 
 
Now I did mention that I was reading from the press release, but 
nowhere in the press release does it reference what the minister 
said on November 6th. The press release came out on 
November 2nd, but the speech in the House, November 6th. 
And I would quote the minister responsible for this Act, and he 
said, and I quote: 
 

Mr. Speaker, one more change I’d like to highlight is the 
proposal to eliminate operating authority certificates 
currently issued by the Highway Traffic Board. Operating 
authority certificates are required for transporting 
passengers for hire, for example, by limos and chartered 
buses. Taxis don’t require . . . authority certificates because 
they are regulated by a municipality. Operating authority 
certificates were intended to outline specific requirements 
of the certificate holder regarding routes, insurance, rates, 
background checks, and more. Over time the Highway 
Traffic Board has been issuing them in a much more 
general way, and they have almost evolved into a rubber 
stamp. 

 
And that’s what he’s called it, a rubber stamp. He continues to 
say: 
 

Thus it makes sense to deregulate this process. SGI will 
strengthen other regulations . . . to ensure there is 
sufficient oversight regarding safety requirements. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s where — for me — red flags drop all 
over the place. If the Highway Traffic Board has evolved over 
the past 10 years to be essentially a rubber stamp, then we have 
questions about their work for the last 10 years. And I wonder if 
they feel that they would be characterized fairly as a rubber 
stamp. You know, Mr. Speaker, I’ve had people come into my 
office who operate a limousine service, very concerned about 
the unfair nature they perceive of what’s happening at the 
Highway Traffic Board. 
 
And you know, the other thing . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
And now they can chirp over there. And if I’m wrong, please, 
they can correct me. They can stand up and correct us. But for 
example, you know, I live on 29th Street in Saskatoon; we’re 
not far off Idylwyld. So we get the buses going by that they call 
the highway or the party buses. I understand they’re supposed 
to be having . . . they are supposed to be licensed for carrying 
young people, but some aren’t. What happens with those young 
people — and there might be 40 or 50 of them in that bus — if 
they were involved in a serious, serious accident? 
 
And some of you will remember in Saskatoon where a young 
man, actually from the Maritimes, got in a fight on one of those 
buses, got off the bus, and then froze to death. And it was his 
bachelor party. And he died and of course there was . . . So 
what are the regulations around that? 
 
And I didn’t realize this, and I may be wrong, and if I’m wrong 
then the minister for Liquor and Gaming can shout out that I’m 
wrong. But these limousine services, I’ve not been in one, 
served alcohol. But apparently you have to have a permit for 
these services to have alcohol in them, and they will serve you 
beer and wine and champagne. That’s what they do. That’s part 



November 15, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2945 

of their business. 
 
But they’re supposed to have a permit from SLGA 
[Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority] to do that. But 
many don’t have that permit. And so this is a question: do they 
even know that over there? Many of us don’t make use of that 
service, and some on this side over here may not know that, but 
this is a question that is very, very serious. And it’s unfair 
because we’ve been told, we’ve been told that some services 
will just go out and buy a case of beer and a few bottles of wine 
and serve it in the back of their vehicles, because nobody’s 
going to check them. Nobody will check them. But then other 
people will go out and actually buy the permit and then you 
have to say, you have to buy an appropriate amount of beer and 
you have to buy an appropriate amount of champagne. You 
have to buy an appropriate . . . And you’re supposed to be a 
professional about this. 
 
So this is very interesting that the minister characterizes this as 
a rubber stamp. And there might not even be a rubber stamp, 
but this is a problem that we have. And people living in . . . 
Well I mean, all the Saskatchewan people would be very 
concerned about this if they knew their family members or 
relatives or whatever, innocently were in a vehicle that they 
thought was properly licensed, properly insured, had the proper 
certificates, but actually didn’t have that, and got into an 
accident. And what would happen? 
 
And so I’m really very, very, very concerned about this and I 
think there will be lots of questions. And I think when people 
find out about this piece of legislation . . . And this is why we 
talk about this, and then we’ll talk to people over the winter 
months to say, did you realize what they are proposing? Some 
people will have some big question marks about what this really 
means. 
 
And one particularly, and we’ve raised this before, but I’ve 
heard shouts from the other side that they will look after this. So 
we’re looking forward to seeing the actual proof in the pudding. 
But we remember last December where a taxicab driver in 
Regina, a Mr. Sharma, was attacked and did not have, could not 
get appropriate insurance for himself. Taxicab drivers are 
required to have insurance for their passengers but cannot get 
insurance for themselves for injury. And the question mark 
around, are they covered by SGI or are they covered by WCB 
[Workers’ Compensation Board], we’re going to be looking 
into that. 
 
And this is the kind of things that need to be in place before we 
deregulate. And the minister has used the word “deregulate.” 
We don’t want to create a situation where we have deregulation 
and then we really have the wild west when it comes to the 
transportation systems in our province. 
 
And this is interesting coming from them, where they want to 
actually make our highways safer. And I have a question about, 
is this going to make our highways safer or is it going to make 
our highways more dangerous because of the deregulation and 
nothing in place? And the minister hasn’t shown us what he’s 
got in place to resolve these issues that he’s well aware of. He’s 
well aware of the taxicab driver situation. We’ve talked to him 
about that. We’ve raised that with him. We’ve raised it in the 
House here, so his people should know that. SGI should be fully 

aware of that. WCB should be fully aware of that and should be 
bringing forth solutions. In fact I expect WCB in the fall may be 
bringing forward legislation to deal with their report that they 
released essentially a year ago that called for legislative change. 
We’re expecting to see it, so I assume any day now we’ll be 
seeing that. 
 
So we have some real questions. And, Mr. Speaker, the mixed 
messages we see from this government and the one that, you 
know, my colleagues have talked about, in the Throne Speech 
we talked about making our highways safer. We talked about 
how we recognize and we acknowledge that in Saskatchewan 
we’ve got one of the worst reputations for drinking and driving.  
 
But at the same time, in that same speech, we acknowledge that 
it’s much easier to get liquor in this province than ever before, 
than ever before. More stores are opening up to sell liquor. And 
you know, you’ve got to ask the question about that: is that a 
good policy direction to go in, to making liquor more easily 
accessible, deregulating vehicles that transport people when 
they’re drinking? Who knows what, you know, if you’re 
deregulating, what the situation is with the driver? 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there is big questions about this. And when I 
read a press release that talks about tougher consequences for 
impaired drivers who transport children, yes we can definitely 
get behind that. But not a mention of any changes to the 
Highway Traffic Board, which we expect better work than 
simply rubber-stamping applications from these different 
businesses who provide transportation. If they haven’t been 
doing their job, then I think the minister needs to be held to 
account for why they haven’t been doing their job. It’s on his 
desk this comes to. 
 
And you know, I have to say and I clap for and I acknowledge 
the good speech he gave on the Throne Speech day when he 
talked about . . . I think it was somebody he knew quite well. It 
might have even been a family member who was an RCMP 
officer who talked about why he went after people who gave 
underage kids alcohol. And said he’s stopping accidents. He’s 
stopping the accidents. He gave a very powerful speech, and it 
was really very moving. And I believe that he was sincere about 
it. 
 
But on the other hand, we have these, I would say to be kind, 
inconsistent . . . We’re seeing this from the leadership over 
there, inconsistent messages: more alcohol available, 
deregulating the Highway Traffic Board and their regulations. It 
just doesn’t add up. It’s like one step forward, two steps back. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with that I know that we’ve got a lot of work 
to do today, and I think that I’ve made my point about how 
there will be lots of questions. And as I said, with the STC, 
people really saw the underbelly of the Highway Traffic Board 
and were not impressed by the work they do. And all of a 
sudden now we see why, that they do plan on deregulating the 
board. And essentially we’ll see a board that probably in a year 
or two won’t even exist. It’ll be done. It will be done and the 
government will say, well they’re not doing any work anyways. 
Why should we keep them? But actually they were doing good 
work. They played a very important role here in Saskatchewan, 
and to get rid of them at a time when we’re dealing with unsafe 
highways . . . 



2946 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2017 

And I would say, you know, I would be remiss if I didn’t raise 
this, as in Saskatchewan we have one of the highest fatality 
rates when it comes to workplace injuries. And one of the 
places where we experience death in our workplaces is on the 
highways. And I don’t see the minister addressing that issue. 
I’ll have questions about that because I think that’s a serious 
situation, particularly with young people who lose their lives at 
work and they’re driving. That’s not something that we should 
take lightly and we need to know more about. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move adjournment of Bill 
No. 81, The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 
2017. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 81. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 82 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 82 — The 
SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I’m happy 
to speak to Bill No. 82 today, The SaskEnergy Amendment Act. 
 
[16:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy 
presented this amendment Act. And whenever he gets up to 
speak about amending Acts, it very much concerns me because 
he was the previous minister for STC, and we saw what 
happened with them. He completely eliminated that 
corporation, and we know the respect that he has for our Crown 
corporations. So really troubles me to see that he is the Minister 
for SaskEnergy. 
 
And I’m going to quote some of his statements that he said in 
his response when he stood up and discussed the amendments 
to this Act, which also concerned me. So the quote here is, 
“These updates will allow the corporation to better serve private 
sector business opportunities to support growth and 
competitiveness.” Mr. Speaker, this to me screams 
privatization, you know. And a lot of the amendments to this 
Act really scares me for that possibility because there’s a lot of 
terminology that the minister used when he was discussing the 
amendments to this Act with regards to privatization. 
 
So I’m going to start with . . . Here he says the major proposed 
amendment in section 23 and 60 is with regards to “. . . 
exclusive rights for distribution and transportation of natural 
gas.” He talks about modernizing the Act because it was 
initially passed in 1992. And I agree. I agree we need to look at 
Acts that are . . . especially in 1992. Wow, that was like 25 

years ago? I’m doing my math real quick. And so I could see 
why we would want to modernize that. 
 
But when he talks about this modernizing, he talks about “. . . 
recognizing today’s industry needs and support new business 
ventures in the province . . .” And yes, we want to increase 
businesses within our province, but we also have to realize the 
importance of keeping our Crown corporations. And they 
employ people right here in our province, and they have good 
family-supporting jobs. 
 
And like I was talking earlier, Mr. Speaker, I’ve previously 
been employed with SaskTel and SaskPower. And when I was 
employed with SaskPower, we worked really closely with the 
employees in SaskEnergy, and so it’s near and dear to my heart. 
When I first starting working with SaskPower, they had the 
ability that you could go between the two companies. If you 
decided you wanted to seek employment at SaskEnergy, you 
could. There was . . . that you can go between the two. And they 
worked really closely together, and our offices worked closely 
together. And when I was out in the field working, because I 
was a meter reader, I’d oftentimes come across some of the 
SaskEnergy employees. We would have coffee together. We 
would have lunch together. And I know the value of having 
them in our communities. They’re coaches within our teams. 
And having those family-supporting jobs is so important. 
 
And when we’re looking at these business ventures, are they 
going to be hiring people right from our province or are these 
going to be people that are coming outside of our province? 
And we need to look at having jobs here for the taxpaying 
people here. 
 
So the minister also talks about providing: 
 

. . . efficiencies and enhance safety . . . by allowing 
flexibility to determine the end point of the gas distribution 
system; increase compressed natural gas and liquefied 
natural gas . . . by allowing for third party trucking to 
qualified companies; and support the development of 
enhanced oil recovery and natural gas markets in the 
province by allowing operators the right to move 
high-pressure natural gas across land parcel boundaries; 
and move the exclusive business rights [exclusive business 
rights] definition from the Act . . . [this is] to accommodate 
changes in technology and marketplace conditions. 

 
Mr. Speaker, when I see language that says “exclusive business 
rights,” it really makes me concerned again about privatization 
and allowing third party trucking companies to come in. 
 
When I look at the changes to this legislation, Mr. Speaker, it 
talks about . . . Currently, the process is if you want to have 
these outside trucking firms or agencies to do some of the work, 
you have to get an order in council. And what the provisions 
here are talking about, getting rid of the fact that you need an 
order in council to engage in business. And, Mr. Speaker, that 
really concerns me with regards to accountability. Where is the 
accountability aspects when we have these processes in place, 
so that both parties can see what kind of business is going on 
within the government? And when we eliminate provisions like 
ensuring that an order in council is provided, we’re losing that 
aspect of accountability, and that to me is very troubling. And 



November 15, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2947 

again the language with regards to these changes is very 
concerning. 
 
There’s also amendments to sections 16, 34, 35, and 45, and the 
minister indicates that this is housekeeping because they need to 
make it current with recent case law and corporate policy. So 
again I know the critic with regards to this profile, she’ll do her 
due course with consulting with stakeholders and doing her 
research and ensuring that this is in fact the case, because I 
would be very worried if this housekeeping was to go along 
with what I’m worried about with this minister’s plans for 
privatization. 
 
Section 12 indicates that they’re going to do some amendments 
with regards to that because they want to prevent insurance 
premiums from rapidly increasing due to nuisance claims, again 
making it consistent with the SaskPower legislation. And when 
I look at words like “nuisance,” Mr. Speaker, I worry about the 
definition of that. And I didn’t see anything within the 
legislation here that indicated that they were going to define 
that language. And maybe it’s just me, but I found it a little bit 
concerning what I would determine as nuisance and what you 
may could be quite different. 
 
Sections 54 and 64, the amendments there enables the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council to make regulations respecting 
to “exclusive business rights” definition. And again that’s 
changing the definitions and allowing individuals to have that 
level of power. It’s concerning when we’re talking about a 
corporation that is owned by the people of Saskatchewan, and I 
would want to make sure that the people of Saskatchewan know 
exactly what’s going to be happening. 
 
And then another quote from the minister. He says “. . . 
amendments are intended to address modern industry needs and 
align with corporate priorities.” I thought that was a pretty 
strong statement coming from the minister, especially when 
we’re talking about a Crown corporation. And like I said 
before, it’s owned by the people of this province. 
 
And also some of the information and changes and updates to 
this legislation reflects the recent closure of the customer 
services to pedestrian traffic. Mr. Speaker, I know that change 
has had a huge impact on my home community of Prince 
Albert. People are still . . . They come to our office on a regular 
basis wondering why they can’t go into SaskEnergy. I believe 
SaskPower also was closed for customer services for people to 
walk in there, and a lot of people want that face-to-face 
interaction with people. 
 
And the people who worked in those agencies . . . Like, Prince 
Albert’s a big city, but it’s also small in consideration that 
oftentimes you know a lot of the same people. And people 
wanted to walk in there and talk to the people that work there. 
They don’t want to phone a number and talk to someone from 
Regina. The centralizing of services has gotten to be so extreme 
and has had a huge impact on my community, and I know 
smaller communities and the northern communities with not 
having that interaction that is so important. 
 
But there’s still a lot of people who, they go down and want to 
pay their bill. They want to talk to someone. A lot of people 
don’t carry their actual bills, so when they went to the 

SaskEnergy office they could pull it up. Or if they go to the 
SaskPower office they could pull it up. But now the only office 
that’s available for that customer service, within Prince Albert 
anyway, is the SaskTel businesses. And they will take your 
payments, but you have to have the bill with you. 
 
And again a lot of people who may use that service, they don’t 
necessarily carry their bills. Or they caught the bus to get down 
to the mall to go to the SaskTel depot, and they don’t have their 
bill and now they have to go back home and get it and come 
back. And then oftentimes people are late, and it’s caused a lot 
of issues with regards to that. 
 
And we talk about, you know, having a computerized system, 
but we’ve got to be mindful, Mr. Speaker, that not everybody 
has a computer. That might seem maybe strange to us. I know, 
like even all my children have access to it and they do a lot of 
their stuff online, and so do I. But not everybody has the 
lifestyle and access that we do or the ability or the finances to 
do that. And I keep that at mindful when I talk about my critic 
portfolio of Social Services and some of the most vulnerable 
people. And when they only have a couple of hundred dollars 
left after paying all their bills, they’re not going to spend that on 
Internet or computers. They’re going to spend that on food, you 
know, Mr. Speaker, so we got to keep that in mind as well. 
 
And again, I wondered how many staff that caused services to 
like . . . There was quite a few people that I know in Prince 
Albert that that was their job, was to provide that customer 
service. And maybe with the fact of retirements and stuff, they 
find them employment, but we also know when you don’t 
replace someone off of retirement, that is a loss of a position 
and a loss of a good-paying job in a community. And I think 
because these are a service for our province, that it’s a service 
that’s owned by the people of our province, and they deserve to 
have that service available to them the way they feel 
comfortable for that. And to have that . . . The money that we’re 
investing into these corporations, we want them to come back 
as good-paying jobs within our communities. 
 
And when we see facilities being closed, and we know, like, as 
soon as they’re closed for business from nine to five, we 
wonder when they’ll be closed for good. And will they be 
centralized? Will they be privatized? That’s what a lot of people 
are really concerned about, Mr. Speaker, and I think they are 
rightfully concerned about that. And so that’s what I worry 
about. 
 
And like I said before, a lot of the language that’s in this bill 
concerns me with regards to the direction of privatization, and 
I’m sure a lot of my colleagues are going to also be addressing 
that. And I’m pretty sure the critic, I know that she’ll be dutiful 
and consult all of the people who are going to be impacted by 
the changes of this bill. She’s going to ensure that all the t’s are 
crossed and the i’s are dotted. 
 
With that, I think I’m going to adjourn my remarks with regards 
to this bill and I’ll allow my colleagues to have further 
discussion with regards to the amendments with this bill. So 
thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert Northcote 
has moved to adjourn the debate on Bill No. 82. Is it the 



2948 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2017 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. It now nearing 5 o’clock, this 
Assembly stands adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 Apology  
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2917 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2917 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2917 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2917 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2918 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2918 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 2918 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 2918 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2918 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2918 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2918 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2919 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2919 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2919 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2919 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Hunting, Fishing, and Trapping Heritage Day 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2920 
 Sisters in Spirit Vigil Held in Prince Albert 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2920 
 International Education Week 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2920 
 Bullying Awareness Week 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2920 
 Saskatoon Hilltops Win Fourth Straight Canada Bowl 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2921 
 Campbell Tartans Win Provincial 4A Championship 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 2921 
 Joint-Use School Openings 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2921 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Education Curriculum 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2921 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2922 
 Global Transportation Hub and Government Initiatives 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2922 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2923 
 Education Curriculum Review 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2923 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2923 
 Support for Schools in La Loche 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2923 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2923 
 Northern Teacher Education Program 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2924 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2924 
 Support for Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2924 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2924 
 Services for Special Dietary Needs 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2925 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2925 
 Fees for Trapping Licences 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2926 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2926 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 94 — The Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education Savings (SAGES) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2926 



 

 Bill No. 96 — The Choice of Court Agreements (Hague Convention Implementation) Act 
 Loi sur les accords d’élection de for (mise en œuvre de la Convention de La Haye) 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2926 
 Bill No. 95 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal and Amendment Act, 2017 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2926 
STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Question of Privilege 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2927 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 89 — The School Choice Protection Act/Loi sur la protection du choix d’école 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2927 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2928 
 Bill No. 90 — The Heritage Property Amendment Act, 2017 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 2929 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2930 
 Bill No. 91 — The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2017 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2931 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2931 
 Bill No. 92 — The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Amendment Act, 2017 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2932 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2933 
  Harrison (point of order) ....................................................................................................................................................... 2933 
  Belanger (point of order) ........................................................................................................................................................ 2933 
 Bill No. 93 — The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding Corporation Amendment Act, 2017 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2934 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2934 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 84 — The Income Tax (Business Income) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2935 
 Bill No. 76 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2017 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2936 
 Bill No. 77 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Superannuation Plans) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2939 
 Bill No. 78 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2017 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2940 
 Bill No. 79 — The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2017 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2940 
 Bill No. 80 — The Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment Act, 2017 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2942 
 Bill No. 81 — The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2943 
 Bill No. 82 — The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2017 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2946 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

 
Hon. Steven Bonk 

Minister of the Economy 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 
Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Larry Doke 
Minister of Government Relations  

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 
Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Nancy Heppner 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Gene Makowsky 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  
and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 




