






















































Hansard: October 25, 2017


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 1A  WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 25, 2017, 14:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Nicole Sarauer 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Hon. Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Hon. Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Kindersley 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2585 
 October 25, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 14:00.] 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, ladies 
and gentlemen, please remain standing for the entrance of the 
Lieutenant Governor and the Vice-Regal party. 
 
[Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber at 
14:02.] 
 
Her Honour: — Pray be seated. 
 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 
 
Mr. Speaker, Members of the Legislative Assembly, honoured 
guests, people of Saskatchewan, welcome to the opening of the 
Second Session of the Twenty-Eighth Legislature of the 
Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We meet during the season of prairie fellowship. 
 
Harvest is nearly completed and people are gathering in town 
halls, church basements, and schools across the province. 
 
It is a time of community, and a time to give thanks for the 
blessings of Saskatchewan. 
 
Ten years ago this month, a journalist acknowledged our good 
fortune in a beautifully written Thanksgiving column in the 
pages of the Regina Leader-Post. 
 
“Let it be known that I am grateful,” wrote the late Ron Petrie. 
 
“Grateful to be where I am, for starters. As a younger man, 
brash and full of swagger, I considered my calling to be 
Vancouver, Montreal, even New York. Only now do I 
appreciate that what I actually fancied was merely the ideal of 
my farm boy self, destined for the big city . . . 
 
“Where I am is Saskatchewan. Thank goodness.” 
 
Ten years on, there is even more reason to be thankful we call 
Saskatchewan home. 
 
Saskatchewan has enjoyed a decade of growth. 
 
Our population is growing faster than it has since the earliest 
days of our province. 
 
During our decade of growth, Saskatchewan has grown by more 
than 160,000 people, reversing the decline of the previous two 
decades. 
 
During our decade of growth, Saskatchewan recorded the 
second-best job creation record, and had the second-highest 
growth in average weekly incomes. 
 
We led the nation in retail sales and manufacturing sales 
growth, and our exporters set new records, with agriculture 
leading the way. 
 
Our farmers are the best in the world at what they do, and they 
have taken off another good crop, despite the challenges posed 

by nature. 
 
Saskatchewan people are responsible for the progress of the 
past decade, and my government is committed to ensuring this 
growth continues. 
 
The Saskatchewan Plan for Growth focuses on international 
engagement, innovation, fiscal responsibility, and investments 
in infrastructure and education and training. 
 
My government remains committed to the principles of the 
Growth Plan at a time when there is much cause for optimism. 
 
Our economy is expected to grow by 2.1 per cent this year, 
higher than originally forecast. 
 
Government debt is $400 million lower than forecast at budget 
time. 
 
Today, Saskatchewan’s operating debt is more than $1 billion 
lower than it was in 2007. 
 
And last month, Moody’s confirmed the province’s Triple A 
credit rating – the highest rating possible – citing my 
government’s strong fiscal management and its three-year plan 
to balance the budget and reduce the province’s dependency on 
resource revenues. 
 
With our economy growing stronger, we are better able to 
sustain quality of life in Saskatchewan. 
 
HEALTH CARE 
 
A growing economy has enabled my government to greatly 
improve health care services during our decade of growth. 
 
Since 2007, we have recruited more than 750 new doctors and 
3,400 nurses of every designation. 
 
Thirteen new long-term care facilities have opened, and new 
hospitals have been built or are under construction, including 
the Jim Pattison Children’s Hospital in Saskatoon and the new 
Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford. 
 
The number of people waiting more than a year for surgery is 
down by 80 per cent since 2007, while people waiting more 
than three months for surgery has been reduced by 45 per cent. 
 
Saskatchewan has gone from having the longest surgical wait 
times in Canada a decade ago to having among the shortest wait 
times today. 
 
My government’s innovative two-for-one approach to 
increasing access to diagnostic imaging is helping patients get 
care sooner. 
 
Since March 31, 2016, 905 people have purchased an MRI with 
a corresponding number being provided at no cost to the health 
care system. 
 
That means more than 1,800 scans have been provided with no 
added expense for taxpayers. 



2586 Saskatchewan Hansard October 25, 2017 

Despite this progress, my government understands there is more 
work to do in health care. 
 
This year, accountable care units were established at Pasqua 
Hospital in Regina and St. Paul’s Hospital in Saskatoon as part 
of an effort to improve service. 
 
Accountable care units create a unique team environment, with 
physicians, nurses, occupational and physical therapists, social 
workers, and dietitians working closely together to provide 
prompt, effective care for patients. 
 
In the coming year, more accountable care units will be created 
in Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
This year, my government accepted recommendations made by 
an advisory panel that examined the administrative structure 
governing health care in Saskatchewan. 
 
The panel recommended the consolidation of the province’s 12 
regional health authorities into a single Saskatchewan Health 
Authority. 
 
The Saskatchewan Health Authority will begin operations in 
December. 
 
Over time, the authority will further reduce administrative costs 
while improving the coordination of care and enhancing the 
accountability of our health care system. 
 
Saskatchewan’s rate of organ donations is low compared to the 
rest of Canada and many other countries. 
 
Last year, my government asked the Legislature’s Standing 
Committee on Human Services to review the province’s current 
organ donation approach and recommend ways to increase the 
rate of donations. 
 
During this session, my government will implement a new 
organ donation program, building on work undertaken by the 
Standing Committee. 
 
The program will be led by donor physicians who will provide 
education and support to fellow health care providers and 
champion organ donations across the province. 
 
My government will also expand the pool of donors by 
amending regulations to allow for a donation after 
cardio-circulatory death and by implementing a mandatory 
referral program. 
 
In addition, we will continue to explore the option of moving to 
a presumed consent model of organ donation. 
 
This session, my government will fulfill its commitment to 
provide individualized funding for children under the age of six 
diagnosed with Autism Spectrum Disorder, or ASD. 
 
The initial funding level will be $4,000 per year for each child, 
for a total investment of approximately $2.8 million next fiscal 
year. 
 
This funding is in addition to the nearly $8 million my 

government already provides to support ASD services within 
the health care system. 
 
EDUCATION 
 
The first week of September was special for thousands of 
Saskatchewan schoolchildren and their families. 
 
This year, 21 new schools, accommodating more than 11,000 
students, opened their doors for the first time. 
 
Eighteen of those schools are joint-use facilities built using a P3 
- or public-private partnership model - that reduced construction 
costs by $100 million. 
 
Those schools are located on nine sites in Regina, Saskatoon, 
Warman, and Martensville, and were completed in less than two 
years. 
 
Altogether, my government has constructed or renovated 65 
schools during the last decade, including several new 
community schools. 
 
In Regina alone, the new École Connaught Community School 
and a new Sacred Heart Community School opened, along with 
mâmawêyatitân centre, a unique integrated facility that includes 
a new Scott Collegiate, a recreational complex, a public library 
branch, a community police station and a First Nations Elders’ 
ceremonial room. 
 
My government’s unprecedented $17 billion investment in 
Kindergarten to Grade 12 education over the past decade has 
also paid for 875 more teachers and the creation of nearly 6,000 
new child care spaces. 
 
My government believes parents and students should have the 
right to choose the schools that work best for them. 
 
Earlier this year, a court decision put that right in jeopardy by 
ruling the government must cease funding for non-minority 
faith students who attend separate schools. 
 
During the session, we will introduce legislation that will 
protect the right to school choice by invoking the 
notwithstanding clause of the Canadian Charter of Rights and 
Freedoms. 
 
My government has taken action to improve the learning 
experience in Saskatchewan classrooms. 
 
We have worked with school divisions and teachers on the 
province’s first Education Sector Strategic Plan, which has led 
to higher graduation rates and more students reading at grade 
level. 
 
My government has collaborated with Indigenous leaders to 
develop programs to assist First Nations and Métis students, 
such as Help Me Tell My Story and Following Their Voices. 
 
In the coming year, my government will continue its efforts to 
improve education for all Saskatchewan children. 
 
A pause on curriculum development has been lifted and 



October 25, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2587 

curriculum renewal will continue in a number of subject areas. 
 
My government continues to hear concerns from parents about 
their children’s proficiency in mathematics. 
 
We are also monitoring the math scores of Saskatchewan 
students in international tests, and they are disappointingly low. 
 
To improve math scores and ensure all Saskatchewan students 
are well-schooled in the basics of math, my government will 
expand math reinforcement and supports, broadening access to 
common-sense methods that have been proven successful in the 
past and in other jurisdictions. 
 
New international models will also be explored. 
 
Saskatchewan, like other provinces, is having difficulty 
recruiting and retaining teachers and early childhood educators 
in French and French immersion. 
 
In the coming year, my government will work with other 
provinces, including Quebec, to build partnerships that will lead 
to higher quality French and French second-language 
instruction for our students. 
 
We will also begin the development of a computer coding 
curriculum to help prepare students for careers in science, 
mathematics, engineering, and technology. 
 
My government is committed to ensuring post-secondary 
education in Saskatchewan remains accessible and affordable. 
 
Since 2008, we have provided $8.3 billion to support 
post-secondary education, including nearly $1 billion in direct 
support for students. 
 
This includes the Graduate Retention Program, the most 
aggressive student attraction and retention program in Canada. 
 
Since 2008, nearly 70,000 students have taken advantage of the 
Graduate Retention Program, receiving about $345 million in 
tax credits. 
 
That’s 70,000 post-secondary graduates who have chosen to 
begin their careers right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
My government also provides direct financial support to 
students through the Saskatchewan Advantage Scholarship, 
which offers all Saskatchewan Grade 12 graduates up to $500 a 
year to help cover tuition costs to a maximum of $2,000. 
 
Since 2012, more than 38,000 students have received over $33 
million through the program. 
 
Expanding access to post-secondary education for First Nations 
and Métis people is a priority for my government. 
 
During the last decade, the number of First Nations and Métis 
students enrolled at post-secondary institutions in Saskatchewan 
has jumped from 12,186 to 16,357, an increase of 34 per cent. 
 
Last year, 854 First Nations and Métis students graduated from 
Saskatchewan Polytechnic, up 138 or nearly 20 per cent from 

the previous year. 
 
This year, my government will allocate nearly $45 million to 
support post-secondary programs and skills training and 
employment initiatives for Indigenous students. 
 
This includes $9.4 million provided to the Saskatchewan Indian 
Institute of Technologies, which has received a 114 per cent 
increase in funding from the province since 2007. 
 
PROTECTING COMMUNITIES 
 
Earlier this year, the federal government announced its intention 
to legalize the non-medical use of marijuana by July, 2018. 
 
This decision has far-reaching consequences and was made 
without adequate consultation with the provinces. 
 
In July, Canada’s Premiers raised concerns about the feasibility 
of the federal government’s implementation date, noting that 
more time may be needed to address important concerns like 
safety, distribution, taxation, and public education. 
 
Despite these concerns, the federal government has not changed 
its timetable. 
 
Therefore, my government has no choice but to prepare for this 
historic revision to the Criminal Code. 
 
My government is in the midst of a review process that includes 
an online public consultation that received nearly 35,000 
responses. 
 
This review is guided by four objectives: preventing the growth 
of the underground marijuana market; restricting access to 
minors; ensuring road and workplace safety; and protecting 
public health. 
 
Once the review is completed this fall, my government will 
introduce legislation that will govern the sale and distribution of 
marijuana and outline measures to protect public health and 
safety and enhance public education. 
 
Saskatchewan has the highest rate of impaired driving among 
the provinces. 
 
During the last decade, more than 600 people have been killed, 
and more than 4,000 people injured in accidents involving 
drivers impaired by alcohol. 
 
In the past year, my government has introduced a number of 
measures to address a preventable tragedy that has shattered so 
many lives. 
 
These actions include: 
 

• Increasing the age at which drivers are prohibited from 
having any drugs or alcohol in their bloodstream from 19 
and under to 21 and under; 

 
• Introducing a three-day vehicle seizure for drivers over the 

age of 21 who are found to have blood alcohol levels 
between .04 and .08 for the first time; and 



2588 Saskatchewan Hansard October 25, 2017 

• Making Saskatchewan’s ignition interlock laws the 
toughest in Canada. 

 
But additional steps can be taken to reduce impaired driving. 
 
Any time an individual makes the terrible decision to drive 
while impaired, there is always a better option. 
 
My government will work to create one additional better option. 
 
We will be urging municipalities to allow ride-sharing services 
to operate within their jurisdiction. 
 
My government will also introduce legislation enabling SGI to 
offer affordable insurance to drivers working for ride-sourcing 
companies like Uber and Lyft. 
 
And we will work with smaller communities to attract or 
establish a ride-sourcing network so people have another option 
for a safe ride home. 
 
My government has heard that more must be done to prevent 
crime in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
To address these concerns, we appointed a committee of 
government MLAs to consult on measures that might 
strengthen public safety. 
 
Acting on the committee’s recommendations, my government 
has created a new Protection and Response Team (PRT), 
consisting of 258 armed officers who have the authority to 
arrest and detain those suspected of committing crimes. 
 
The PRT is composed of: 
 

• 120 police officers from the RCMP and municipal police 
services; 

 
• 40 Commercial Vehicle Enforcement Officers, who have 

been given expanded powers; and 
 

• 98 Conservation Officers. 
 
The Protection and Response Team will improve response 
times to emergency calls and increase the visibility of 
uniformed officers in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
My government has committed nearly $6 million to support the 
PRT and other initiatives arising from the committee’s report. 
 
During this session, my government will take further action to 
protect Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
Cyberbullying through the unauthorized sharing of intimate 
images is a despicable crime, one that most often victimizes 
young people. 
 
But it has proven difficult to rely on the Criminal Code to deter 
this crime because the burden of proof – beyond a reasonable 
doubt – is so high. 
 
My government will amend The Privacy Act to allow the 
victims of the unauthorized distribution of intimate images to 

sue for compensation in a civil action. 
 
The amendments will also create a reverse onus requiring the 
defendant to prove the plaintiff consented to the release of the 
images in question. 
 
In addition, my government will remove the requirement that an 
action of this type be commenced in the Court of Queen’s 
Bench. 
 
Once The Privacy Act is amended, the victims of “revenge 
porn” or “sexting” can seek redress through Small Claims 
Court, which will be less costly for them. 
 
In Saskatchewan, most renters and landlords have a respectful 
relationship. 
 
But there are exceptions where one party fails to meet their 
obligations to the other. 
 
This session, my government will look at creating a process to 
improve the disclosure of decisions made by the Office of 
Residential Tenancies. 
 
This will assist in ensuring problem landlords and problem 
tenants can be readily identified in the marketplace. 
 
In July, amendments to The Victims of Interpersonal Violence 
Act and The Residential Tenancies Act came into force. 
 
The new provisions permit victims of domestic violence to 
obtain a certificate allowing them to end a fixed-term lease of 
residential premises, without penalty, if they are in danger. 
 
INFRASTRUCTURE 
 
Trade-dependent jurisdictions like Saskatchewan require 
modern and well-maintained infrastructure to ensure they can 
compete and prosper. 
 
During the last decade, my government has invested more than 
$26 billion to renew and expand Saskatchewan’s infrastructure. 
 
Of that total, $7.4 billion has been committed to the province’s 
highway system. 
 
This record investment has resulted in the repair and 
improvement of 12,000 kilometres of highway and the 
completion of significant projects, such as Saskatoon’s Circle 
Drive South Bridge, the St. Louis Bridge, the twinning of 
Highway 11, and passing lanes on Highway 7 and Highway 10. 
 
This year, work continues on the Regina Bypass, overpasses at 
Martensville and Warman, the Saskatoon North Commuter 
Parkway Bridge, twinning projects on Highways 39, 16, and 7, 
and passing lanes on Highway 5, among many other projects. 
 
CROWN CORPORATIONS 
 
Our Crown corporations support economic growth and quality 
of life in Saskatchewan. 
 
Last session, my government passed Bill 40, legislation that 



October 25, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2589 

would allow for the sale of up to 49 per cent of a Crown 
corporation. 
 
This legislation would have enabled a Crown corporation to 
enter into a partnership beneficial to the province, while 
ensuring the government remained the majority owner of that 
corporation. 
 
Over the last few months, my government has heard from many 
Saskatchewan people concerned about this legislation and the 
potential sale of even a small stake in a Crown corporation. 
 
Consequently, my government will repeal the provisions of Bill 
40 that allow for the sale of a partial equity position of a Crown 
Corporation. 
 
In the year ahead, our Crown corporations will continue to 
invest in Saskatchewan 
 
Demand for electricity has grown by 25 per cent since 2007, 
and is expected to increase by another 13 per cent by 2025. 
 
SaskPower has responded by investing nearly $8 billion during 
the last decade to meet increased demand and to restore and 
replace aging infrastructure. 
 
This year, the company expects to allocate another $1.1 billion 
on capital projects. 
 
Since 2008, SaskTel has invested more than $2.6 billion to 
improve telephone and internet service in the province. 
 
But we have heard from the people of Saskatchewan that 
cellular and internet service must be further improved. 
 
Too many rural areas still have poor cellular coverage and slow 
internet service. 
 
This year, SaskTel will spend $300 million to expand and 
enhance its network, with a total of $1.1 billion expected to be 
invested in the next four years. 
 
My government’s goal is to ensure that Saskatchewan is the 
best province in Canada in terms of cellular and internet 
coverage. 
 
My government’s plan to create a more open, competitive, and 
customer-friendly liquor retailing system is moving forward. 
 
To date, Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority stores in 
24 locations have been converted and new private operators are 
providing retail liquor service in those communities. 
 
This includes five communities where the new private 
ownership is made up either partially or entirely of former 
employees, with one more employee-owned store scheduled to 
open this fall. 
 
In addition, there are new private retailers open in Aberdeen, 
Pilot Butte, Osler, and Hague — communities where there was 
no government liquor store operating before. 
 
An expanded private retail liquor system is expected to be 

completed by May 2018. 
 
ENSURING PROSPERITY AND COMPETITIVENESS 
 
International engagement is a priority for my government 
because trade drives Saskatchewan’s economy. 
 
More than 100,000 jobs in our province depend on exports. 
 
During our decade of growth, Saskatchewan exports to 
emerging markets, particularly in Asia, have grown by 
staggering amounts. 
 
Saskatchewan’s exports to China have increased 530 per cent 
over the past decade to $3 billion last year. 
 
Exports to India are up 272 per cent to $1.5 billion; exports to 
Pakistan are up 293 per cent to $548 million; and exports to 
Indonesia are up 132 per cent to $543 million. 
 
My government will continue working to expand our export 
markets through further trade missions to these and other 
countries and through support for trade-focused organizations 
like the Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership. 
 
As negotiations on a new North American Free Trade 
Agreement proceed, we will join with others in Canada in 
reminding our trading partners about the benefits of free trade 
and the dangers of protectionism. 
 
My government will also continue to advocate for freer trade 
within Canada. 
 
Saskatchewan stands to benefit from the new Canadian Free 
Trade Agreement (CFTA), which came into force on July 1st. 
 
The CFTA will reduce barriers to trade, investment, and the 
mobility of workers. 
 
However, we are concerned other provincial governments do 
not share Saskatchewan’s commitment to free trade. 
 
An impartial trade panel has ruled Alberta’s rebate program for 
small brewers discriminates against brewers in Saskatchewan. 
 
The panel also determined the rebate program is not in 
accordance with Alberta’s trade obligations to other provinces. 
 
Alberta is appealing the ruling. 
 
My government is considering a range of retaliatory measures 
in response to Alberta’s unfair trade practices. 
 
This year, capital investment in Saskatchewan is forecast to be 
$14.5 billion. 
 
While this is down from a few years ago, it is still 43 per cent 
higher than capital investment in 2007. 
 
Saskatchewan’s favourable business climate has played a major 
role in attracting investment. 
 
In the last provincial budget, my government increased and 



2590 Saskatchewan Hansard October 25, 2017 

broadened the provincial sales tax to reduce our dependency on 
resource revenues. 
 
But even with those changes, Saskatchewan has the lowest 
provincial sales tax among provinces with a PST. 
 
We have reduced income taxes for all citizens. 
 
Saskatchewan’s manufacturing and processing tax is the lowest 
in Canada. 
 
Competitive taxes and sensible regulations helped build the 
Saskatchewan Advantage, and my government will do 
everything it can to defend the Saskatchewan Advantage. 
 
In the spring budget, my government committed to keeping 
Saskatchewan competitive with our neighbouring provinces by 
moving to the lowest corporate tax rate in western Canada, 
matching British Columbia’s rate of 11 per cent. 
 
Since then, two things have changed. 
 
First, the BC government has announced it will raise its 
corporate tax rate to 12 per cent - the same as Alberta and 
Manitoba. 
 
And second, the federal government introduced tax changes that 
could have had a significant negative impact on Canadian small 
businesses. 
 
While we are pleased the federal government has backed down 
on most of its proposed tax changes that would have hurt small 
businesses, my government has decided to refocus its business 
tax reduction plan on Saskatchewan small businesses. 
 
Effective January 1, 2018, we will raise the small-business 
income threshold from $500,000 to $600,000 - the highest 
threshold in Canada. 
 
This is the amount of income up to which small businesses pay 
tax at the significantly lower two per cent small business tax 
rate. 
 
We will also return the corporate tax rate to 12 per cent - the 
same as the other western provinces. 
 
My government is monitoring developments in the potash 
industry, particularly the merger of PotashCorp and Agrium 
into a new company called Nutrien. 
 
My government’s priority is to ensure Nutrien’s continued head 
office presence in Saskatoon and increased employment in 
Saskatchewan as the merger moves forward and market 
conditions improve. 
 
My government will continue to lead the national discussion on 
competitiveness in the resource sector. 
 
With multi-layered reviews and climate change initiatives being 
advanced by the federal government, there is a high level of 
uncertainty in energy and mining. 
 
Our energy sector is one of Canada’s greatest strengths, yet its 

economic potential is being hamstrung by our own national 
government, even as Canada continues to import thousands of 
barrels of oil every day from other countries. 
 
In the past year, energy projects worth more than $56 billion 
have been abandoned, including the Energy East pipeline, 
which would have moved Saskatchewan oil to tidewater, 
enabling our province to get full value for the oil it produces. 
 
My government will continue to call for transparent, 
predictable, and timely approval processes for resource 
companies. 
 
This fiscal year, my government will introduce a new targeted 
Mineral Development Strategy. 
 
The strategy will include a mineral exploration incentive to 
cover a portion of the costs associated with ground-based 
exploration activities. 
 
AGRICULTURE 
 
Thanks to the efforts of our farmers, ranchers, researchers, and 
processors, agriculture remains a pillar of our economy. 
 
In 2016, Saskatchewan shipped $14.4 billion worth of 
agricultural products – more than half of all exports. 
 
And we are on track for another strong year of agricultural 
exports. 
 
In the coming year, my government will continue to provide 
strong support to farmers, ranchers, and agri-businesses. 
 
We will stand up for our agricultural sector in opposing a 
federal carbon tax and federal small business tax changes that 
will hit farmers and ranchers hard. 
 
We will work to expand access to important markets across the 
globe. 
 
And we will continue to invest in research through the 
Agricultural Development Fund, the Global Institute for Food 
Security, and the Livestock and Forage Centre of Excellence at 
the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
Our support extends to Saskatchewan’s value-added food 
processing industry, which has grown tremendously through the 
years. 
 
There are now more than 300 food companies operating in the 
province generating more than $4 billion in revenues and 
employing 5,000 people. 
 
To build on this momentum, my government will launch an 
Agriculture Value Added New Growth Incentive intended to 
attract more investment into the sector. 
 
ENVIRONMENT 
 
My government recognizes that climate change is a reality. 
 
We must do more to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. 



October 25, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2591 

In Saskatchewan, important steps have already been taken by 
my government. 
 
SaskPower is expanding renewable power to as much as 50 per 
cent of its total generating capacity by 2030. 
 
This represents a doubling of renewable generation in less than 
15 years. 
 
The expansion of renewable power will help SaskPower cut its 
current greenhouse gas emissions by 44 per cent by 2030. 
 
We have invested $1.3 billion in the world’s first commercial 
power plant equipped with a post-combustion carbon capture 
system. 
 
SaskPower’s Boundary Dam 3 project has cut Saskatchewan’s 
carbon dioxide emissions by 1.6 million tonnes, the equivalent 
of taking 400,000 cars off our roads. 
 
Today, our province is a world leader in the advancement of 
carbon capture and storage technology, which has been 
identified by the United Nations and the International Energy 
Agency as a crucial technology if global emissions are to be 
reduced. 
 
Saskatchewan contributes in other ways. 
 
In 2015, our farmers sequestered nearly 12 million tonnes of 
carbon in our soil, in large part thanks to zero till seeding 
technology developed in our province. 
 
Increasing production of pulse crops like lentils and peas, which 
fix nitrogen in the soil, is helping to reduce emissions. 
 
Uranium mined in Saskatchewan is used to generate 
emission-free electricity around the world. 
 
Meanwhile, the companies operating in our energy and mining 
sectors are investing in the latest technologies to reduce their 
environmental footprint. 
 
Those companies provide good jobs that support thousands of 
Saskatchewan families. 
 
The federal government’s carbon tax will put those jobs in 
jeopardy and threaten Saskatchewan’s competitive position, 
while having no significant impact on emissions. 
 
This session, my government will introduce further actions that 
actually reduce emissions while we continue to oppose the 
imposition of a federal carbon tax on Saskatchewan, including 
through a legal challenge if necessary. 
 
PARKS AND CULTURE 
 
Saskatchewan’s 35 provincial parks are the natural jewels of 
our province, offering breathtaking beauty and a diversity of 
recreational opportunities. 
 
During the last decade, my government has invested $100 
million to maintain and upgrade facilities in provincial parks, 
more than double the amount invested in the decade prior to 

2007. 
 
Saskatchewan residents and those from outside the province 
have responded by visiting in record numbers. 
 
Since 2007, higher attendance at provincial parks has helped 
boost total tourist visits from 8.46 million to 12.24 million, a 45 
per cent increase. 
 
Total visitor expenditures have grown by nearly 35 per cent to 
$2.15 billion a year. 
 
This session, my government will continue to invest in our 
provincial park system with the creation of a new park in the 
Porcupine Hills, located southeast of Hudson Bay. 
 
This is the second new provincial park created in the last five 
years. 
 
My government continues to support arts, culture, and sports 
throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
This year, Creative Saskatchewan will allocate nearly $5.3 
million in grants to support our province’s creative 
entrepreneurs, who work in a variety of sectors, including film, 
television, interactive digital media, music, publishing, visual 
arts, and the performing arts. 
 
Creative Saskatchewan will also provide $1.5 million to support 
operations and programs at Saskatchewan’s seven creative 
industry associations. 
 
My government continues to explore innovative ways to 
support Saskatchewan’s creative industries with new grant 
programs announced this past summer. 
 
SOCIAL SERVICES 
 
My government believes growth is not only an economic 
necessity, but a moral imperative as well. 
 
Growth gives us the opportunity to improve the quality of life 
for all Saskatchewan people and build a fairer, more tolerant 
province. 
 
Growth enables us to help those who are most vulnerable 
among us. 
 
Because of the economic progress of the last decade, my 
government was in the position to invest $3.7 billion to support 
people with disabilities. 
 
In 2009, we created the Saskatchewan Assured Income for 
Disability (SAID) program, and since then we have increased 
benefits paid to recipients of the program four times. 
 
My government supports more than 4,000 individuals and 
families with respite, residential, and day programming 
services. 
 
And over the past decade, we have more than doubled support 
for crisis prevention and outreach support services, and nearly 
doubled the number of group homes in Saskatchewan. 



2592 Saskatchewan Hansard October 25, 2017 

There are 96 group homes operating in Saskatchewan today that 
did not exist a decade ago. 
 
Helping seniors in Saskatchewan is also a priority for my 
government. 
 
In 2012, we created the Personal Care Home Benefit to support 
seniors residing in personal care homes. 
 
Since 2008, my government has tripled the Seniors Income Plan 
benefit from $90 per month to $270 per month. 
 
In the coming months, my government will introduce the 
Seniors Education Property Tax Deferral Program. 
 
This program will give seniors with household incomes under 
$70,000 the option to defer the education portion of the 
property taxes on their home. 
 
These measures, together with tax reductions which have saved 
a couple with an income of $50,000 more than $13,000, will put 
more money in the pockets of seniors. 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
So much has changed in Saskatchewan during the past decade 
of growth, and today, my government is making the decisions 
necessary to ensure Saskatchewan keeps growing stronger in 
the decade ahead. 
 
Saskatchewan is truly blessed, and there is so much to be 
thankful for. 
 
“Where I am is Saskatchewan. Thank goodness.” 
 
May divine providence continue to bless our province and guide 
this Assembly in all its deliberations. 
 
God bless Saskatchewan. 
 
God bless Canada. 
 
God save the Queen. 
 
The Speaker: — I invite Elder Betty McKenna to come 
forward. 
 
Ms. McKenna: — [Elder McKenna spoke for a time in 
Ojibwa.] 
 
It’s a beautiful day. I ask for a blessing from the Great Spirit, 
our heavenly Protector, to give all Saskatchewan people a 
blessing on this day, a blessing of prosperity and growth, a 
blessing of respect and honour, a blessing of love and 
forgiveness. Most of all, a blessing of safety. 
 
In this time of turmoil, I ask that the Creator give Saskatchewan 
the ability to be that place of peace and an oasis of safety for 
every reserve, hamlet, town, village, and city and family farm. I 
ask the Creator to bless us all with safety in our daily lives as 
we stand in the middle of four directions. 
 
I ask a blessing to those brave men and women who put their 

lives on the line to protect us and give us that safety. 
 
Bless our leaders of this province. Give them strength and 
prayerful guidance in their daily lives. 
 
Bless our children and youth, that they may seek to be strong 
leaders tomorrow. 
 
Bless our educators who work with those children, that give 
them the light down that path to the future. 
 
[Elder McKenna continued in Ojibwa.] 
 
The Speaker: — I invite Pastor Rick Parkyn to come forward. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Mr. Parkyn: — Would you join me in prayer at this time 
please. 
 
Dear Lord, we’re so thankful for your word. Your Bible said in 
1 Timothy 2:1-3: 
 

I urge you first of all to pray for all people. When you 
make your requests, plead for God’s mercy upon them and 
give thanks. Pray this way for kings and for all others who 
are in authority so that we can live in peace and quietness, 
in godliness and dignity. This is good and pleases God our 
Saviour. 

 
Dear Lord, let your word encourage us to come with hearts of 
thanksgiving. We thank you for your blessings on our province 
of Saskatchewan. We acknowledge it is your blessings that 
have moved us from a have-not province to a have province. 
We are so blessed, and we are thankful. 
 
We also pray for all people who live in this great province of 
Saskatchewan. We ask you to show your grace and mercy 
especially to the poor and to the hurting and those who, though 
the province has been blessed, many feel they are 
disenfranchised in this day. 
 
We pray for the widows and the orphans, as we’re instructed to 
by your word, to care especially for them. 
 
As directed by the Bible, we now pray for our Premier and the 
Leader of the Opposition as well, and for every elected member 
of this Legislative Assembly as this session begins. As each 
item of business is considered, Lord, I would pray and we 
would ask that there would be a majority of caring, considerate, 
and committed members from both sides of this House to set or, 
if necessary, reset the moral compass of our province. 
 
We believe, Lord, that when we pray for our leaders, we will 
continue to live in peace and quietness, in godliness and in 
dignity. 
 
We now pray part of the great prayer that Jesus taught us, that 
has been the prayer of great leaders in this Legislative 
Assembly here from the time of Reverend Tommy Douglas to 
our present Premier. This was Mr. Douglas’s favourite prayer: 
“Thy Kingdom come, Thy will be done on earth, as it is in 
Heaven.” 



October 25, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2593 

And I say, amen. 
 
And PS, one last thought: Lord, help the Roughriders. 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you. Thank you, Elder McKenna and 
Pastor Rick. That was wonderful. 
 
[Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 14:49.] 
 
The Speaker: — 
 

Present us, O Lord, in all our doings with thy most 
gracious favour and further us with thy continual help, that 
in all our works, begun, continued, and ended in thee, we 
may glorify thy holy name, and finally by thy mercy attain 
everlasting life. Amen. 

 
Please be seated. 
 
I recognize the Premier. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Pro Forma Bill 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I move 
that a bill respecting the Administration of Oaths of Office be 
now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Hon. Premier that 
said bill be now introduced and read the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Introduction of Pages 
 
The Speaker: — I wish to inform the Assembly that the Pages 
for the session will be: Sherrilyn Bzdel, Jessica Fahlman, 
Samara Mamani, Paige McAlpin, Kaylen Merasty. 
 

TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 
 
The Speaker: — I would wish to inform the Assembly that in 
order to prevent mistakes I have obtained a copy of the speech 
of Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor which I will now lay on 
the Table. 
 
I recognize the Premier. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Speech from the Throne 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
move: 
 

That the speech of Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor be 
taken into consideration on Thursday, 26 October, 2017. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier: 
 

That the speech of Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor be 
taken into consideration on Thursday, October 26th, 2017. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that we 
do adjourn the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Before putting the question on the 
adjournment motion I have a few announcements to make. 
 
I would like to thank all guests and members of the public for 
joining us today. 
 
I’d like to thank the members of the judiciary from the Court of 
Appeal, the Court of Queen’s Bench, and the Provincial Court 
for your attendance today. 
 
I’d like to thank you, Elder Betty McKenna and Pastor Rick 
Parkyn, for taking part in today’s ceremony. 
 
I would like to introduce the school groups that are with us 
today. In the west gallery we have grade 12 students from the 
Regina Huda School, and in the east gallery we have the grade 
12 students from Miller Comprehensive Catholic High School 
also from Regina. I would like to thank all of you, along with 
your teachers, for attending today’s ceremony. 
 
Welcome also to the Vocal Jazz group from Regina’s Michael 
A. Riffel High School. They are seated in the west gallery and I 
will be calling on them to sing for us in a few minutes. 
 
I would also like to thank the members of the following 
Saskatchewan-based regular and reserve forces units for 
providing us with the guard of honour earlier this afternoon: 15 
Wing Moose Jaw, Royal Regina Rifles, Saskatchewan 
Dragoons, 38 Signal Regiment, 38 Service Battalion, 16 Field 
Ambulance, and HMCS [Her Majesty’s Canadian Ship] Queen. 
 
I would like also to thank the 10 Field Regiment, the Royal 
Canadian Artillery for the 15-gun salute, and Sub-Lieutenant 
Field for his playing of the Vice-Regal Salute. 
 
I would like to invite everyone to join Her Honour, the Premier, 
the Leader of the Opposition, and members of the Legislative 
Assembly at the Speaker’s tea which will take place 
immediately following the Chamber ceremony. The tea will be 
in two locations — in room 218 in the west wing and in the 
library reading room in the east wing. 
 
It has been moved by the House Leader that this House do now 
adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 



2594 Saskatchewan Hansard October 25, 2017 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
I would now like to welcome the Vocal Jazz Choir from 
Michael A. Riffel High School under the direction of Stacy 
Allen. They will be singing two songs for us — “There is 
Peace” and “The Water is Wide.” Ladies and gentlemen, the 
Riffel Vocal Jazz Choir. 
 
[The choir sang.] 
 
The Speaker: — On behalf of everyone, I would like to thank 
the choir for that very, very fine performance. 
 
One final announcement. I would ask that members and guests 
observe the following order when departing the Chamber: the 
Speaker’s party; Her Honour’s party; the Premier and 
Provincial Secretary; Leader of the Opposition; judges of the 
Court of Appeal, Queen’s Bench, and Provincial Court; 
members of the cabinet and their spouses; other members of the 
Legislative Assembly and their spouses; and guests. 
 
This House stands adjourned until tomorrow, Thursday, 
October 26th at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:54.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE ................................................................................................................................................. 2585 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Pro Forma Bill 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2593 
ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 Introduction of Pages 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2593 
TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2593 
MOTIONS 
 Speech from the Throne 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2593 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

 
Hon. Steven Bonk 

Minister of the Economy 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 
Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Larry Doke 
Minister of Government Relations  

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 
Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Nancy Heppner 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Gene Makowsky 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  
and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 


