






















































Hansard: November 08, 2017


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 9A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 8, 2017, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Nicole Sarauer 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Hon. Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Hon. Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Kindersley 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2853 
 November 8, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 
The Speaker: — Introduction of guests. I recognize the 
member from Meadow Lake. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Apology 
 
Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday a point 
of order was made regarding a reference to the absence from the 
House of the member for Meewasin. In responding to the point 
of order, I may have inadvertently reflected on the absence from 
the House of the member for Meewasin, Mr. Speaker. For doing 
so, I do withdraw and apologize. 
 
The Speaker: — Presenting petitions. I recognize the member 
from The Battlefords. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cox: — I request leave for an introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the minister. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Cox: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Speaker. And to you 
and through you to all members of this House, it’s my pleasure 
to introduce a couple of constituents of mine seated in the west 
gallery, Orville Bilous and Theresa Joss-Bilous. They’re in 
town today for a function later tonight. And I would just like to 
say they’ve been long-time supporters of mine and great 
supporters of this party, and I just ask everyone to please 
welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moosomin. 
 
Hon. Mr. Bonk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to 
welcome today four grade 12 students from Cowessess 
Education Centre. They’re here with their law class today. And 
I look forward to meeting them later on today in my office, and 
we’ll discuss a little bit about what happens here in their 
legislature. So I’d like to have all the members join me in 
welcoming them to their legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
join with the Minister for the Economy in welcoming Maria 
Sparvier and her students from Cowessess. Maria was an 
integral part of the SSTI [Saskatchewan Social Sciences 
Teachers’ Institute on Parliamentary Democracy] committee 
that brings teachers to the legislature every year. And I would 
like to thank her for her service and to welcome her back to the 

legislature, unfortunately this time in the gallery rather than at 
the mock parliaments on the floor here. So please welcome 
Maria and her students to the legislature. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 
 
Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of Leoville, 
Spiritwood, Rabbit Lake, and Shell Lake. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition to re-open the Buffalo Narrows 
Correctional Centre. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that 
the closure of the Buffalo Narrows Correctional Centre takes 
inmates far away from their families, which makes visitation 
difficult or non-existent at all. They point out that the closure of 
the correctional centre also took away from inmates the 
opportunity to get treatment and to obtain training tickets while 
they were there, Mr. Speaker; and that the closure hurts elders 
within the community when they were getting the help of 
inmates to do odd jobs, Mr. Speaker; and that the fact is that the 
closure of the correctional centre left 15 people out of work and 
created some financial hardship on their families and to local 
businesses, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan immediately 
reopen the Buffalo Narrows Correctional Centre to better 
our community for future generations to come. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens from 
Buffalo Narrows. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’m rising to 
present a petition to end the unfair Sask Party tax hikes for 
Saskatchewan families and businesses. The people who have 
signed this petition want to bring to our attention the following: 
that the Sask Party has hiked taxes on Saskatchewan families 
and businesses by $1 billion per year. At the same time, the 
Sask Party has handed over $100 million in tax breaks to 
corporations and the wealthy and well connected. 



2854 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2017 

The Sask Party increased the PST [provincial sales tax] to 6 per 
cent and applied it to everything, from groceries and children’s 
clothes to a case of beer and even insurance premiums. Because 
of the Sask Party’s PST increase, Saskatchewan has become the 
only province in the country where people are charged PST on 
life and health insurance premiums. 
 
Mister party, the Sask Party’s new tax on crop insurance is a 
devastating hit to producers, and yesterday at the SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] 
convention, Mr. Speaker, the delegates there overwhelmingly 
voted against this tax on crop insurance. Mr. Speaker, I’ll read 
the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Sask Party to immediately stop their unfair tax hikes on 
Saskatchewan families and businesses. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals who have signed this petition 
today are from the city of Regina. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition to get big money out of Saskatchewan politics. And 
the people signing this petition from the province of 
Saskatchewan . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . There you go. 
They’re very interested in this one. That Saskatchewan’s 
outdated election Act allows corporations, unions, and 
individuals, and even those outside the province to make 
unlimited donations to our province’s political parties. 
 
For example, Mr. Speaker, over the past 10 years, the 
Saskatchewan Party has received $12.61 million in corporate 
donations, and of that, $2.87 million are coming from 
companies outside of Saskatchewan. And we know that the 
federal government and the provinces of Alberta, Manitoba, 
Quebec, Nova Scotia, and now British Columbia have moved to 
limit this influence and level the playing field by banning 
corporate and union donations to political parties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan call on the Sask 
Party to overhaul Saskatchewan’s campaign finance laws 
and to end out-of-province donations; to put a ban on 
donations from corporations and unions; and to put a 
donation limit on individual donations. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from the city 
of Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
calling on the government to restore funding to post-secondary 
institutions. These citizens wish to bring to your attention that 
the Sask Party is making students and their families pay for 
Sask Party financial mismanagement; that Saskatchewan 

students already pay the second-highest tuition fees in Canada; 
that this budget cuts 36.8 million from post-secondary 
education and 6.4 million from technical institutions; that 
funding for the Saskatchewan Student Aid Fund and 
scholarships have been cut by 8.2 million; and that the Sask 
Party has broken a 2016 election promise by cancelling their 
first home plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately restore 
funding to Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions and 
stop the damaging cuts to our students. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by individuals from Saskatoon. I do 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
calling on the Legislative Assembly to stop the Sask Party 
attack on our kids’ classrooms. Those who have signed this 
petition wish to draw our attention to the following: that the 
Sask Party has cut at least $674 in government funding for 
every student across this province; that the Sask Party has hiked 
education property taxes by $67 million but has cut the total 
government portion for education by $121 million, and even 
though the Sask Party is making us all pay more, our kids are 
actually getting less; that the Sask Party cuts mean that students 
will lose much-needed support in their classrooms, including 
funding for buses for kindergartners and supports for children 
with autism and special needs. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call upon 
the government to reverse the senseless cuts to our kids’ 
classrooms and stop making families, teachers, and 
everyone who works to support our education system pay 
for the Sask Party’s mismanagement, scandal, and waste. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those who’ve signed the petition today reside in 
Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand 
in my place again today to present a petition on behalf of the 
residents of Balgonie. And, Mr. Speaker, the people of Balgonie 
are concerned about the permanent closure of their Main Street 
access to Highway No. 1. 
 
And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Respectfully request that the Government of Saskatchewan 
take the necessary steps and actions and leave the west-in, 
west-out driving access for vehicles into and out of 
Balgonie at the intersection of Highway No. 1 and their 
Main Street. 
 



November 8, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2855 

They also respectfully request that the Government of 
Saskatchewan put up a locked gate on the apron between 
the eastbound lanes and westbound lanes of Highway No. 
1 and Balgonie’s Main Street intersection. This gate would 
allow emergency services access to the eastbound lanes of 
Highway No. 1 at the Main Street, Balgonie intersection, 
but also would not allow the public access to cross east- 
and westbound lanes. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as we say every day, there are people that 
have signed this petition on behalf and support of the people of 
Balgonie from all throughout the province of Saskatchewan. 
And on this particular page they are from Balgonie; they’re also 
from McLean, Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Sexual Assault & Information Centre’s 
Fashion Show Fundraiser 

 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I recently had the 
privilege of attending the Saskatoon Sexual Assault & 
Information Centre’s 14th annual fashion show fundraiser, 
Luncheon en Vogue, along with my colleague from Meewasin. 
Each year, businesses and individuals within the community 
gather together to raise funds for an organization that works 
tirelessly to assist survivors of sexual abuse, as well as working 
to stop it from happening in the first place. 
 
In addition to offering clients support services, the SSAIC 
[Saskatoon Sexual Assault & Information Centre] visits 
Saskatoon schools to hold their sexual assault awareness 
prevention programs, including their I’m the Boss of Me puppet 
show. The Saskatoon Sexual Assault & Information Centre 
provides valuable services for the community, such as a 
24-hour crisis hotline and free counselling services for 
survivors. 
 
A summary report for 2016-17 states that the centre served 456 
new clients — a 19.5 per cent increase from the previous year 
— and provided 2,074 counselling sessions and follow-up 
services, amounting to a 10 per cent increase from the previous 
year. 
 
One of Luncheon en Vogue’s most enthusiastic supporters is 
the Saskatoon Police Service. To help raise money for the 
SSAIC, police officers gamely walked the runway in clothing 
by Anthonys Fashion and The Shoe Boutique, with their hair 
and makeup styled by Paramount Day Spa Salon & Boutique. 
The luncheon also featured a performance by the talented 
musician Jorgina Sunn. 
 
The Luncheon en Vogue was a pleasure to attend, Mr. Speaker, 
and it was encouraging to see so many people, including our 
outstanding police force, come together to support a valuable 
organization devoted to sustaining the well-being of our 
community. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 

Remembrance Day and the Battle of Passchendaele 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning in 
the rotunda we held our legislative Remembrance Day 
ceremony, and I’d like to take a moment to recognize this day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this November there is an anniversary of 
particular note. November 10th marks the 100th anniversary of 
the conclusion of the Battle of Passchendaele. This battle was 
significant in the conflict in the First World War, and Canadian 
soldiers played an essential role. 
 
In mid-October the Canadian Corps arrived at the 
Passchendaele front, and by November 10th they delivered 
victory. But not without cost — 15,654 Canadians fell taking 
the Passchendaele ridge. But numbers cannot do justice to the 
sacrifices made. 
 
[13:45] 
 
I’d like to read a quote from Alexander Decoteau, who was 
born on the Cree Red Pheasant reserve near The Battlefords. 
This is from a letter he wrote to his sister dated September 10, 
1917: 
 

A man has a lot of time to think of his people and home 
out here, and one does get awfully lonesome at times. I 
know on my last trip to the front line, I dreamed of home. 

 
Private Decoteau died on October 30th during the battle of 
Passchendaele. 
 
Mr. Speaker, from the muddy French countryside to the deserts 
of Kandahar, we remember all who made the ultimate sacrifice 
for their country. We will remember. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

Recipient of the University of Regina 
Outstanding Young Alumni Award 

 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Every 
year the University of Regina Alumni Association celebrates 
the Alumni Crowning Achievement Awards. This year’s 
distinguished recipients of awards included author Guy 
Vanderhaeghe, Dr. Margaret Dagenais, Dr. Gregory Kratzig, 
and Dr. Joan Halmo. But the recipient I particularly want to 
honour today is one Thomas Benjoe, who received the 
Outstanding Young Alumni Award. 
 
Thomas Benjoe is a proud member of Muscowpetung First 
Nation. He was raised in my home neighbourhood of North 
Central and graduated just six years ago from the First Nations 
University of Canada with a degree in business administration. 
After graduation he had begun a very promising career with the 
Royal Bank of Canada before being approached to take on his 
current position, president and CEO [chief executive officer] of 
File Hills Qu’Appelle Developments, a partnership of the 11 
First Nations communities that make up the File Hills 
Qu’Appelle Tribal Council. FHQ Developments generates 
revenues of some $35 million a year, and it couldn’t be in better 
hands, Mr. Speaker. 
 



2856 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2017 

Thomas Benjoe credits his work ethic and love of learning to 
his mushom, who raised him. He points to the tradition of doing 
the beadwork for the family powwow dancers that was handed 
down to him from his great-grandmother, and he believes that 
success in business is about creating wealth for the community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing 
Thomas Benjoe and all of the recipients of this year’s 
University of Regina Alumni Crowning Achievement Awards. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

A Veteran’s Story 
 
Mr. Nerlien: — Mr. Speaker, for the moment I am Driver G.E. 
Gaudreau, L8502. When I joined active service in 1940, I was 
sent to Red Deer to train for two months, then sent overseas as a 
truck driver. 
 
I later transferred to the 1st Division. We were told they had 
landed in Sicily. We were in Algiers. We were camped in the 
sand. We were rationed 2 gallons of water per day, but the 
kitchen took most of that. It was usually over 100 degrees every 
day. We travelled at night to keep the trucks from boiling over. 
There were no roads, and we travelled by compass. 
 
Later redeployed to Italy, the most horrible thing happened to 
me in Ortona. I was sent with two young men from PPCLI 
[Princess Patricia’s Canadian Light Infantry]. We crossed the 
killing ground on foot, over dead bodies and parts. We were 
told to go where a movie was showing in a yard between the 
buildings. I sat with my back to the wall. A shell fell in the 
yard. The boys were blown to pieces in front of me. I was 
completely covered in body parts. It was December 24th. It was 
not a very good Christmas that year. 
 
I went to Pescara. On a sharp downhill, a gun went off and I 
received the full blast. Later I was on the road, my nose 
bleeding, one eardrum blown out. That is why I am deaf today. 
When in Italy sometimes we were down to 10 per cent strength. 
I wrote on a card: “Give me orders in writing. I am deaf.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know this story because George Gaudreau has 
been married to my mother for 45 years and now is in his 100th 
year, living at home with her. Mr. Speaker, our veterans are real 
people with real stories. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 

Muslims for Remembrance  
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On October 27th, the 
Ahmadiyya Muslim Jamma’at Canada began its 7th annual 
Muslims for Remembrance Day campaign across this country. 
Muslim communities from all over Canada stood alongside the 
Royal Canadian Legion handing out poppies together, 
remembering the sacrifices that were made to keep our country 
safe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was a special commemorative poppy 
campaign that was held at mosques across the country, bringing 

an entire community forward to remember together. The poppy 
is a true symbol of sacrifice and of unity, as it continued to 
blossom and flourish even after fields were destroyed due to the 
artillery bombardment of World War I. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we reflect on the loss that this country felt. We 
reflect on the sacrifices made. We remember those who 
answered the call. We come together in unity and thank all 
those men and women who served together, so that we may 
together live in this beautiful country today in peace and 
harmony. 
 
I now ask all members to join me in thanking the Muslims for 
Remembrance campaign on their efforts for bringing Canadians 
closer together to remember the important sacrifices that were 
made for our country. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 
 

A Soldier’s Sacrifices 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Today I 
would like to share with this assembly the story of my 
father-in-law, William Samuel Ross. At the age of 22, Bill 
answered the call to serve his country. He served with the South 
Saskatchewan Regiment. 
 
In one of the darkest days of the Second World War, Bill’s 
regiment, along with the British and American allies, launched 
a raid on the town of Dieppe in Normandy, France. A German 
convoy took control of the raid, and the allies were met with 
overwhelming fire. 
 
Mr. Speaker, August 19th, 1942, the South Saskatchewan 
Regiment’s boat drifted away from its allies, and they were 
captured. 1,946 soldiers were captured that day. They became 
prisoners of war and were transported to Stalag Lamsdorf 
VIII-B, a notorious prisoner of war camp where they would 
endure starvation and torture. Bill was also forced to partake in 
the death march, a 1500-kilometre march in the middle of 
winter. Bill was liberated and returned to Canada. Bill 
continued to serve his country in the Canadian Armed Forces, 
dedicating 30 years of his life to this nation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the South Saskatchewan Regiment lost 84 
members at the Dieppe raid, and in this time of remembrance, 
we must thank these young men for their efforts and their 
sacrifice for their country. 
 
William Samuel Ross passed away in 1981, and though his 
family hold him in their hearts every day, I take this time to 
remember him, to especially reflect on the sacrifices he made 
for his family, his community, and our country. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize our Provincial Secretary. 
 

First Red Cross Hospital in the British Empire 
 

Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With 
Remembrance Day fast approaching, I’d like to share with the 
Assembly a story about the Red Cross that includes a personal 
touch and holds a special meaning for myself.  



November 8, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2857 

Shortly after the end of the First World War, the Red Cross 
turned its attention and resources to helping those here at home 
in Saskatchewan. As a result, the very first Red Cross hospital 
in the British Empire was established just outside of the town of 
Paddockwood. This hospital, staffed and supplied by the Red 
Cross, served the small and remote communities, including a 
large number of returning soldiers who were settling in the area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not a doctor, but a nurse-in-charge managed this 
hospital full time while living in the community. These nurses 
did it all, from giving medicine and setting legs to delivering 
numerous post-war babies. This model proved to be so 
successful that 24 more outposts were opened in Saskatchewan, 
as well as over 200 more across Canada. As the years passed, 
these hospitals helped the community grow, including the birth 
of my parents Ella Neurauter and Walter Helbig at the very first 
outpost hospital outside of Paddockwood, where a monument 
stands on duty today. 
 
As we remember the sacrifice of all those involved in the war, 
let us also remember the contributions they made in developing 
the communities we know and love today, after they returned 
home. We remember them. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Point of Order 
 
The Speaker: — Before question period, I’ll rule on a point of 
order that was raised yesterday. Yesterday a point of order was 
raised by the Deputy Opposition House Leader concerning the 
member’s statement by the member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
She alleges that the member for Indian Head-Milestone 
contravened rule 51(b) which states that a member shall not 
reflect on the absence of another member. 
 
I reviewed the record. On page 2822 of Hansard the member 
for Indian Head-Milestone stated, “It wasn’t too many years 
ago that the Leader-Post and many [other] papers around the 
province read, ‘Doctor shortage on the rise.’ In fact, doctor 
shortage even today in the House, I see again.” 
 
In response to the point of order, the Deputy Government 
House Leader said that the member for Indian Head-Milestone 
did not specifically “reflect on” the absence of the member for 
Saskatoon Meewasin. He stated, “. . . the operative provision, 
being ‘reflect,’ was not met.” 
 
The purpose of the ruling is to prohibit members from 
expressing opinions or observations why a member is absent 
from the Assembly. The member for Indian Head-Milestone did 
not specifically mention the particular member’s absence but 
his choice of words and actions did convey a message that came 
close to doing indirectly what we cannot do directly. For this 
reason I caution the member. 
 
I thank the Deputy House Leader for the respect for this 
institution and for his apology earlier today. I ask all members 
to be truly parliamentarians, and we will be having better 
decorum today in the Assembly. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

Usage of Private Email Accounts 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, every single time we ask the 
Premier about doing government business on his partisan email 
that is housed on a server at the Sask Party office, he tries to 
laugh it off. He makes excuses and he wants to rant about other 
things. But, Mr. Speaker, you know what he doesn’t do? 
Answer the question. In fact yesterday he even hid from 
reporters and refused to answer their questions. The question is 
simple: why did the Premier’s office say his email was down 
when it was not? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, when this matter was first 
raised and I was asked by the media earlier this spring about the 
issue, I said that I would do my best to use the government 
email account in all occasions. I would note, by the way, that 
that doesn’t happen in this Assembly on either side of the 
House to 100 per cent degree. I think we’ve received emails 
from certain members over there who are doing constituency 
business not on their government email account. I think as long 
as those are available and obviously sent to another government 
account, that’s not a problem. But let’s be very clear that others 
in this Assembly, including members on that side, are using 
non-government accounts to conduct government business. 
 
But when I was asked by the media about it, I said I would do 
my best, knowing that I probably would fall short, Mr. Speaker, 
especially if I get an email on a thread from someone who had 
been using the old non-government account and I didn’t pay 
attention to change the account and just replied. Moreover, I 
had said that if the email server of the government was giving 
some trouble, in order to continue to do the work I would 
probably use a non-government account. 
 
And I would make sure that the emails, as they are in this 
Assembly, are available to members in terms of whatever is 
applicable to normal freedom of information requests. I would 
also ensure that they were turned over, collected and turned 
over to the Provincial Archives, which is happening even now, 
Mr. Speaker. And so I hope that answers the hon. member’s 
question. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, again that didn’t answer my 
question. During that time period in September, Mr. Speaker, 
the IT [information technology] has no record of the Premier’s 
email being down. Executive Council has no record of the email 
being down. So why did the Premier’s office say his email was 
down when it was not? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I think it was towards the end 
of August where the email was giving . . . the server was giving 
me particular troubles. And I just indicated to, even to 
colleagues, look, if they need to get a hold of me, use the 
non-government email. I was using the non-government email 
through some dates in September certainly and then slowly 
moved back to the government account when it was clear that 
that was working successfully. 



2858 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2017 

And by the way, if the government account falls off again in 
terms of its efficacy, I’m going to continue to email, knowing 
that those emails are subject to FOI [freedom of information] if 
they’re from a non-government account and also that they’re 
part of the Provincial Archives. 
 
I would point out again to the members opposite and to anyone 
else that might be listening that I think it’s important that 
documents that belong to the people of the province from an 
archives perspective, that they stay with the people of the 
province. And there are eight NDP [New Democratic Party] 
ministers who have yet to hand over their government files — 
which would be the equivalent of a government email — their 
government files to the Provincial Archives. 
 
And the members opposite sort of would have laughed that off 
as the past. I think it’s important. One of them’s the minister of 
Justice, the minister that presided over the Murdoch Carriere 
affair. One of the them’s the minister that was responsible for 
the SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company] affair. There is the Finance minister. There’s the 
Culture minister. There’s eight members, ministers. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think the hon. member would do the House a 
service as the leader of her party of these members if she would 
make a request to them to please hand over their files that 
belong to the people of the province back to the people of the 
province. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Circumstances Around Review of  
Global Transportation Hub 

 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, like Bill Boyd and his court 
dates, the Premier just keeps trying to kick the can down the 
road. But on these important questions of trust and 
transparency, the Premier is all show and no go. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yes, the auditor did do a report and we’ve been 
asking questions of this Premier and that cabinet since the day it 
was published. But we’re not getting any clear answers. As a 
result, the people of Saskatchewan still have questions about the 
Sask Party’s GTH [Global Transportation Hub] scandal. If he 
doesn’t trust me, well he can ask the RCMP [Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police], or he can ask all of the people that are running 
to replace him in his job. They say they all get asked about the 
GTH everywhere they go. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that Premier’s chief of staff quit when an email 
came out that put him at the centre of the controversy. That 
Premier let Bill Boyd ride off into the sunset, and that Premier 
has four weeks left to answer questions in this House. So two 
simple questions. Does he regret not firing Bill Boyd, and does 
he think Laurie Pushor should still be working for the 
government? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment 
and the Global Transportation Hub. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s been indicated on a number of occasions in the 
House and outside of the House. The Provincial Auditor has 
looked into this matter, has issued a report to the Legislative 
Assembly that included a number of recommendations that the 
Global Transportation Hub has implemented and is working 
under. This government also co-operated fully with the 
Provincial Auditor’s office, providing any documentation, all 
cabinet information that the Provincial Auditor requested or 
looked at or needed to look at, and again provided a full report 
on this matter. And the members opposite will know that the 
RCMP are looking into this matter, and we await their findings. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 

Regina Bypass Project and Highway Safety 
 

Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not only on the GTH that 
members of the public really want some clear answers. They’re 
also wondering about the Regina bypass project that ballooned 
from $400 million to $2 billion, Mr. Speaker. They say this 
project was studied to death, but it’s cut off Balgonie. It doesn’t 
work for farm equipment. It’s got first responders raising safety 
concerns, and now the signs they’ve put up are causing traffic 
jams and confusion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier admit that signing over control of 
a Saskatchewan road to a French conglomerate wasn’t the 
wisest choice? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let’s make it 
perfectly clear, Mr. Speaker. This project went from $400 
million to over a billion dollars because we expanded the 
project, Mr. Speaker. It went from three overpasses to 12 
overpasses, Mr. Speaker, and it’s going to go around the city of 
Regina. 
 
This project was much bigger than what the member opposite 
said, and it’s a good project for the province of Saskatchewan to 
grow the economy and to diversify, Mr. Speaker. The accesses 
are there. The signs are up, and the bypass is flowing real good. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, governing is about choices, and this 
government has chosen to put 60 per cent of its highway budget 
into a single project in Regina and put off other important work. 
In the wake of deadly crashes on Highway 5 between Saskatoon 
and Highway 2, we’ve had recent crashes and the mayor of 
Humboldt recently told the media that that road has been bad 
for years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government has been talking about expanding 
this highway to make it safer, but talk is cheap. And a 
spokesperson for the Ministry of Highways recently told 
reporters that the actual construction schedule is going to 
depend on future budgets. 
 



November 8, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2859 

How does the Premier justify handing $2 billion to a foreign 
company for a single project in Regina while making rural 
communities wait for the changes to make their roads safe now? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased 
to announce in this House today, Mr. Speaker, we have open 
passing lanes on No. 5 west of Humboldt right over to junction 
No. 2, and we are looking at the plan for east of Saskatoon. It’s 
in the works that we’re going to proceed that way. We’re 
actually starting to do some of the preliminary work right now, 
as we speak, Mr. Speaker. Let’s make it very clear: this 
ministry takes highways very . . . concerns of safety, very 
important, and we are doing everything we can to improve the 
safety on our provincial highways, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Water Management and Environmental Protection 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, it was the same kind of bluster 
and arrogance that in 2012, the then Environment minister 
promised that they would have a policy in place to protect our 
wetlands by 2015. Five years later, and I don’t even know how 
many Environment ministers later, there is still no plan in sight. 
 
Mr. Speaker, wetlands are important carbon sinks. Preserving 
them is also an important step to managing the quality of our 
water. But instead of following through with their promises, the 
Sask Party is falling short. Mr. Speaker, while they continue to 
turn a blind eye to illegal drainage and force downstream 
farmers and municipalities to suffer the consequences, can the 
minister tell us when will the Sask Party finally introduce their 
promised strategy to “retain and restore wetlands”? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to take this question and I’m pleased to have been 
recycled as the Minister of Environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of areas from 2007 over the last 
10 years that we’ve had to work very hard on in terms of 
making changes to how the environment is not only monitored 
and managed but protected, Mr. Speaker. The members 
opposite would know, and perhaps new members don’t know, 
that under the NDP for 16 years, GHG [greenhouse gas] 
emissions, for example, went up by 70 per cent under the New 
Democrats, Mr. Speaker. There was no action on that matter, 
Mr. Speaker. There was no action on improving problems 
around drainage, Mr. Speaker. We know a number of the 
problems that were experienced in this province existed under 
the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, what members may not know, in fact, is 
that there was in fact a bill introduced by a private member of 
the NDP after they had lost the election, looking at air 
management, Mr. Speaker. And what that bill proposed to do 
was ban laughing gas in the province of Saskatchewan. That’s 
as much progress as we had under the NDP when it came to the 

environment. We’re working hard to address all of these areas, 
but there was a lot of work that wasn’t done under this former 
government. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, there’s lots of hot over there, but 
not one word about the wetlands here in Saskatchewan. We lose 
25 acres of wetlands to illegal drainage in Saskatchewan each 
day. That’s nearly 10,000 acres or over 7,500 football fields 
each year. And still this government does nothing. 
 
Time and time again they’ve promised to stop illegal drainage, 
but instead of taking action they’re turning a blind eye. I’ve 
seen it myself, Mr. Speaker, in the Quill lakes area. There’s a 
supposed moratorium on drainage, but it’s still happening. The 
law is being broken because this government refuses to enforce 
it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in June of 2016 the second-last Environment 
minister committed to taking action in the Quills, but a few 
short months later the last Environment minister admitted that 
no illegal drainage in the Quills had been or even would be shut 
down. So will this Environment minister have the courage to 
finally enforce the law, or will we have to wait for the next one 
or the next one or the next one? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I think the member opposite would know that this 
government has taken significant action on this file, action that 
wasn’t taken under the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, action 
that in fact hadn’t been taking place over the last number of 
decades in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Under the former minister, legislation was passed in 2017. 
Regulations were introduced in 2015, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, we want to work with all of those associations, the 
watershed associations, the C & Ds [conservation and 
development area authority], to ensure that we are managing the 
system. It is a very complex system, a network of drainage 
works all across the province, Mr. Speaker. And that’s what 
we’ll continue to do: work with all the stakeholders to ensure 
that this is managed in the most appropriate fashion. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Support for Municipalities 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, last week I told the minister 
about the tough decisions that the city of Prince Albert had to 
make to respond to the Sask Party’s cuts, but we are not alone. 
In Saskatoon, for example, the city was forced to raise fees and 
property taxes too. In Regina the council even added a line to 
show where some of the Sask Party cuts were hitting the people 
who live here. And at SARM’s mid-year convention, rural 
representatives have shared with me how much they are 
struggling with provincial funding cuts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know the Minister of Education likes to play 



2860 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2017 

shell games to cover up for their cuts, but will the Minister for 
Government Relations accept the facts and admit that these 
municipal tax hikes and service cuts are Sask Party tax hikes 
and service cuts? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess in regards 
to EPT [education property tax], I will respond. When we first 
formed government, we committed through reducing the EPT 
so that education funding would be 60 per cent from the GRF 
[General Revenue Fund] and 40 per cent from the EPT. We 
actually went beyond that, and the split was 65 per cent from 
the GRF and 35 per cent from the EPT. We have returned the 
EPT funding to a level to meet campaign commitments of 60/40 
split. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also say that since 2008-2009, our 
government has reduced cumulative education property tax 
burden on residents by $1.3 billion. And I can say that all the 
money that’s collected from EPT that goes into the GRF is 
spent by another two and a half times. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, these municipal leaders know a 
budget cut when they see one. Saskatchewan people know what 
a tax hike is. And at the root of it all is the Sask Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, back in my own community of Prince Albert, the 
Sask Party’s cuts have forced the city to freeze funding for 
police services. Mr. Speaker, at a time when the Sask Party has 
also cut important services that help to curb crime and keep 
people off the street and while police chiefs across the province 
are saying they need more social services and more support, 
how can the Sask Party possibly justify cutting services, 
downloading to municipalities, and forcing communities across 
our province to consider cutting policing budgets? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In 2007-18 over 
257 provincial revenue sharing . . . 257 million was given to the 
municipalities, up 130 million or 103 per cent since 2007-08 — 
unconditional, no-strings-attached funding for our municipal 
partners. Since 2007-08 over $2 billion has been provided to 
Saskatchewan municipalities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are truly looking after our municipalities and if 
the member opposite would just have a look at the numbers, she 
would recognize that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Funding for Indigenous and Northern Students 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We 
know that the Education minister has a few thoughts on 
indigenous teachings in the classroom. But when it comes to the 
education of indigenous children, there are serious issues that 

should concern her much more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the funding gap is leaving on-reserve students 
behind. Graduation rates for indigenous students across the 
province remain far too low. Aboriginal retention workers have 
been cut from classrooms and the legislative secretary 
responsible for First Nations student achievement quit five 
months ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we said legislative secretaries weren’t doing 
enough, we didn’t mean that they should drop the ball 
altogether. Mr. Speaker, why has this government infused their 
budget with so many cuts that hurt indigenous students and our 
province’s future? Is this just another one of Sask Party’s 
philosophy? 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
graduation rates of course continue to be a challenge but we did 
see an increase this year which we took as a great sign of 
progress. That has always been a key goal of this government, 
to move in that direction, and again there has been progress. 
 
Let’s take the North for example, Mr. Speaker, in terms of some 
of the things that we are trying to achieve in terms of First 
Nations education. Since ’07 we’ve increased funding to the 
northern school divisions by 28.5 per cent. We’ve invested over 
4 million in the new Birch Ridge School in Turnor Lake. It’s 
just some examples — extensively renovated Churchill 
Community High School, Mr. Speaker, and La Ronge high 
school; provided mental health, first aid to all three northern 
school divisions. 
 
And again in terms of garnering efforts towards the graduation 
rates and improving them that the member opposite references, 
the Following Their Voices program has expanded to four new 
schools in La Ronge, Ile-a-la-Crosse, Canoe Lake First Nation. 
And we provided 73 per cent of the funds to the northern library 
system, over $970,000. Efforts in the right direction, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We 
should all be genuinely proud of our schools taking action on 
reconciliation and recognizing our shared histories. But that was 
not the question I asked. I asked specific about the budget cuts, 
and she wants to talk about their record. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government and that Education minister cut 
NORTEP [northern teacher education program], a program that 
for 40 years gave hope to our youth and entire communities. It 
educated northern students who taught in the North. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the education funding gap between on-reserve and 
off-reserve students is still leaving indigenous students behind, 
and yet NORTEP was cut to add further pain to the education 
efforts of our Aboriginal people. 
 
A year ago, the Premier said we needed to be vigilant on 
closing this gap. So far, nothing. Zero progress, Mr. Speaker. 



November 8, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2861 

So why won’t the Education minister finally take some action 
and work to support all students across this great province? 
Why won’t they just fill that funding gap and send the bill to 
Ottawa? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cox: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 
would just say at the outset that teacher education in the North 
is very important to this government. But the consolidation of 
that education programming in the North was about expanding 
the programs and enhancing access to northern students while 
we also ensured that the programs would remain high quality 
and sustainable. 
 
Northlands College has had 40 years of experience in educating 
northerners and has seen significant increases. For example, 
since 2007, Mr. Speaker, enrolment in that university’s 
education programming has increased by 226 per cent. We’re 
going to continue to work with our northern partners and make 
sure that we have quality education in that North. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Wait Time for Young People to Receive 
Mental Health Services 

 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Closing the funding 
gap is a pivotal step in reconciliation, and with indigenous 
youth across the province seeing so little hope that they are 
choosing to end their lives, there isn’t time to sit back and wait. 
Action is needed now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, psychiatric services in the North are so lacking 
that many northern youth are referred to Saskatoon. But a 
family doctor in Saskatoon recently said, with two positions 
vacant, the wait times for young people to see a psychiatrist are 
between 18 months and two years. 
 
Whether it’s an urban centre, a rural community, or the far 
North, the trend remains the same. Wait times are dangerously 
high and youth are struggling to get the services they 
desperately need. Does the minister have a plan to make sure 
youth can access the services they need? If he does, how much 
longer will our kids have to wait to see it in action? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, this government and my 
co-minister and myself take this issue very seriously. And when 
you hear of these suicide issues in some of these communities, 
whether urban or rural, it hits close to home, Mr. Speaker. All 
of us, I think, have been touched by suicide in one shape or 
form. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we talk about the psychiatric numbers, Mr. 
Speaker, the minister and I were in Edmonton at the FPT 
meetings, the federal-provincial-territorial minister meetings, 
only a couple of weeks ago. The same challenges in recruiting 
psychiatrists, for example, are across the country. In fact, I 

think when we look at some of the initiatives that we’ve had in 
the province here, we’re actually doing a little bit better than 
some of our partners. 
 
We have a recruitment effort under way for the two 
psychiatrists in Saskatoon, as well as a temporary position to fill 
the gap in the short term, Mr. Speaker, as well as two new 
psychiatrists that were recruited for North Battleford at the 
Union Hospital there that will offer Telehealth services to the 
North, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, the wait times I gave were for 
the largest health region in the province, the region in which a 
children’s hospital is slated to open in two years. And they can’t 
recruit or retain the mental health care professionals they need? 
This is incredibly concerning. There are 67 psychiatrists 
working in the province, but the Canadian Psychiatric 
Association suggests Saskatchewan should have 170. Let me 
help the minister with the math on that. That would mean we 
need 154 per cent more. 
 
And so I ask again, since we didn’t see anything in their Speech 
from the Throne on mental health, what is the plan to decrease 
the waits, to recruit more mental health care providers, and 
when will the Sask Party make this a priority? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, as so often is the case in 
this House, we have to correct the NDP and their record, Mr. 
Speaker. There might have been less then — a lot less 
psychiatrists working in the province under the NDP, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ve increased those numbers by 29 per cent to 112, 
Mr. Speaker. And I just talked about the two that were recruited 
for North Battleford that will be helping the North. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also have to keep in mind there’s many 
different mental health services available to the youth and the 
citizens in this province upfront. There’s the 811, which isn’t a 
do-all end-all but it does direct people, have instant contact 24-7 
with mental health professionals via telephone. We also have 
mental health workers, we have psychotherapists. We have a 
gamut of professionals throughout the system, Mr. Speaker, that 
do help with mental health. 
 
In fact, I would point the members to some of the things they 
don’t like, is continuous improvement, where my region back 
home in Sunrise Health Region shortened those wait-lists for 
youth needing services to zero, Mr. Speaker. In fact we see 80 
per cent of youth that have psychiatric issues that need care are 
getting those services within five days. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Employment of Women and Provincial Economy 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Mr. Speaker, earlier this week I asked the 
minister what she was doing to help the increasing number of 



2862 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2017 

women in our province who are struggling to find work and 
those who have given up looking for work because there’s no 
work to be found. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was a 28 per cent jump in the number of 
women relying on EI [employment insurance] this year. There 
are 3,400 fewer people with jobs in Saskatchewan right now 
compared to this time last year. Mr. Speaker, 3,300 of them are 
women. That’s not some philosophy; that’s a fact. 
 
How can the minister not think this is significant? How can she 
deny that her government is failing Saskatchewan women? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Bonk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Low global 
commodity prices have had an impact on our labour market in 
the past few years. And I empathize with anyone who has been 
impacted by recent job losses. But despite these challenges, our 
unemployment rate is at 5.9 per cent — lower than the national 
average of 6.3 per cent — and we’re far better off now than we 
were under the NDP. 
 
And we’re seeing improvement in other areas, Mr. Speaker. 
Jobs in oil and gas extraction were up by 1,400 and by 600 in 
the supporting activities for mining, oil and gas extraction 
industry. These industries are drivers of our economy and we 
see positive growth in these and we look forward to more of 
them in the future. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 89 — The School Choice Protection Act 
Loi sur la protection du choix d’école 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
No. 89, The School Choice Protection Act 2017 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Education that Bill No. 89 be now introduced and read the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Next sitting of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 90 — The Heritage Property 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Makowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 90, 
The Heritage Property Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Parks, 
Culture and Sport that Bill No. 90 be now introduced and read a 
first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Makowsky: — Next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 91 — The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2017 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 91, 
The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2017 be now introduced and 
read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Crown 
Investments that Bill No. 91 be now introduced and read a first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 92 — The Saskatchewan Telecommunications 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 92, 
The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Act, 2017 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Crown 



November 8, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2863 

Investments that Bill No. 92 be now introduced and read a first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 93 — The Saskatchewan Telecommunications 
Holding Corporation Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 93, 
the Saskatchewan telecommunications corporation amendment 
Act, 2017 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Crown 
Investments that Bill No. 93 be now introduced and read the 
first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answer to question 19. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered the 
response to question no. 19. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 87 — The Data Matching Agreements Act 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Data Matching Agreements Act. 
This is a new Act that will allow for the matching and linking of 
information and databases to facilitate fact-based decision 
making within government. This Act promotes co-operation 
amongst government institutions sharing information while still 
protecting the privacy rights of individuals, following 
recommendations made by the Office of the Information and 
Privacy Commissioner. Mr. Speaker, this new Act will create a 
statutory authority for government institutions and prescribe 
local authorities to enter into data-matching agreements and 
participate in data-matching projects using personal information 
or personal health information. 
 
Data matching is where information from one database is 
matched or linked with information in another database. This 
Act will establish requirements for the initiation of a 
data-matching program by a government institution or 
prescribed local authority and also place requirements on 
participating organizations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new Act will require parties to a 
data-matching project to enter into a data-matching agreement 
which meets the criteria set out in the Act. Oversight will be 
provided by the government access coordinator where the 
initiating organization is a government institution, and the 
Office of the Information and Privacy Commissioner generally. 
The government access coordinator and the Privacy 
Commissioner will review agreements and provide comment. 
 
The new Act establishes reporting requirements where a 
data-matching project has been completed and sets out 
expressed good faith liability protection for disclosing 
information and compliance with such an agreement. Of course 
the Office of the Information and Privacy Commissioner will 
continue to retain all of its investigative and recommendation 
power under The Freedom of Information and Protection of 
Privacy Act and The Local Authority Freedom of Information 
and Protection of Privacy Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government access coordinator is a new role 
that will be created through consequential amendments to The 
Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act. The 
government access coordinator will review data-matching 
agreements for government institutions and provide comment. 
The government access coordinator will also receive reports 
from government institutions where a data-matching project is 
completed. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to The Freedom of Information and 
Protection of Privacy Act, the government access coordinator 
will also receive and respond to access requests, working 
towards centralization of access to information service for 
government institutions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Data Matching 
Agreements Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The Deputy Premier has moved second 
reading. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 
member from Athabasca. 



2864 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2017 

Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
And as the custom here, I’m pleased to stand in my place today 
to give the initial comments on Bill No. 87, The Data Matching 
Agreements Act. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as I understand the notes from the minister, 
when he made reference to a number of points of his bill in the 
sense of being able to use a large amount of data and to match 
the data to a number of agreed . . . a group of people to share 
some of the data that they have in common, that may be of 
assistance to each other on a variety of fronts, as I understand 
the bill being introduced. 
 
So this data matching agreement Act, really you begin to ask 
the question, what is the purpose of this particular bill? What is 
the intended objective, Mr. Speaker, and who is it meant to 
assist? Is it meant to assist the government? Is it meant to assist 
the private sector? Is it meant to assist the various groups that 
are out there, Mr. Speaker? 
 
It’s important to note that as we look at the modern-day 
technology and all the different aspects of social media or the 
Internet, Mr. Speaker, there’s more and more worries about 
keeping information confidential for a variety of sources, 
whether it be government or business or even countries overall, 
Mr. Speaker. And we’re all very familiar with the ability of 
hackers to go into any system, Mr. Speaker. That’s always a 
constant threat. And we’ve seen evidence of that not only in the 
banking industry, Mr. Speaker, but all throughout the world. As 
you know, there’s numerous cases of this, of the world being 
apprised of certain confidential information that was hacked out 
of secure servers, Mr. Speaker. This is the worry that a lot of 
people have when they talk about technology in the modern 
age, that this is obviously something that is very, very 
concerning to a lot of people. 
 
And what we should do as a government, Mr. Speaker, is if it is 
something that is going to be of net benefit to the people of 
Saskatchewan, then we need to explain specifically which 
organizations have asked for this particular bill. What’s the 
intended objective of this particular bill? And why, out of the 
blue, in 2017 are we now deciding to put this bill forward to 
talk about getting large pieces of information? And members 
opposite, certainly, you know, they have access to a lot of 
information, and they want access to more information. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the part that is a bit worrisome whenever the 
Sask Party gets up and talks about more legislation to provide 
more insight into people’s lives, Mr. Speaker, we want to be 
very, very careful that we recognize privacy, something that a 
lot of people would like to continue and paramount in some of 
their businesses or their lives. And I would point out, Mr. 
Speaker, that this is something that needs a lot of thought. It 
certainly needs a lot of thought. 
 
Now it’s a bit rich coming from the Saskatchewan Party 
government that talks about The Data Matching Agreements 
Act, Mr. Speaker, when we can’t seem to get their Premier to 
use a government email account so we’re able to access that 
information through the FOI process. 
 
There was a lot of discussion around how the Privacy 
Commissioner would be engaged, Mr. Speaker. The minister 

spoke about the need for the proper process to access some of 
the information that may be available between the different 
parties in this particular bill. So the list goes on as to what the 
potential challenges could clearly be with this bill, and we need 
to make sure that this is not something that, at the end of the 
day that is simply more oversight. Some people like to make 
reference to more oversight from big brother. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, again as I said at the outset, it’s a bit rich 
coming from the Saskatchewan Party when we can’t get the 
Premier of the province of Saskatchewan to use the government 
emails that we could access to see what discussions were 
around some very important matters and, more recently, the 
GTH land scandal, Mr. Speaker. The purpose that a lot of 
people in the province have asked me is . . . [inaudible] . . . 
what’s the importance of having the Premier’s emails become 
accessible to the opposition and to the public? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it is very important. Because any time the 
Premier talks about any issue on the email, that they should be 
subjected to an FOI where the public, as our Premier, have a 
right to know what he’s talking about. So when the opposition 
says, when the opposition says, can we have a copy of any 
emails you have, Mr. Premier, on the GTH, on the GTH and 
what your involvement is, and then he says, well our 
government email account was down so I used the private Sask 
Party email, well, Mr. Speaker, we can’t go to a private email 
called the Sask Party email account and ask for that 
information, primarily because they’re a private organization. 
 
So that’s the purpose in the opposition. We get up every day 
and we say, can we have your emails that you sent to express 
your involvement in the Global Transportation Hub land 
scandal? Can we have those emails? That was the question that 
was asked of our leader, and consistently the Premier has not 
answered. So on one hand they want more data collection and 
more data-pooling information as identified in The Data 
Matching Agreements Act, but they themselves do not want to 
provide information through their email accounts as to what 
they discussed on the GTH to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
So that’s exactly my point in terms of the hypocritical approach 
of this particular government. And once again we see, through 
the data matching Bill No. 87, that what they want to do is take 
a large number of information from a large number of sources 
and put them all together in a pool and then have the data that 
one organization may have on a certain group and then match 
that with the government and use that — for whatever purposes, 
Mr. Speaker, is totally beyond me. 
 
So as they bring that process forward, then we turn around and 
we say, okay if you want to be able to build a big brother 
network — which I view this thing as; we never know who 
their intended benefactors are — we would like you to also give 
us information on your email accounts as the Government of 
Saskatchewan because that information is highly valuable, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s very important that we have access to that 
information. 
 
And we hear the two responses from the Premier indicating that 
he inadvertently used a private email, Mr. Speaker: I may have 
just replied in a private email; I didn’t do it on purpose. And the 
other argument he made, Mr. Speaker, is that, according to his 



November 8, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2865 

office, that his email account for the government was down for 
a number of weeks. So we checked. We checked and lo and 
behold, Mr. Speaker, there was no report of an email account 
being down in the Premier’s office for two weeks. There was 
none of that. 
 
So we’re asking the question, okay, if the people of 
Saskatchewan have a right to know what you’re sending in your 
email as our Premier to various government departments and to 
various members of his government on something as critical as 
the GTH land scandal, then the people have a right to know 
what you’re saying in that email. 
 
And all emails within the government ministries are subjected 
to freedom of information. And what happened was the 
Saskatchewan Party or the Premier said, well I’m going to use a 
different email account. I’m going to use the Sask Party email 
account. That way none of this information I have on the GTH 
is FOI-able, so therefore we don’t have to report this 
information to the public or to the Leader of the Opposition, 
who has been steadfast in her request, in her demand to have 
that information come forward. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, why is that important? A lot of people back 
home would ask me, why is the Premier’s email so important to 
you folks? And I tell them because whatever he sent in the 
email as a result of discussions and negotiations around the 
GTH . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And the Premier’s chirping 
from his seat right now, Mr. Speaker. The reason why we 
needed that information, sir, we needed that information to see 
what your involvement was in the GTH. That’s what we want 
to know. 
 
We want to know when were you involved because you give us 
two different stories. One story you say, I was involved right 
from the start, and the other story is that I found out about it 
later. So we say, well let’s check out your email. We’ll help you 
out and find that information for you. And he said, well I can’t 
remember if I used my government email or my Sask Party 
email account because I had to communicate with the people. 
Well the people of Saskatchewan want that communication. 
 
So that’s why, when we talk about emails, Mr. Speaker, from 
the perspective of the opposition, as the Premier he obliged 
himself and his party that he would be transparent and 
accountable and that any actions that he’s undertaken as our 
Premier, the public should have a right to know as to what is 
happening to the Government of Saskatchewan, and thereby 
they should be using government email accounts. So any 
correspondence from the Premier’s office or discussion or even 
memos that he’s had on the GTH, guess what, Mr. Speaker? We 
can’t access that information because he’s used the 
Saskatchewan Party email account. And, Mr. Speaker, this is 
the same government, this is the same Premier that talked about 
accountability and transparency. 
 
So now we come along and we, as the opposition, we ask the 
question, well can you give us that information? And the 
Premier said, I’ve co-operated fully with the auditor. Well the 
fact is they didn’t co-operate with the auditor to the extent the 
auditor should have received co-operation on when it comes to 
the GTH. All his email information on his private server should 
have been provided to the auditor, Mr. Speaker. 

And the report of the auditor on the GTH, Mr. Speaker, was 
very confined. It was a very confined role that she had to play. 
All she could basically interview were government employees. 
They couldn’t go beyond that to talk to prospective people that 
may have been in conflict, Mr. Speaker. She had a very limited 
ability to interview certain people. 
 
And that’s why today, when you hear the member from Regina 
speaking of some of the challenges as it pertains to trying to get 
to the bottom of what happened at the GTH, Mr. Speaker, we 
have to make sure that when the auditor’s name is being used in 
this Assembly . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . As my colleague 
says, that the auditor’s report exonerated no one, Mr. Speaker. 
She was very confined in what she had to say and it’s a bit . . . 
Mr. Speaker, it would be shocking, if not amusing, that the 
ministers of the day continue standing up and making reference 
to the auditor’s report. And I know, Mr. Speaker, and 
everybody in Saskatchewan knows, the media know that the 
auditor’s report was very constrained, very confined. There 
were some tight timelines and there was only certain people that 
she could interview. 
 
And these are some of the things, Mr. Speaker, that we would 
find evidence of if we had access to the Premier’s email 
account. And obviously because it’s hidden in the 
Saskatchewan Party headquarters basement in their server, that 
we simply can’t access that information. And that’s why email 
record keeping is so important, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Government House Leader on 
his . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I would like to make a point of order. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — The member opposite full well knows — 
he’s been here long enough — that when a bill’s put on the 
floor, to discuss the bill and not to be wide ranging. I’ve 
listened intently and I’ll ask the Speaker to, if he has to review 
Hansard, to listen. For the last five minutes I haven’t heard any 
reference to the particular bill except just basically a basic rant. 
So I would ask the member to return to the bill that is on the 
order paper that is being discussed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m glad to see the member from 
Arm River back in the Assembly, the Government House 
Leader . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . My apologies, Mr. 
Speaker. I, of course, apologize and withdraw that particular 
comment, but it’s always good to see the member in the House. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the traditions that guide debate, 
the member will well know that when you’ve got a subject as 
broad as data matching, Mr. Speaker, that certainly there are a 
number of subjects that that naturally leads to, many of them 
that are currently in the public eye squarely this day, Mr. 
Speaker. So I would submit that as great as it is to ever see the 
member from Arm River in the Assembly, that his point of 
order be not well founded, Mr. Speaker, and that the member 
should be able to continue on in his great and edifying speech. 
 



2866 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2017 

The Speaker: — I too was listening very carefully to the 
member from Athabasca, and we do have pretty good latitude 
on speaking to different bills, but I do caution the member to do 
his best to tie his message back to the bill. And I do not take the 
point of order well taken. I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
referred to one section of the Bill 87 to reinforce my point, Mr. 
Speaker. The bill clearly states that the intent in here, or the 
intended objective here within the bill says, and I quote, 
“Individuals will also be able to request information collected. 
Government coordinators will also be legislated to provide 
information regarding this entire process.” 
 
[14:45] 
 
So a big part of collection of data also engages the email option 
for people to share information. So as you have a block of 
information between various organizations and entities, 
including government, and they share this information, my 
point being that you should not have certain information privy 
to certain parties and not to others. So the point being that 
government coordinators will also be legislated to provide 
information regarding this entire process. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it is in line with what the bill is involving and 
speaking about, and that’s why it’s important for the member 
from Arm River to figure out that emails are a big part of the 
technological options available through this bill. So, Mr. 
Speaker, the member from Arm River should actually try and 
make the link that when we talk about data matching, it 
includes all data, Mr. Speaker. That means transcripts, letters, 
and, Mr. Speaker, emails. It’s a big part of the technology in 
this day and age, I would remind the member from Arm River. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would point out that a lot of folks in 
northern Saskatchewan understand the complexities of the 
Internet and that this is really a global community, and there is a 
lot of information that people . . . It’s amazing what information 
that they could glean out from just basically what we would 
refer to as surfing the Net. 
 
And it’s important that we have strategic issues, and I look at 
the business community as an example. A lot of their 
information that they want to share and certainly retain for their 
own proprietary interests, Mr. Speaker, that they should be able 
to have a secure server, and that in the event that they want to 
join a process such as this, you would assume that the entities 
that are establishing this particular process and this particular 
project and . . . as identified in Bill 87, and this being the 
Government of Saskatchewan, that they would be equally 
co-operative with that business when it comes to sharing 
information, whether it be through correspondence or through 
emails. 
 
So that’s why it’s important, Mr. Speaker. The link is clear: that 
any electronic communication by sharing information and data 
matching, Mr. Speaker, is open and subjected to debate on this 
particular bill. So I’m going back to the Premier and his whole 
email issue, Mr. Speaker, and I’m pleased with the latitude 
provided because it is . . . It does encompass that process and I 
certainly concur with that premise. 

And it’s important to point out that as the people of 
Saskatchewan have identified, there is so many complex issues 
that need to be managed well, and exchange of information is 
highly valuable when applied well. Coordination and efficiency 
within all organizations, including the government in 
Saskatchewan, is pretty important to a lot of people, and if it’s 
applied well, then all these objectives are basically things that 
we would be supportive of. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, my point being that if on one hand the 
government wants to talk about data collection and data 
matching, want to bring in companies and different 
organizations to share a wide swath of information and correlate 
between all the organizations which data that we could share 
and that which data that we have a match on and which we can 
exchange information, this is an important aspect of more and 
more oversight, and some people may not like that process. 
Others may like it. 
 
We just need to know, Mr. Speaker, if that is something that 
different organizations have concerns about, or different people, 
different companies may have some reservations about. And 
that’s why it’s important as we introduce bills of this sort, no 
matter how many times the Saskatchewan Party appear to make 
some of these bills benign, there are some real challenges to 
what they’re proposing, and I would suggest that this particular 
bill may have some wide-reaching consequences, Mr. Speaker, 
and certainly something that we have to watch and provide 
oversight as best we can as the official opposition. 
 
That being said, Mr. Speaker, we know that there’s 
organizations out there that are familiar with this process, as I 
said earlier on. There are people that provide oversight, and 
people surf the Net. They come across some of these bills and 
some of the intentions of these bills, and they have a lot of 
different perspectives. And that’s why, as the opposition, I 
would encourage them to contact us. If there is some part of the 
bill that is concerning, that you feel may be impugning your 
civil liability or hurting your company from growth or allowing 
more oversight by big brother, so to speak, then we need to 
hear, we need to hear those comments and concerns, Mr. 
Speaker. And there may be some very valuable parts of this bill 
as well. We also need to hear that as well, Mr. Speaker, and 
that’s the point that I would raise as we look through some of 
these bills. 
 
But the whole intent, Mr. Speaker, as we talk about these bills, 
is that many of these companies and these organizations and 
these private individuals that may be interested in this particular 
process, I would suggest to them, Mr. Speaker, that they look at 
the actions of the Government of Saskatchewan that is 
proposing such a bill, and from there that you arrive at the 
determination on your own whether you should trust that 
partner or not. And my point being today that based on the 
performance of the Premier when it comes to accessing his 
email account, that they have not followed the rules in terms of 
providing information in a timely fashion. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, so it comes to accountability, it comes to 
transparency, and it comes to respect amongst the partners. And 
I would suggest to those that may be looking at the options and 
the opportunity and the threats of The Data Matching 
Agreements Act, Bill 87, that you forward that information to 



November 8, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2867 

us. And certainly from our perspective, the help is very much 
appreciated because we don’t understand how this could affect 
a number of organizations and people and companies. We need 
obviously the time and the option to discuss that and look at 
that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there is all kinds of issues that impact the 
sharing of information. As I’ve said at the outset, the 
technological opportunities of 2017 are amazing. And there’s 
also a threat not only to the banking industry but to government 
entities as well in releasing private, confidential information 
that’s not meant to be public. And, Mr. Speaker, in many cases 
that’ll hurt companies, and it’ll certainly hurt a lot of 
organizations and people out there that may be unsuspecting 
victims. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have no choice but to take the time, look at 
The Data Matching Agreements Act, and see what the intended 
objectives are, see who the potential partners are. We need to do 
a bit of network and a bit of research work on our part to make 
sure we understand what is being planned with this bill. 
 
But I’ll close on this particular point on Bill 87, Mr. Speaker, 
that if you look at the actions of the Sask Party government who 
is proposing this bill, where we see the Premier has refused to 
give us emails that he has sent as the Premier to the members of 
his caucus and various other ministers, I’m assuming, and he 
used a private email account which is the Sask Party email in 
the basement of one of their Sask Party offices, and that’s 
where all the information is being stored — that’s where all the 
information is being stored — I think, I think that information 
should be made public. If you’re the Premier of the province, 
you shouldn’t be sending emails, confidential emails, on a 
private server that’s housed in your Sask Party headquarters. 
That email should be handled through the Premier’s email 
account. 
 
And what’s worst, Mr. Speaker, what’s worse is that when we 
asked why he was continuing to use the email account of the 
Sask Party, his office indicated that the government email was 
down, that it wasn’t operational for two weeks. So dutifully as 
we should, the opposition made inquiries through FOI, so we 
got hold of the SPMC [Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation] guys and we said, well can you give us a record of 
when the Premier’s government email is back online, and we 
were told that there was no report of any email server being 
down. 
 
So again, Mr. Speaker, on both fronts we never got a straight 
answer. And that’s a crying shame because people deserve 
information, especially when it comes to the Global 
Transportation Hub, the challenges we have in the whole 
scandal that’s associated with the land around the Global 
Transportation Hub. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would point out again, a lot more 
information is required as to what the intention of this bill is. 
We need to network with the people that are going to be 
impacted, so we have a lot of work ahead of us.  
 
But as I said, do not trust the Government of Saskatchewan 
when it comes to sharing information willingly and openly, like 
many companies and organizations would under this bill, 

because they have so far squandered every opportunity to be 
credible on that front by continuing to deny the people of 
Saskatchewan, and thus the opposition party of Saskatchewan, 
access to the Premier’s email which is housed in their private 
Sask Party server. That information is needed by us. It’s needed 
by many people and they simply refuse to hand it over, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s why I say accountability and transparency, 
which is identified in this bill, from their perspective is a sham. 
And despite making all those assurances, they still continue to 
not provide information, timely information, to the people of 
Saskatchewan and to the opposition on such matters such as the 
global transportation land scandal. 
 
So on that note, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot more to add to Bill 
87, and I move that we adjourn debate on The Data Matching 
Agreements Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 87, the data matching agreement, 
2017. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 88 — The Automobile Accident Insurance 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I am pleased to rise today to move second reading of The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2017. The Act 
administered by Saskatchewan Government Insurance outlines 
considerations with respect to people injured in vehicle 
collisions. There are a few minor amendments to this Act, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
SGI’s [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] safe driver 
recognition program places all drivers on a safety rating scale 
based on their driving history. The program rewards safe 
drivers with a discount on their vehicle insurance, while drivers 
who display riskier behaviour are assessed financial penalties. 
 
The Automobile Accident Insurance Act defines “chargeable 
incident” for the purposes of safety rating assessments under the 
safe driver recognition program. A part of the definition of 
“chargeable incident” is duplicated in regulations. The proposed 
change eliminates unnecessary duplication and will be more 
efficient when changes are required to the listed offences. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when SGI changes a driver’s safety rating as a 
result of a collision, the driver can appeal SGI’s decision to the 
Highway Traffic Board. The procedure for appealing is set out 
in The Automobile Accident Insurance Act. The Act requires the 
driver to appeal within 30 days when the business practice is to 
allow 90 days. As well, the Act directs the board to contact the 
driver to schedule a hearing. In practice it is the driver who 
contacts the board. So amendments are being made to reflect 
what is actually happening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the hon. members may recall that in January 2017 



2868 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2017 

two additional offences were added to the list of those that 
triggered payment of pain and suffering bereavement damages 
under the Act. Those offences are criminal negligence causing 
death and criminal negligence causing bodily harm. These 
offences do not have a corresponding statutory condition, which 
means SGI cannot seek recovery against the convicted driver. 
The proposed change means that if a Saskatchewan driver is 
convicted of these offences, SGI can recover any insurance 
money paid for pain and suffering, or bereavement damages 
from that driver’s third party liability insurance. Basically, Mr. 
Speaker, the proposed change corrects an oversight at the time 
of the January 2017 amendments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 2016 SGI made numerous changes to the safe 
driver recognition program, responding to customer feedback 
calling for bigger discounts for good drivers, and tougher 
consequences for risky drivers. This doubled the cost of 
financial penalties for riskier drivers. As a result, it can be 
challenging for some drivers to pay their amounts owing to 
SGI. Amendments to the Act will allow for monthly 
instalments, making payments easier for customers. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, a last change clarifies that 
counselling costs for family members of someone injured in a 
collision will be outlined in regulations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Automobile 
Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Crown Investments has 
moved second reading of Bill 88. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 
want to, if the member from Arm River would let me talk about 
tires and tire safety during an automobile insurance Act 
proceeding, then I would very much make the connect for him, 
if you’d like, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s important to, as you look at this particular Act, Bill 88, The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s important to note that the automobile consists of many, 
many parts, and insurance consists of many, many aspects of 
which parts of the automobile are protected, Mr. Speaker. So 
it’s important to note that there is an all-encompassing aspect 
when you talk about automobile insurance overall. And, Mr. 
Speaker, Bill 88 is something that we need to pay very, very 
close attention to as it pertains to changes that the minister may 
want to propose under this bill. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the definition of “chargeable incident” is 
moved to regulation as opposed to legislation. We need to know 
what is exactly is meant when the minister made reference to a 
chargeable incident. What kind of parameters will he be using? 
And how would the rules be established? Is there going to be a 
consult with the legal team, whether it be police officers or their 
own government lawyers, as to what the definition of a 
chargeable incident may mean? Mr. Speaker, it’s very, very 
important for the drivers and the people that use SGI in the 
province of Saskatchewan to know what regulations will be 
changed as a result of some of the legislation around Bill 88. 

Mr. Speaker, there is also appeals for drivers’ safety ratings. 
The procedures, fees, and required documents for those were 
moved from legislation into regulations. Again, Mr. Speaker, I 
would point out to the people of Saskatchewan, it’s very, very 
important to note there’s a difference between legislative versus 
the whole notion around regulation because legislative usually 
has the scrutiny of this legislature and the opposition and any 
other group out there that may be impacted by any bill, that 
legislatively would have much more, much more light shone on 
any particular bill that has changes. 
 
Now what’ll happen is, obviously as we witness time and time 
again, is the Government of Saskatchewan, the Sask Party 
government, they’ll move some of those rules and regulations 
from legislation where everybody can have a look at it, and 
they’ll move them down to regulations where the minister and a 
few other people have the authority to change all kinds of rules 
and all kinds of regulations without oversight, Mr. Speaker.  
 
And I would dare say that they make these rules up in the dark 
recesses of the Sask Party offices just simply to do one thing, 
Mr. Speaker, and that is to weaken SGI, frustrate the drivers, 
and drive up costs for SGI because at the end of the day as the 
customers become more and more unaware of what SGI is 
doing, Mr. Speaker, it makes it much easier for the Sask Party 
to try and do what they always want to do and that is sell off 
SGI. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there is no question in my mind that the worry 
we have around Bill 88, Mr. Speaker, is that as the minister 
confers more power unto himself, there is less oversight on how 
some of these rules will affect SGI overall. Don’t forget, Mr. 
Speaker, that SGI is a Crown corporation that has served 
Saskatchewan for many, many years, Mr. Speaker. And they 
have done a remarkable job in making sure that our rates stay 
low, that we manage great programs in the province, and that 
we have a great team at SGI. I want to point that out. 
 
The challenges that SGI have is that when you have ministers 
that want to come along and arbitrarily make changes in rules, 
in rules that they think should be imposed on the people of 
Saskatchewan without oversight and, Mr. Speaker, many, many 
times without the professional opinion and support and advice 
of people that work within SGI. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, again I’d point out the actions of the 
Saskatchewan Party are much more pronounced when people 
hear some of their bills being proposed that, as I mentioned 
earlier about the private email account that the Premier uses so 
he doesn’t have to report those conversations that he’s had 
around the GTH, well, Mr. Speaker, this is the same minister, 
this is the same minister that sold off the Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company. And now he’s coming along, he’s 
coming along and he’s saying well, well because I’ve sold off 
the STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company], Mr. 
Speaker, I want to start having the arbitrary right to make rules 
and regulation changes from within my office for SGI. So that’s 
why, on this side of the Assembly, we simply don’t trust that 
particular member, the member from Prince Albert Northcote 
who simply, who simply . . . his main job is to come here and 
have a wall-to-wall sale of our Crown corporations. 
 
So as he comes along, as he comes along and says, I’m here to 



November 8, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2869 

sell everything under the sun, Mr. Speaker, this is the problem 
we have when you have a minister that is supposedly 
representing Saskatchewan people’s interest instead represents 
Sask Party interest and confers great powers unto himself to 
decide which rules or regulations he likes and which ones he 
wants to change before breakfast, Mr. Speaker, with no 
oversight and certainly no study by this Assembly and by the 
people of Saskatchewan and, worst of all, Mr. Speaker, without 
very much input from the fine people at SGI. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we have to understand that SGI is a valuable 
automobile insurer in the province of Saskatchewan. And I have 
had occasion to talk about insurance with a number of people 
from other provinces. And in my recent discussion with my 
older brother — my older brother lives in St. Albert — and he 
said, if we could enjoy the insurance rates that you guys in 
Saskatchewan enjoy as opposed to what we pay here in Alberta, 
you know, we would just be fine with that, Mr. Speaker. Like 
he was really impressed with some of the rates that we pay and 
he was really, really impressed with that. And I’m going to 
share with the members opposite, once we get some of that 
information from him, as to what Albertans are paying for their 
tax or for their premiums on automobile insurance. I can tell 
you, it’s a heck of a lot more than what SGI’s charging the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And what the Saskatchewan Party want to do is they want to 
say, oh my goodness, SGI’s doing a good job and most people 
are dealing with SGI. And now they’re doing so well, but we 
want to sell them because if we sell them, we sell SGI, then we 
can follow Alberta’s lead in the dramatically higher costs for 
car insurance. That’s what they want to do, Mr. Speaker. They 
want to sell off SGI. And they make these kinds of rules in this 
bill, really, really hurtful in the sense that they don’t have the 
right consult with the customers and of course with the 
management team at SGI. And the minister confers great 
powers unto himself to decide what rule or what regulation he 
likes or doesn’t like, Mr. Speaker. And that’s a shame. 
 
So I think it’s really important for people in Saskatchewan to 
know that when you have a minister that has sold off our Liquor 
Board system. They have sold off Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company. They have sold off the land titles branch called 
Information Services Corporation. And now he’s coming along 
saying, well now I’m meddling in with SGI’s operations. I’m 
going to confer great powers unto myself as the minister to 
determine which regulations I like or don’t like without any 
oversight. Well, Mr. Speaker, he’s on par with the actions of his 
boss, the Premier of Saskatchewan, when it comes to accessing 
private emails that affect the people of Saskatchewan. They are 
actually, Mr. Speaker, they are actually hiding a lot of 
information, and that’s a shame. 
 
So what concerns me, Mr. Speaker, again on this bill is that the 
salesman of our Crown corporation is proposing these particular 
actions that give him more power. And I think many times they 
confer power amongst themselves without the advice, the 
guidance, and the support of many people within SGI. And, Mr. 
Speaker, you’ve got to be very, very careful when you don’t 
begin to differentiate your role between a legislator and a 
manager of a corporation called SGI. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
seeing those lines becoming blurred. We’re seeing that the 
philosophy of the Saskatchewan Party is to sell everything 

under the sun. 
 
And the problem we have with that, Mr. Speaker, is they’re 
telling people, well we have to sell. The people are saying, why 
should you sell our Crowns? Well because we broke the 
province, because we broke the province. Well the question you 
ask is, why did you break the province? Well because we had 
record revenue left behind by the NDP.  
 
So how does that work? You’ve got record revenue left behind. 
You’ve had record revenue in the last 10 years. You’re still in 
debt, and you’re going to sell off the Crowns to cover that debt 
that you had because you had record revenue for 10 years. Like 
it confuses anybody, Mr. Speaker. That absolutely confuses 
everybody. 
 
And then you have the salesman for the Crown Investments 
Corporation, the minister, dressed up as a minister, coming 
along saying, I want to sell everything under the sun. And 
anything I can do to decrease the affordability of insurance and 
really begin to reduce SGI’s independence from politics, then 
I’m going to confer great power, such as changing regulations, 
as opposed to going thorough the Assembly and changing 
legislative pieces in front of everyone. I’m going to do it the 
back door way so I can weaken SGI. And the net effect is the 
people of Saskatchewan will be paying a heck of a lot more for 
insurance in the future if the Sask Party gets their way by 
weakening SGI through bills of this sort and, Mr. Speaker, 
ultimately doing what they want to do. And they want to sell 
SGI. They want to sell SGI, Mr. Speaker. That’s the bottom 
line. 
 
And the unfortunate part of this, Mr. Speaker, is that once 
they’re sold, once these Crown corporations are sold, then 
they’re gone forever. There’s nobody could bring back these 
Crown corporations. And then what’ll happen, Mr. Speaker, is 
90 per cent of that bench over there, they’ll also be gone. They 
won’t be around anymore to be held accountable for their 
actions of weakening our Crowns through bills of this sort, Mr. 
Speaker, and selling off whatever they can sell off because 
they’re so broke. They’re so broke. And this is after a decade of 
record revenue and money left behind to the tune of $2.3 billion 
by the previous NDP administration. 
 
And what really gets me, Mr. Speaker, what really gets me is 
that conservative party over there, they talk about wanting less 
government. That’s what they talk about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I caution the member to only use parties that 
are representative here today in the Assembly. I recognize the 
member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to point out that for a party that simply wants less government, 
why do they always want to be government, Mr. Speaker? 
Because first of all they (a) don’t know how to govern; and (b) 
by the time they leave the province; which they’ve done in the 
past, they’ve left the province in financial ruin, Mr. Speaker, 
and other people had to come up and clean up their miserable 
mess. 
 
And that’s one of the problems, Mr. Speaker, we have. When it 
comes to the Crown corporations and bills of this sort, the 



2870 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2017 

opposition is going to be very, very, very vigilant in ensuring 
that there isn’t anything that they can pass through the 
Assembly without our scrutiny, without our involvement, and 
therefore advising the people of Saskatchewan what changes 
they have. 
 
So what they do? They change the legislation. The member 
from Melfort is chirping from his seat. You go back to Melfort, 
and you be very proud on the stage and tell the people of 
Melfort that you want to sell off the Crowns. And I bet you, Mr. 
Speaker, that the member from Melfort will not do that. He will 
not do that. What he’ll do is he’ll stand up and he’ll applaud the 
effort by the member from Prince Albert Northcote by changing 
rules, as opposed to legislation, in the backroom of their offices 
so people of Saskatchewan can avoid scrutiny. 
 
And I challenge any member of the Sask Party to go to a public 
meeting and say very loudly and clearly, we want to sell off the 
Crowns. They won’t do it, Mr. Speaker. They refuse to do it. 
They refuse to do it, yet they want to do it. And that’s why the 
people of Saskatchewan need not trust the Saskatchewan Party 
right from the Premier to the minister to the salesmen within 
that organization, Mr. Speaker, because they don’t have our 
interests. They do not have our interests. 
 
And that’s why it’s important, Mr. Speaker, as you see some of 
these bills come forward, when they talk, when they talk about 
changing the process, when they talk about changing the 
process and they use the word “efficiency,” Mr. Speaker. It’s 
not efficiency. They want to avoid scrutiny. So they move 
certain parts of the automobile insurance Act right from 
legislation to regulations, where they can change the rules on 
their own, Mr. Speaker. And this is why I tell the people of 
Saskatchewan, if they were serious about protecting the Crowns 
they would stop undertaking actions such as that under bills 
such as Bill 88 because, Mr. Speaker, that really is a disservice 
to the people of Saskatchewan. And I say shame on them. 
 
The bottom line is SGI has provided great service. We’ve had a 
great team, and all they got from the Saskatchewan Party is a lot 
of deregulation. All they got from the Saskatchewan Party is 
nothing but grief, Mr. Speaker. All they got from the 
Saskatchewan Party is political interference, Mr. Speaker. And 
they got nothing but non-confidence by the Saskatchewan 
Party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And how can some of our Crowns survive under that kind of 
atmosphere, Mr. Speaker? Well that is what’s happening in the 
Assembly today. We’ve witnessed that time and time and time 
again and bit by bit. As I said at the outset, they’re having a 
wall-to-wall sale. Liquor stores are now gone. Where’s that 
profit going? Down east, Mr. Speaker. We had the land titles 
branch, Mr. Speaker, called Information Services Corporation, 
Information Services Corporation, that was generating $14 
million a year profit for the people of Saskatchewan. That’s 
gone, Mr. Speaker. Where’ve those profits gone to? And now 
they shuttered and sold off the Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the Premier’s talking about income tax. I want to the thank 
the Premier for bringing up income tax. This is the architect 
behind a billion-dollar tax increase this year alone. That must be 
a record. A billion-dollar tax increase by the architect of 

Saskatchewan called the Premier, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, and this is what . . . And, Mr. Speaker, they laugh 
from their seats, but I’ll tell the people of Saskatchewan this: 
you’re going to be paying more for everything, from your 
power bill to your licence to your telephone, Mr. Speaker, to 
every aspect of who we are as people. And this is going to 
affect every household in the province of Saskatchewan. As a 
result of Sask Party scandal, mismanagement, and waste, we are 
all going to be paying for years and years and years to come. 
 
[15:15] 
 
And that is a shame, Mr. Speaker. It is an absolute shame 
because, as I said at the outset, when the NDP left government 
the Crowns were very strong. They were robust. They were 
intelligent. They were independent, and they were giving us 
some money, Mr. Speaker. There was money in the bank, Mr. 
Speaker. And guess what? The economy was just humming 
along really good and the population was growing and money 
was starting to roll in and everything was going great, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And then what happened was they let the Saskatchewan Party 
have control. So where we are 10 years later, where we are 10 
years later: a billion-dollar tax hike, sale of three Crowns. Oh, 
we’ve got $23 billion in debt. The member from Moose Jaw 
talks about new schools. Guess what? You can't hang anything 
on the walls on that new school. You can’t open the window. 
And heaven forbid you want to have a nomination meeting in 
one of those schools. You wouldn’t be able to do that. You 
don’t own that asset. The people of Saskatchewan don’t own 
that asset. We rent those assets. We rent those assets, and that’s 
what the member from Moose Jaw doesn’t understand. 
 
What happened with P3s [public-private partnership], Mr. 
Speaker, is you punted that debt down the road. So as you and 
the member from Martensville are gone somewhere, to a warm 
climate somewhere, we’re stuck here paying your tax bill for 
years and years to come. And that’s from a right wing 
government, Mr. Speaker. So your tax philosophy doesn’t 
work. Your defence of Crown doesn’t work. You guys have 
ripped this province apart. You have destroyed the confidence 
in our Crowns. You have put us deep in debt for years to come, 
and if that wasn’t enough, you throw in a whole bunch of P3s to 
make sure we never see sunlight for years to come. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly the reason why the people of 
Saskatchewan should not trust the Saskatchewan Party or any 
member of the Saskatchewan Party with the future growth and 
stability and ability of our Crown corporations such as the one 
being identified here in Bill 88. The people of Saskatchewan are 
really becoming aware of how bad this government is. They’re 
becoming aware of how poorly they have protected the Crowns, 
and they’re also becoming aware of how they have thwarted the 
rules and they have avoided scrutiny in this Assembly, as 
identified in Bill 88. Because now as opposed to legislation to 
make some changes, the minister can decide how to make those 
changes on their own. 
 
And I say to the people of Saskatchewan, it’s time to get rid of 
this tired, old government, Mr. Speaker, who’s had no interest 
in protecting the people of Saskatchewan’s future. They have 



November 8, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2871 

no interest. Their interest really, Mr. Speaker, is bound to their 
philosophical belief that we should have less government. 
That’s what they believe. Well why does a party want to be 
government if you want less government? And then, you’re 
very bad at becoming government to begin with. And this is an 
example of how you haven’t thought things through. 
 
People in Saskatchewan want a modern, forward-looking 
government that is accountable, that is dynamic, and can live 
within its means and provide as much support and provide as 
much leadership and direction and common sense as they 
possibly can, right from rural Saskatchewan to the North to our 
cities to our fields. They want a common sense government that 
will reflect what they need. As a government, it has to be 
compassionate, caring, and considerate but, Mr. Speaker, also 
become good managers. And good managers don’t sell off 
money-making opportunities. Good managers do not do that. 
Good managers do not sell off interests that give you money 
each and every year, that create jobs. Good managers do not all 
of a sudden, boom, put a billion-dollar tax hike on the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And good managers don’t sell off 
valuable things like the Crown corporations. 
 
And on every front, every front, Mr. Speaker, on every front the 
Sask Party has failed miserably. The Sask Party has failed 
miserably. And I can tell them today that we’re going to come 
for them in 2020, Mr. Speaker. We are going to come for them, 
Mr. Speaker, and we’re going to show the people that they are a 
tired, old government. They are a tired, old government that is 
broke. They are broke, Mr. Speaker, and they have a deficit of 
ideas and ideals. And this is why the people of Saskatchewan 
need to change. 
 
And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that it’s going to be parties that 
are supportive of our Crown corporations, parties that are 
supportive of inviting free enterprise to our province and 
making sure that we’re a province that is conducive to 
investment, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
And they can smile all they want, but I’ll tell you what, Mr. 
Speaker. They are still following Lorne Calvert’s royalty 
regime that he established in 2007. And the reason why they’re 
following that, Mr. Speaker, because it took a New Democratic 
premier to teach the so-called Saskatchewan Party how to 
attract investment and business to the community of 
Ile-a-la-Crosse. Lorne Calvert brought the oil and gas industry 
here, Mr. Speaker, and the future leader of the NDP is going to 
keep them here for years to come. And we’re going to form and 
forge a powerful relationship with the oil and gas sector. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, guess what? When the oil and gas sector 
come here, they look at utilizing our Crowns. They look at 
utilizing our Crowns, Mr. Speaker. They look at all the 
opportunity that the Crowns provide, whether it’s SaskPower or 
whether it’s SaskTel. And there may be instances where SGI, as 
identified in Bill 88, there may be instances where the 
companies would use some of these opportunities in 
Saskatchewan. So when companies come here, it’s important to 
provide them with a good investment climate. It’s important to 
provide them with good, solid labour force needs, Mr. Speaker, 
good to make sure that they’re comfortable here and that they 
create those mortgage-paying jobs. We understand that on this 
side of the Assembly. 

But what really amazes me, Mr. Speaker, is how poorly the 
Saskatchewan Party has managed the great, robust finances of 
this province when they took over. Right from day one, Mr. 
Speaker, right from day one they have failed this province 
miserably, and now it’s all catching up. And just to add insult to 
injury, as I mentioned, the Crown corporations are under attack 
by them, Mr. Speaker. They put us in deficit: 23 billion by the 
year 2020. And how could a million people sustain that kind of 
debt? 
 
But to add insult to injury, Mr. Speaker, they created the P3 
accounts where we will be paying interest and penalties and 
payments to out-of-country companies for years and years and 
years and years and years to come. And the worst part is, Mr. 
Speaker, the worst part is that 90 per cent of them will be gone 
when those bills come due. But I think the people of 
Saskatchewan will remember the Saskatchewan Party with 
disdain because they had the opportunity and they really, quite 
frankly, squandered, squandered that opportunity to build a 
brave, new future for our province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would point out there was a mention of 
Bill 40. There was a mention of Bill 40 where Bill 40 talked 
about selling off the Crowns such as SGI. Forty-nine per cent 
they wanted to sell, you know. And imagine, Mr. Speaker. I 
understand that a few members were car dealership owners 
before and imagine you telling a guy, give us a price for this 
car; you’ll own 49 per cent. I wonder how many cars they 
would have sold in their time, Mr. Speaker. That’s the sad 
realities. Bill 40 was flawed in its intent. It was flawed even to 
meet their own philosophical beliefs, Mr. Speaker, and yet they 
all spoke up. They all spoke up, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Government House Leader on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Make a point of order. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — You’ve made a previous ruling on 
speeches on second readings that the bill should be, that’s on 
the order paper should be discussed. This is the time to discuss 
that bill, not to make a leadership race speech. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve been listening 
closely to the member’s speech and although there have been 
diversions, I think that his comments have been pertinent to the 
bill that is before us. And there’s some latitude with regard to 
his comments and where his thoughts go. So I would submit 
that to the Speaker for consideration. 
 
The Speaker: — I also was listening carefully to the speech 
from the member from Athabasca. I do not take the point of 
order well taken, but I do caution the member once again that it 
needs to . . . Your narrative has to tie somewhat back to the bill 
in the end. Our tradition in this Assembly is to give a fair bit of 
latitude, but today has been stretched very, very thin. So could 
you please continue on with your speech with due diligence to 
tie it back to the bill under debate. I recognize the member from 



2872 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2017 

Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I will try 
and keep my comments directed and pointed at Bill 88, and I 
thank you for your tolerance for the member from Athabasca, 
Mr. Speaker.  
 
I think it’s important to note that when you talk about a Crown 
corporation of this sort, Crowns are very valuable and very 
important to our province of Saskatchewan. People love the 
Saskatchewan Crowns, and SGI is a great Crown. It’s one of the 
Crowns that is what people would make reference to as a jewel 
in the family of Crowns owned by the people of Saskatchewan. 
And these were Crowns that were built through hard work and, 
Mr. Speaker, over time they have served Saskatchewan very, 
very, very well. And this is the reason why I think it’s important 
to draw the connect between how the bill impacts a certain 
Crown, and generally overall how the other Crowns may be 
impacted by the actions of the current shareholder in trust called 
the Saskatchewan Party government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I appreciate that there is a lot of latitude given and afforded 
in this particular Assembly, but as it pertains to the Crowns, as 
this bill talks about the Crowns, it’s important to, as best as I 
possibly can, to try and draw the reference to all our Crowns 
and how they have been attacked by the current government and 
how they have been weakened by the current government and 
how they have changed their position from day to day. And, 
Mr. Speaker, it really, really to me . . . I think the connection 
that the confidence in how the Saskatchewan Party is handling 
our Crowns is something that is deep in question throughout the 
province and that there is reference to how the Crowns are 
impacted, in my statements, as it pertains to Bill 88. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think if we look at some of the issues 
around SGI itself, there’s a robust amount of people that are 
working within SGI at one time. We’re seeing further cuts to 
the Saskatchewan Government Insurance service, Mr. Speaker, 
and we’re also seeing a weakening of some of the aggressive 
and necessary steps that SGI was taking. Mr. Speaker, as you 
can recall many years ago, the Saskatchewan Party while they 
were in opposition, they talked about Sask first, Mr. Speaker. 
They talked about Sask first, and they started getting SGI and 
other opportunities that the Crowns had.  
 
The Crowns were going to expand. They had other options they 
were looking at to try and build a stronger, country-wide base, 
Mr. Speaker. And along come the Saskatchewan Party saying, 
oh how about Saskatchewan first. That was their philosophy, 
Mr. Speaker. But they indicated that they are supposed to be a 
great business-minded party. Well, Mr. Speaker, if a business 
doesn’t expand their services and seek other markets 
aggressively, it really becomes problematic for these Crowns. 
And that’s exactly what the Sask Party did with our Crowns. 
They confined them within the province of Saskatchewan. They 
divested all kinds of opportunities. And they made money to 
boot, Mr. Speaker. They divested a lot of opportunities that we 
were investing in and sharing in. And some of the examples I 
would use would be in Atlantic Canada, Mr. Speaker, where 
actually our expertise was necessary there and our services and 
our style. 
 
And the Crowns were really moving in the right direction, Mr. 

Speaker, but along came the Saskatchewan Party. Even though 
they’re expanding, creating jobs, making money, doing the right 
thing for the people of Saskatchewan and paying us dividends 
every year, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party still 
philosophically didn’t like them, and they tried to sell them. 
And the first thing they did was to obviously constrain their 
opportunity to build a different or a bigger and broader 
customer base. And that’s when they come along and they put 
this whole Saskatchewan-first concept in front of people of the 
province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they played on the fact that Saskatchewan 
was investing in other areas when we needed services at home, 
Mr. Speaker. They did not tell the people of Saskatchewan the 
reason why the Crowns were allowed to expand is that it builds 
a broader base of customers, and it retains control by SaskTel, 
SaskPower, SaskEnergy, Mr. Speaker, here in the city and here 
in the province. And there was a lot of good thought behind 
how you would invest from the Crown perspective, how you 
would invest in other areas of the province to strengthen our 
Crowns here at home, to generate more revenues so you’re not 
counting on tax dollars from the people of Saskatchewan to 
sustain operations within government. 
 
But the Sask Party continued doing what they are doing. They 
are using the argument Saskatchewan first, and some people 
thought they’re doing the right thing, Mr. Speaker. But years 
later they’re finding out that here all the time, the Saskatchewan 
Party philosophically — no matter what kind of sense the 
ownership of the Crowns made to the people of Saskatchewan 
— philosophically the Saskatchewan Party did not believe in 
them, and that’s why they began dismantling them. They sold 
off three so far, and now they’re looking at others. 
 
[15:30] 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Bill 40 was just a small foray into what they 
want to do. They’ll be back with the full intent of selling our 
Crowns, and we got to stop them, Mr. Speaker. Every man, 
woman, and child in this province can do so. Every voter can do 
so by going to that polling station and sending the Sask Party a 
very resounding message that no, our Crowns are not for sale. 
They’re not for sale. And we didn’t elect you to confer great 
powers on you to avoid legislator’s oversight on some of these 
bills and begin to make rules and regulations in the backrooms 
of your offices. All this must come to the light of the people of 
Saskatchewan because it impacts farmers. It impacts the 
ranchers. It impacts rural Saskatchewan. It impacts the tax base 
that many of our agricultural communities have contributed to 
over the years. It impacts northern Saskatchewan. It impacts 
urban Saskatchewan. So all the impacts are profound. 
 
But I’ll tell you what, Mr. Speaker, entities like SGI, the Crown 
corporations we enjoy, they serve Saskatchewan in every 
corner. And it’s a shame that the Saskatchewan Party 
constricted and confined the growth of our Crown corporations 
to expand in other sectors, in other provinces in our country, 
Mr. Speaker, because had they been allowed to do so, I think 
our Crowns would have been very strong and position ourselves 
very well because we have professional, professional and 
dedicated employees within these Crowns, and they would have 
made sure that the Crowns were successful in other areas as 
well. 



November 8, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2873 

But like I said, it goes back to the philosophical position of the 
Sask Party. They don’t like the Crowns. So we do not trust 
them one little bit on any legislation that they propose when it 
comes to the Crown corporations, and especially, Mr. Speaker, 
what Bill 88, where the minister confers great power unto 
himself to make changes in regulation that avoids scrutiny of 
the Assembly. And that’s why I think, as par for the course, the 
Minister of SGI can do this to avoid scrutiny the same way the 
Premier has used his private emails to avoid scrutiny of those 
emails, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would tell the people of Saskatchewan that the trust in the 
Sask Party has long been gone, and it’s time to change. So on 
that note, I move that we adjourn debate of Bill 88, The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has adjourned 
debate on Bill 88. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 84 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 84 — The 
Income Tax (Business Income) Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
enter into adjourned debates on Bill No. 84, The Income Tax 
(Business Income) Amendment Act, 2017. I understand this bill 
proposes to increase the general corporate income tax rate by a 
half point to 12 per cent in January 2018 and also cancels a 
previous change to decrease the rate to 11 per cent in July 2019. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the rationales provided in the Throne 
Speech for making this change was that BC [British Columbia] 
had changed their tax rate and therefore the Sask Party decided 
to cancel their previous change. 
 
Mr. Speaker, surely this can’t be the only reason the Sask Party 
are making this change. I know, because I was on doorsteps 
with residents in Fairview this summer, residents who were 
quite upset to learn that the PST increases occurred alongside 
these tax breaks to the wealthy. To say that folks were 
frustrated to hear this news is an understatement. People were 
irate. They were ready to march in the streets, and as we know, 
some of them did. 
 
You see, Mr. Speaker, citizens of Saskatoon Fairview were 
already upset with this government’s mismanagement. We had 
just come out of a boom, so where had all this money gone? 
But, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are strong and willing 

to do their part, especially those in the middle class. Many of 
them said, well you know, we all have to pay our fair share. So 
you can imagine that the changes to the corporate income tax 
rate were of interest to these people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the public were not onside with these changes, and 
that is the reason for this cancellation. Make no mistake. People 
are frustrated, Mr. Speaker, that they are being forced to pay for 
this government’s mismanagement. PST has been added to 
kids’ clothes, restaurant meals, and even insurance. We are the 
only province charging PST on health and life insurance, Mr. 
Speaker. Seniors on a fixed income cannot afford this. Where is 
that money supposed to come from? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this bill also proposes to change the small 
business threshold from $500,000 to $600,000 as of January 
2018. Mr. Speaker, this will be beneficial to some small 
businesses, I’m sure, but there are so many small businesses 
that are not making $500,000. What is this government going to 
do to help these businesses? How is this provision creating 
jobs? $500,00 is a lot of money. I know so many small 
businesses that have not seen this type of profit. And as the 
minister indicated, small business is so vital to the health of the 
economy. 
 
I’m sure my colleagues will have much more to say about this 
bill, but with that, Mr. Speaker, I move to adjourn debates on 
Bill 84, The Income Tax (Business Income) Amendment Act. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The member has moved 
to adjourn debate. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 76 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Makowsky that Bill No. 76 — The 
Parks Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Regina Fairview.  
 
Ms. Mowat: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to rise today to 
enter into the adjourned debates on Bill 76, The Parks 
Amendment Act. I have fond memories of my visits to Pike 
Lake and Blackstrap provincial parks which are both close 
enough to Saskatoon to accommodate day trips. 
 
And I was born in Alberta. My grandparents are ranchers in the 
Southwest so we made many trips from Pincher Creek to 
Saskatoon growing up, and we would always stop at Sask 
Landing Provincial Park as a rest stop along the way. It’s a 
beautiful place to stretch your legs and have a sandwich that 
might be a little warm out of the car. 
 
Many of my memories growing up are tied to parks in this 
province, and I imagine the same is true for other members in 
this Assembly. And my partner Grayson and I had an elaborate 
driving trip planned for this summer where we wanted to take in 
more of the parks in this province and across Western Canada, 



2874 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2017 

but we ended up in a by-election so that trip had to be cancelled 
or, I guess, postponed unfortunately. 
 
We know that our parks are important to Saskatchewan people, 
so introducing a new park is often something we get very 
excited about. As someone who enjoys the scenery and the 
outdoors, I can say that when I heard about the prospect of a 
new park in our province, I was excited. However, Mr. Speaker, 
the folks in this Chamber have a significant responsibility that 
is associated with this new park, and we need to take that 
seriously before we start celebrating. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand there are a number of housekeeping 
matters in this bill that definitely make sense to me. Creating 
gender-neutral language in a bill is logical, as is making the 
language consistent with definitions provided in The Forest 
Resources Management Act, amending cross-referenced 
sections of the Act, and clarifying the intent behind phrasing. 
These housekeeping changes seem prudent. 
 
Both my colleagues from Athabasca and Saskatoon Centre have 
had an opportunity to engage in some discussions about this bill 
and both have identified a concern with the government’s duty 
to consult as it relates to designating new parklands. I intend to 
highlight these concerns as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on Monday when the minister was delivering 
second reading on this bill, he described five existing 
recreational sites that would be included in the new park, 
including the Woody River block and the McBride Lake block 
of the proposed new park located in the Porcupine Hills area of 
Saskatchewan. And from the pictures I have seen of these sites, 
Mr. Speaker, they look like gorgeous places. 
 
I appreciate that the minister identified that some traditional 
activities on the land will continue, including hunting and 
snowmobiling. 
 
In my view, Mr. Speaker, it is essentially important that we 
keep First Nations traditions alive in the park and not limit 
access to the park. We should be careful that we are setting up a 
system where we’re not infringing on hunting and fishing rights 
of indigenous peoples. And I would like to hear more from the 
minister on how access and hunting rights will be monitored. 
 
The minister also talked about how this new bill proposes to 
add a statute of limitations on prosecutions within the Act. 
Currently it is six months, and I understand the argument is that 
that’s too short to investigate. This proposed amendment allows 
up to two years. I understand the minister was acting on advice 
of the Justice minister in this case, but it seems curious, Mr. 
Speaker, that in one breath the minister is saying the access to 
traditional activities will be granted, and on the other hand we 
are reading an amendment about prosecutions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister also discussed changing the park boundary 
descriptions for several areas, proposing minor exclusions to 
parks, including Candle Lake and Douglas Provincial Park. 
Now, this appears to be a housekeeping-type amendment where 
we know it would be more costly and time-consuming to survey 
all the parks so we are addressing known inconsistencies to 
park boundaries. That sounds logical provided it does not have 
unintended consequences. 

Yesterday my colleague from Saskatoon Centre raised some 
quite valid concerns about the assumptions of this bill, and I 
would like to highlight and have a chance to reflect on some of 
them. There is certainly an important role that the parks play in 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we are talking about an area of 
Saskatchewan that is traditionally used by indigenous peoples 
in our province, and I understand for herb gathering, and there’s 
a burial site included on the land as well. 
 
Considering the rich history of indigenous peoples in this 
particular park, there is cause for some concern here. We need 
to respect as many stakeholders as possible and have 
engagement from all parties. As my colleague from Athabasca 
identified, the indigenous peoples living in these areas are just 
as important as anyone else in this province. The fact that this 
has to be said in 2017 is disappointing to me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
According to a CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] 
article from seven days ago, Key First Nation has concerns with 
this new provincial park and have called for the protection of 
graves, traplines, and medicinal plants. Mr. Speaker, our 
government should not be pushing First Nations into believing 
that it’s going to happen anyway. Members from Key First 
Nation have expressed concerns about how park designation 
will change use of the land, leading to an influx of tourists. It’s 
disappointing that this interview happened right out in the 
rotunda on the day when our visitors from Key First Nations 
were present in the gallery when this bill was being introduced. 
When they were introduced, Mr. Speaker, it left me with the 
impression that the representatives from Key were on board 
with this decision. But that does not seem to be the case. 
 
And it’s easy for the minister to say that consultations will 
continue with community leaders, but if they haven’t come to 
an agreement after starting out consultations in 2011, that 
leaves me a little suspect that this is going to occur now, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s one thing to say consultations have been ongoing 
for six years, Mr. Speaker, but I’m curious about how many 
meetings took place during that time. 
 
There’s a bill in second reading right now, Mr. Speaker. This is 
a bill we are debating on. That doesn’t exactly send the message 
that the Sask Party is willing to go back to the drawing board on 
this. We saw evidence of the government failing to adequately 
consult with local indigenous groups when the Great Blue 
Heron Park was formed. 
 
It’s important that we move past this and on to a new 
opportunity for our indigenous peoples to feel heard. We have 
an opportunity here to turn that around and to set a meaningful 
precedent. In light of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission 
of Canada, we need to actively seek out and engage in 
opportunities for reconciliation. According to the TRC [Truth 
and Reconciliation Commission], section 43 under 
“Reconciliation,” it states: 
 

We call upon federal, provincial, territorial, and municipal 
governments to fully adopt and implement the United 
Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples 
as the framework for reconciliation. 

 
In section 47, Mr. Speaker, it states: 
 



November 8, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2875 

We call upon [all] federal, provincial, territorial, and 
municipal governments to repudiate concepts used to 
justify European sovereignty over Indigenous peoples and 
lands, such as the Doctrine of Discovery and terra nullius, 
and to reform those laws, government policies, and 
litigation strategies that continue to rely on such concepts. 

 
Under UNDRIP [United Nations Declaration on the Rights of 
Indigenous Peoples], Mr. Speaker, it declares that First Peoples 
must grant “free, prior, and informed consent” for any 
development in their territory — free, prior, and informed. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, it strikes me that certainly the “prior” portion of 
this has not been honoured, given the timing of these 
consultations and where we are at in debating this bill As my 
colleague from Saskatoon Centre identified, I understand 
there’s been some consultation with indigenous groups in the 
region over the past six years, and that’s a great start. But if we 
have even the slightest inkling that we do not have full support 
of indigenous people in the area, and I think we do, we should 
be going back and engaging in meaningful consultations with 
these groups. 
 
Again I say, Mr. Speaker, we have an opportunity to get this 
right. We need to think carefully through this and fully engage 
in the duty to consult. If we are to implement UNDRIP as a 
framework for reconciliation as the TRC suggests, then I would 
argue, this is the time and this is the place. We have an 
opportunity to improve on our past and we have a 
responsibility, we have a call to action to do better this time 
around. In the days of the TRC calls to action, we have a 
responsibility to engage in meaningful action toward 
reconciliation — meaningful. 
 
I understand this park will have a temporary name. It is my 
hope that indigenous groups in the area should play an active 
role in the naming of this park. I know that it will have a 
temporary name but as my colleague from Saskatoon Centre 
pointed out, its permanent name should be an indigenous one. 
 
My colleague also identified the lost educational opportunities 
and I’d like to speak to this a little bit, and how the minister did 
not take the opportunity to talk about how this park provides an 
educational opportunity as well. This is a critical component, 
and we need to invest in education and look for ways and find 
opportunities to teach. 
 
As a former educator myself and having a partner who is a 
teacher, there is nothing like using the environment around you 
and around your students as a teaching tool. And these are the 
future guardians of this province, Mr. Speaker. It’s a chance for 
them to learn about the history of our province but also the 
ecosystems that are all around us. And it is aligned with how we 
actually learn as human beings and internalize information. 
Teaching our kids and grandkids about this province is essential 
and this is certainly a learning opportunity, and that should be 
acknowledged. 
 
I appreciate having the opportunity to weigh in on this 
important bill. Like I said, Mr. Speaker, a new park is a great 
opportunity for us to put meaningful action toward 

reconciliation and we should not take our responsibilities 
toward reconciliation lightly. I know that my fellow colleagues 
will have more to say about Bill 76. With that, Mr. Speaker, I 
move that we adjourn debate on Bill 76. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The member from 
Saskatoon Fairview has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 
76. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 77 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 77 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Superannuation Plans) Amendment 
Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 
pleased to enter the discussion, the debate on Bill No. 77, The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Superannuation Plans) Amendment 
Act, 2017. 
 
I’ll start actually by just pointing to the minister’s second 
reading speech, Mr. Speaker, as she points out that the bill is: 
 

The first amendment proposed in this bill is to amend The 
Liquor Board Superannuation Act to designate the minister 
responsible for the Act as the sole member of the Liquor 
Board Superannuation Commission, or [as she refers to it] 
the commission. The commission [itself] is responsible 
[she points out] for the administration of the Liquor Board 
superannuation plan . . . while the day-to-day 
administration of the plan is delegated to the Public 
Employees Benefits Agency, PEBA, Ministry of Finance. 

 
She points out that the plan’s been closed to new members since 
1977, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And recent numbers, just as of 
March 2017: “the Liquor Board superannuation plan has [only] 
two active members, both of whom have exceeded [their] 35 
years of service and are eligible to retire,” Mr. Speaker. So it 
isn’t a . . . And as of December 31st, 2016, there were 177 
retired employees in the plan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister points out . . . It’s always important when we look 
at legislation, who was consulted? With whom did the 
government do a review of the legislation? Those are always 
questions that we draw attention to here in the House, and when 
legislation moves into committee, that’s where that’s asked. 
 
The minister in her second reading speech points out that it was 
reviewed, that in 2012 a third party was engaged to review the 
governance of both the Liquor Board and the public service 
superannuation plans because of their decline in active 
membership and the associated work for administering the 
plans. And she points out, the minister in her second reading 
comments points out that the primary function of the plan 
currently is to pay pensions. 



2876 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2017 

The review of 2012, its key recommendation, which “. . . the 
former minister responsible for The Liquor Board 
Superannuation Act, was to designate the minister as the sole 
member of The Liquor Board Superannuation Commission 
once the plan approached zero active members.” And she points 
out that “The minister will be supported in this role by PEBA, 
who will continue to provide administrative services to the 
pension plan.” 
 
The second amendment: 
 

. . . amend The Superannuation (Supplementary 
Provisions) Act to allow the restricted retirement option . . . 
to continue until otherwise ended by a legislative 
amendment. The RRO provides a means for executive 
government and the Crown Investments Corporation to 
offer early retirement to eligible employees in corporate 
downsizing or restructuring. 

 
The minister points out that: 
 

Proceeding with the amendment does not commit the 
Government . . . to a future course of action. The RRO 
provision has been extended annually by an order in 
council since December 31st . . . [and this] amendment 
eliminates the need for an annual order in council.  
 

So the second reading speeches are always helpful in providing 
us with a sense of where the government is going. You look at 
the bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In reviewing it, you talk to 
stakeholders, you see what the minister’s interpretation of the 
bill is, and you have an opportunity later on to move into 
committee and ask questions. 
 
And I know that I have colleagues who are critics for this area 
who will ask some very thoughtful and insightful questions, and 
I know I’ll have colleagues who will weigh into the debate on 
this. But for now that is all that I have to say with respect to Bill 
No. 77, and I would like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 77. 
Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 78 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 78 — The 
Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’ll have 
a little run on me here for the next few minutes, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, as we talk about pensions and continue to talk about 
pensions in the next few bills. This particular bill, Mr. Speaker, 
does a number of things. I think some of the more mundane 

things are updates to language to ensure that it’s gender-neutral 
and modern language. 
 
I’ve said this before in the House, but I think language is really 
important and moving to gender-neutral languages is something 
that we should do in all our legislation. And there’s been many 
Acts before us in my time here where we’ve made that move. I 
know that when I used to be a reporter that . . . That was many, 
many, many years ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but when I first 
started out as a reporter I actually, when I was a much younger 
individual I never thought gender-neutral language was 
important. But as I grew older and in my education, you learn 
about how language sends a message about who is reflected, or 
who matters, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Not around gender-neutral language, but something that really 
jumps out at me about my own lived experience is I was an 
at-home mom. I was at home with my oldest daughter for the 
first few years of her life, and everyone . . . You’d tell someone 
you were an at-home mom and they’d say oh, you don’t work, 
or you’re a working . . . If you worked outside of the house you 
were considered a working mom, and if you were not in paid 
employment you weren’t considered a working mom. So I think 
when we talk about language, whether it’s gender neutrality or 
other parts of language, the way we use language matters, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. So moving to gender-neutral language is 
important. 
 
Another area, this is something very simple in this bill. The 
word “dependent” is being changed in this, when it’s being 
used, the spelling of it, to reflect it as a noun. That is being 
corrected, Mr. Speaker. I was a copy editor back in the day as 
well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so those things really matter to me as 
well. I think all of those things are important. And some of the 
more mundane things that carry on here is changes of . . . Other 
statutes that are named in the bill have changed their names 
over the years, so that’s being amended. And different 
organizations which are referred to in this bill, there is some of 
that as well. 
 
But a little bit more in terms of more of the meat of the bill. 
This is The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 
2017. So the municipal employees’ pension plan, which we 
commonly refer to M-E-P-P, or MEPP, I suppose, is a defined 
benefit pension plan administered by the Municipal Employees’ 
Pension Commission for the employees of schools, rural 
municipalities, cities, towns, colleges, villages, and libraries and 
a variety of other municipal-level employees. I’m sure we all 
know . . . have friends and family who are members of this 
plan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As of March 31st, the minister points out that there were close 
to 25,000 plan members in MEPP and 737 employers 
participating in the pension plan. The Municipal Employees’ 
Pension Plan Commission wants to continue, according to the 
minister, the financial sustainability of MEPP. And she talks 
about MEPP, the commission being in consultation with its 
actuary and plan stakeholders. The commission is seeking 
approval of the legislature to amend the plan. 
 
So again, as per my previous remarks, it’s always important in 
legislation to find out why changes are being made, who’s 
asked for them, who benefits, think about the unintended 



November 8, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2877 

consequences — all those kinds of things. So it sounds like this 
recommendation is coming from the MEPP commission, but 
those are all things that, as we go along in the debate and 
discussion of these bills, the respective critic will reach out to 
stakeholders and find out if there’s any problems or difficulties 
with these changes, or negative impacts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But just in terms of the changes that are being made here, “. . . it 
proposes to eliminate the portability of the pension benefit for 
members eligible for pension upon termination of 
employment.” The minister points out that “Moving lump sums 
of money out of the plan at retirement is a financial drain on the 
pension plan and is in contradiction to the steady stream of 
payments the plan is funded to provide [its] members in 
retirement.” 
 
The minister points out that “This amendment causes the option 
of a temporary pension to transferring members to become 
redundant.” She points out that: 
 

Consistent with the elimination of the portability of 
pension [Mr. Speaker], members who have pre-1994 
contributions in the plan will not be allowed to remove a 
portion of those pre-1994 contributions on termination or 
retirement as a partial settlement of the member’s benefit. 

 
She goes on to say that this will in turn “maintain the value of 
the pension benefit for members.” 
 
So again there’ll be some consultation just to make sure that 
folks are in agreement with this. She points out that “. . . on 
retirement or termination, members who have contributed more 
than 50 per cent of the contributions required to fund their 
pension benefit may use the excess funds to increase the value 
of their monthly pension benefit.” And then once this bill is 
passed, “. . . members will be required to move their excess 
contributions out of the pension plan within two years of their 
termination date or immediately upon their retirement. This will 
eliminate any unforeseen liability resulting from the increased 
pension.” 
 
That just made me think about a debate that’s going on right 
now. We have Sears entering bankruptcy and closing all its 
stores, Mr. Speaker, and I know that there are many employees 
across Canada who, in many occasions, have committed years 
to Sears and put their own money, their deferred payments aside 
into pensions, Mr. Speaker, and may lose access to these. 
 
There’s a debate, I know, at the national level around . . . The 
CARP or Canadian Association of Retired Persons is 
advocating making sure that those who have a pension, who’ve 
paid into pensions, are the first on the list when it comes to 
bankruptcies and any money that is regained from the sale of 
those assets. 
 
[16:00] 
 
It is a debate, because obviously there are businesses that are 
impacted as well, and one of the arguments I’ve heard is that 
some of the . . . Yes, businesses, particularly small businesses. 
You’re always concerned about the mom-and-pop shops or 
people who might be supplying to companies having 
outstanding balances that aren’t going to get paid. 

But I know one of the advocates I heard speak about pensions 
point out that, at best or at most, likely those outstanding 
accounts might be for a year, Mr. Speaker, where in fact you’ve 
got pensioners or people who’ve been counting on these 
pensions their whole life. They might have put in 20 or 25 years 
with Sears and have been counting . . . And Sears is just one 
example. We’ve got Nortel a few years ago as well. You may 
have put in your time and made plans based on your pension 
from Sears and now you may not have access to it anymore, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I would argue in the case of Sears . . . 
And I could be wrong; I’ve not looked at the numbers on this in 
terms of gender of employees. But this would be a policy on 
which you could perhaps put a gendered lens and see how it 
impacts men and women differently. 
 
Anecdotally I’m just thinking of folks that I know, or growing 
up going through Sears, and many of the staff have been 
women. But I’m not sure; I don’t have any numbers to quantify 
that. But it’s always good to put a gendered lens on policy, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, to see . . . because policy impacts men and 
women differently in many cases, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So that 
piece around eliminating any unforeseen liability resulting from 
the increased pension reminded me of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister also pointed out that there’s amendments of a 
more administrative nature in this bill as well. She points out 
again that the employee pension Act requires a review of the 
composition of the commission every five years. She points out 
that a review was conducted in 2015 and a report was submitted 
to the then minister of Finance in 2016 and that minister 
accepted and agreed to follow through on the recommendation 
contained in the report. And one of those recommendations was 
that the election of a chairperson and the vice-chairperson for 
the Municipal Employees’ Pension Commission shall be for a 
term of two years instead of one year. 
 
It was also recommended, one of the other recommendations is 
that the composition of the commission increase by two 
members. One member is to be appointed by employers who 
employ firefighters and police officers, and the other is to be 
appointed by the Saskatchewan locals of the Canadian Union of 
Public Employees that represent MEPP [municipal employees’ 
pension plan] members. I think always making sure that you’ve 
got a broad range of representation is a good thing, Mr. 
Speaker, but I know that the critic will be reaching out to folks 
to find out more in terms of the feeling in the community about 
these changes. 
 
The minister points out that these amendments to the 
composition of the commission serve to ensure more equitable 
representation for all stakeholders and will enhance the 
continuity of the commission’s operations from one year to the 
next. She also points out that the bill contains amendments to 
enhance the administration of the plan. One amendment is 
intended, she says, to clarify the definition of full-time hours for 
all members of the plan. She points out that besides facilitating 
consistent interpretation of full-time hours, salary, and service 
for members, this particular amendment also serves to simplify 
reporting to the plan for employers. 
 
And another amendment requires all employers to remit 
contributions to MEPP within 15 days after the end of a pay 
period, and she points out that this will provide a more 



2878 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2017 

equitable basis for the timely remittance of contributions by all 
employers. 
 
So again, Mr. Speaker, with respect to Bill No. 78, The 
Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, as I said there 
is 25,000 plan members, 737 employers participating, so it does 
affect a good chunk of folks, Mr. Speaker. And so it’ll be 
important to have those conversations and find out how those 
impacted by these changes feel, whether or not this is a good 
thing or a bad thing. And we’ll also have an opportunity to chat 
about this in committee. 
 
But with that, for the moment, I would like to move to adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 78, The Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Riversdale has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 78. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 79 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 79 — The 
Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s me again. I’m 
pleased again to enter into the debate, this time on Bill No. 79, 
The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2017. 
There are six amendments in this bill, Mr. Speaker, so I guess 
it’s important to talk a little bit about the public employees 
pension plan, also known as PEPP, which we’re all members in 
. . . of which we’re all members here in the House, Mr. Speaker. 
But there are many other people who are as well. 
 
The plan was established in 1977 and it provides a means of 
saving for retirement and a means of receiving a retirement 
income for its membership. And included in its membership, as 
I said, are members of the Legislative Assembly, but the 
employees of executive government, government agencies, 
Crown corporations, and other employers. And recent numbers, 
Mr. Speaker, point out that there are close to 65,000 members 
of PEPP and 146 employers. 
 
And there are six amendments here that . . . Right now, Mr. 
Speaker, currently members must wait one year to become 
vested in PEPP, so locking in. When a member locks in that 
means that the member’s account balance must be used to 
provide a retirement income. Currently locking in happens at 
one year, but this particular amendment will mean that you’re 
vested and locked in when you are first enrolled in PEPP. 
 
There are other amendments here. One that provides that the 
spouse of PEPP members with . . . It provides the spouse of 
PEPP members with additional rights. If a member happens to 

die, the amendment clarifies that the spouse of a deceased 
member may keep any amount left to him or her in PEPP. And 
with respect to the amount the spouse, with this amendment, 
would have the same rights as any other non-working member 
of PEPP. And in case of a breakdown in a spousal relationship, 
the amendment also permits the spouse or ex-spouse of a 
member to keep in PEPP any amount resulting from a division 
of the member’s account balance. With respect to that amount, 
the spouse or ex-spouse would have the same rights as any 
other non-working member of PEPP. 
 
Just having been someone who has been on . . . who has had a 
divorce, Mr. Speaker, and has been in that position of 
negotiating pensions, I think that that . . . I’d like to have 
conversations with other folks about that for sure, but I know 
from my own experience, I had to . . . My previous husband had 
to withdraw money from his pension and I had to put it with a 
financial adviser into something. And I can see the benefits of 
being able to stay in the same pension plan and be part of a 
body that has 65,000 members, Mr. Deputy . . . Mr. Speaker. 
Sorry. There’s been a few of you in the Chair here today. So 
that, I think, sounds like some positive amendments there but I 
know our critic will be reaching out and talking to folks. 
 
Another amendment proposes removing a 15-day waiting 
period for the unlocking of voluntary contributions on 
termination of employment. And the minister points out with 
respect to the authority of the Public Employees Pension Board, 
which is the trustee of PEPP and the body responsible for 
administering The Public Employees Pension Plan Act, the 
amendments clarify that the board may make policy to 
administer PEPP with respect to out-of-province members and 
their monies, which is subject to the laws of other provinces. 
 
As I’ve talked about in the other bills, and usually do in this 
House, that you always want to know who is recommending 
changes and why they’re being recommended and who they 
impact and what those people who are impacted, how they feel 
about them. The minister in her second reading speech says that 
these amendments have been proposed on the recommendation 
of the Public Employees Pension Board. So that’s positive, Mr. 
Speaker, but it’s always good to talk to as many people as 
possible who are impacted to find out how folks feel about 
particular legislation and what the impacts might be. 
 
A final amendment the minister points out is a purely 
administrative amendment and updates the Act to reflect the 
new name of the Communications, Energy and Paperworkers 
Union, or CEP, which is now known as Unifor. Unifor is one of 
the organizations that appoints a member to the board. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that is all the comments that I have for now. I 
know when eventually this bill moves to committee, the critic 
will have some questions, and I know that I’ll have colleagues 
who have lots of comments on this bill as well. So with that I’d 
like to move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 79. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Riversdale has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 79. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



November 8, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2879 

The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 80 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 80 — The 
Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment Act, 2017 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to be part 
of the debate today on Bill No. 80, The Municipal Financing 
Corporation Amendment Act, 2017. There are a few changes in 
this Act, Mr. Speaker. This is An Act to amend The Municipal 
Financing Corporation Act. That is a mouthful. 
 
The changes are important, the minister argues, “. . . to a 
growing province with growing municipalities in need of key 
infrastructure . . .” Definitely municipalities need support and 
need to address infrastructure issues. 
 
I remember a few years ago when our caucus sat down with 
folks in P.A. [Prince Albert], it’s quite shocking . . . Actually I 
think lots of people don’t realize the state . . . We drive on 
roads, and I think we get a sense of that, but we don’t always 
know what’s going on with some of the other infrastructure. I 
was shocked to hear when we were in P.A. that some of the 
pipes, actually the only way they’re staying intact and not 
closing in on themselves is because of water pressure, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I know across Canada and here in Saskatchewan that 
infrastructure is a huge issue, and the pressures . . . Having 
spoken to municipal leaders in the past, I know that they really 
would look forward to having a specific fund on capital 
infrastructure, Mr. Speaker, which there is none. It is a huge 
issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the changes, the first change in the Act, it “. . . repeals 
the Municipal Financing Corporation of Saskatchewan’s 
30-year borrowing limit which is a provision [the minister 
points out] that dates back to the 1970s.” She goes on to say 
that: 
 

Capital markets have evolved since then to permit 
borrowing for the longer, more cost-effective terms. 
Repealing the 30-year limit would put MFC in line with 
most other Crown corporations which are subject to a 
40-year limit in The Crown Corporations Act. 

 
So I know that our critic responsible for municipal issues will 
be reaching out to all the folks that she knows and has 
relationships with to find out if this borrowing from . . . moving 
the bar from 30-year borrowing to 40-year is what 
municipalities want and need, and what other concerns they 
may have. 
 
The second change is to increase the Municipal Financing 
Corporation’s debt limit from 350 million to 500 million. So 
that’s a 150 million increase. It was set at 250 million in the 
’70s, and it was raised to 350 million in 2010. So that was just 

seven years ago that we raised that limit. So I think that we 
need to think about the pressures to bear on our municipalities, 
as I mentioned a little bit earlier. So we’re creating a ceiling 
where they can take on more debt, and obviously they have 
some serious infrastructure needs, but I would argue that 
perhaps we should be looking to the province to better support 
some of those infrastructure needs. 
 
The minister argues that “It is prudent to increase the limit once 
again to ensure that this demand continues to be met and no one 
is turned away.” But I’m not sure. And this will be all part of 
the consultation process with the municipal leaders, if that is the 
best way to go or if they prefer to have a capital fund from the 
province, Mr. Speaker. But I do know that there will be 
questions in committee with respect to Bill No. 80, The 
Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment Act, and our 
critic will do her due diligence in reaching out to folks, as will 
other members. 
 
But with that for the moment, I would like to move to adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 80. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Riversdale has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill 80. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 81 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 81 — The 
Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And as 
always, it’s a pleasure to enter into debate on these bills as 
they’re introduced in the House. This is my first time wading 
into debate this fall in this part of the session, and feeling a little 
bit rusty. But we’ll see how it goes, Mr. Speaker, and hopefully 
we’ll be able to put something on the record that is of some 
assistance maybe. We’ll see. 
 
[16:15] 
 
Anyways the minister introduced the bill here a couple days ago 
and, as he indicated in his comments in the second reading 
speech, there are a number of changes to The Traffic Safety Act. 
And the large part of his speech deals with the changes of the 
blood alcohol content rules and vehicle suspension rules as 
well. The penalties are being increased quite significantly, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and I think that’s in line with 
recommendations made a couple years ago when we had a 
special committee set up to look at this issue. 
 
I think about drinking and driving in Saskatchewan and the fact 
that we have such a significant number of fatalities associated 
with drinking and driving, and certainly at least one of, if not 



2880 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2017 

the highest rate in Canada. And obviously drinking and driving 
is a concern and gives rise for legislative intervention so that 
these horrible fatalities don’t occur again and again. 
 
I think back and I was reading some information, thanks to the 
library staff, just before I came into the House here about the 
trends. And certainly impaired driving trends, I think, are 
starting to shift downward across Canada. Sadly, not here in 
Saskatchewan, and you have to think about why that is. And I 
reflected a little bit on my growing up in a small town in 
Saskatchewan and, you know, living on the farms the vehicle is 
your licence to freedom. I got my driver’s licence the day after I 
turned 16 just because they didn’t have any tests on the day I 
turned 16. So I had to wait one day before I got my driver’s 
licence, ad that was freedom. 
 
And certainly for anyone growing up in small towns in my 
generation, in the ’70s and early ’80s, there was a culture of 
acceptance that if you wanted to get home from a party, you had 
to drive. And the idea of a designated driver certainly never 
came into the parlance when I was a teenager. And it was years 
later, I think, when we started seeing concerted efforts to 
encourage that shift in the culture. 
 
And I think what brings me hope, Mr. Speaker, is that I have a 
21-year-old son who takes the whole concept of DD, or 
designated driver, very, very seriously. And his friends, when 
they plan an evening out, he very consciously makes the 
decision if he’s going to be the designated driver or not. And 
they are always very definite about making sure somebody has 
that role for the evening. So I’m kind of proud of his generation 
and the fact that they have learned, and there is a culture within 
his peer group that a DD is an important part of any evening out 
where alcohol is involved. 
 
So I know that there’s a lot of work to be done, but I do have 
hope that younger generations really understand that and 
appreciate the role that a DD plays. Now he’s a city kid; I was a 
farm kid. So I don’t know if the reality is the same in smaller 
communities or farming communities and would defer to 
people in my hometown to find out whether that’s still the case 
or not. 
 
But I think of the times when . . . I remember one time getting 
into a vehicle at the end of a night — a party in Gravelbourg, 
had to get home to Lafleche — and the only ride was someone 
who was incredibly inebriated. And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve never 
prayed so hard as I did that night and very easily could not have 
made it home. And I still think of that night often when I think 
about the situations you get into when you don’t have a DD or 
somebody that’s not inebriated. 
 
I think of the number of people I know who were killed in 
drunk driving accidents. When I grew up, it was kind of a 
theme almost at grad, where there would be these grad parties 
and then someone would end up in a serious accident, often a 
fatal accident. So that started the whole idea of a safe grad. 
 
So we have seen changes, and I think the proposals that are in 
this bill really move that along a little bit, increasing the 
severity of the consequences if you are apprehended while 
under the influence. And I think those changes will send that 
message and further reinforce the message of how dangerous 

drunk driving is, how dangerous it is not only for the people 
driving the car of course, but for the people that they could 
injure and kill when they are drunk and in control . . . or driving 
a vehicle I’d say, not necessarily in control of it. 
 
So I know a lot of my colleagues will want to speak to this as 
well and these aspects of the bill. There is one part of this bill I 
find really fascinating and a little bit concerning, Mr. Speaker, 
and that is the removal or elimination of the operating authority 
certificates that are issued by the Highway Traffic Board. Now 
the reason that’s concerning is because the minister seems to 
suggest that these were simply rubber-stamp processes. So I just 
want to review a little bit what these certificates are, and then 
maybe it may cause some concern for the public and certainly, I 
think, for members if we take away the requirement for these 
certificates. 
 
Now what the minister said was that “Operating authority 
certificates are required for transporting passengers for hire . . .” 
Now as you know, Mr. Speaker, this government just recently 
privatized STC, and part of that means that there are now 
private companies . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . They get all 
wound up about winding down, Mr. Speaker, but the truth is 
they sold it off and there are private companies taking its place. 
So it sounds like, looks like, smells like privatization no matter 
how you characterize it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So I’m going to 
comfortably use the term privatization when it comes to STC. 
 
So they go on to say that “Operating authority certificates are 
required for transporting passengers for hire, for example, by 
limos and chartered buses.” And certainly it’s for more than that 
when you look at the actual certificate. 
 
He goes on to tell us that taxis don’t require these certificates 
because they are regulated by a municipality. So already we 
have the responsibility for safety and insurance and all those 
things being covered through the municipalities for taxis. 
“Operating authority certificates [he goes on to say] were 
intended to outline specific requirements of the certificate 
holder regarding routes, insurance, rates, background checks, 
and more.” 
 
Now that sounds like pretty important stuff, Mr. Speaker, when 
you think about it. If someone’s going to be operating a vehicle, 
carrying passengers for hire, you kind of think that maybe 
routes, insurance, rates, background checks are kind of 
important things when the members of the public are getting 
into these vehicles, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now what he tells us, and this is something that came out very 
clearly in June of this year, “Over time the Highway Traffic 
Board has been issuing them in a much more general way, and 
they have almost evolved into a rubber stamp.” So rather than 
making sure the Highway Traffic Board takes these processes 
seriously, what does he do? Well this is what he says, Mr. 
Speaker: “Thus it makes sense to deregulate this process.” 
 
Well that is an interesting solution to a problem, Mr. Speaker, 
when we’re obviously opening up to privatization public 
transportation of passengers. And what is he doing? He’s 
deregulating these certificates that were required for these 
entities to be able to carry the public. And I think this just 
highlights for us a number of the concerns that have been 



November 8, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2881 

raised, not only on this side of the House, but by many, many 
people in the public about what’s going to replace STC and 
fulfill the role that STC played here in the province. 
 
Now I think it’s important for us to take a little look here at 
what does this certificate look like, so I printed one off. There’s 
a fairly lengthy application form, and so I just want to go 
through that a little bit with you, Mr. Speaker, because this is 
what’s not going to be happening now. 
 
And he says that “SGI will strengthen other regulations as 
required to ensure there is sufficient oversight regarding safety 
requirements.” He has given us no idea what SGI is going to be 
doing here, and without that kind of reassurance I think we have 
a very serious public policy gap here, Mr. Speaker, and I think 
it’s cause for alarm. 
 
So if you look at the application for Saskatchewan operating 
authority certificate, who should apply? That’s the very first 
question on the form: “Who should apply for a Saskatchewan 
operating authority certificate?” The answer is: 
 

All persons operating commercial or business use vehicles: 
 

Based in Saskatchewan . . . for the purposes of 
transporting passengers for-hire within or outside of 
Saskatchewan. 

 
So obviously anyone who’s transporting people should be 
getting one of these certificates. I think that’s pretty 
straightforward. There’s a fee and there’s some other 
requirements. 
 
So here’s the application itself. You fill it out. There’s a form. 
Here’s who you mail it to. You put down your name and 
address, your corporate information, and then we get into some 
of the requirements that you need. So first of all you need to 
provide a certificate of incorporation. That is a good thing I 
think, Mr. Speaker, to know that people who are driving people 
for hire actually are incorporated because that provides us 
protections under the corporations Act. 
 
There’s other things that they have to have, things like there’s 
information for sales and motor fuel tax, single-trip registration 
permits, pro-rate registration, which I don’t even know what 
that is but there’s some sort of pro-rate registration through 
SGI. But this is something I think that’s really, really important 
for us as we set foot into these privatized buses, and that is 
insurance. In order to get the certificate you need to have 
insurance. 
 

Saskatchewan regulations require all operating authority 
holders to maintain a minimum of insurance coverage as 
outlined in the Motor Carriage Conditions of Carriage 
Regulations. 

 
So if we get rid of the certificate, how are we going to know? 
How does the public have the assurance that their privatized bus 
service is in fact insured properly? And there’s all kinds of 
requirements here on this insurance. 
 

An owner of a commercial vehicle shall not engage in the 
transportation of passengers unless that person maintains, 

on each commercial vehicle in respect of any one accident, 
insurance against liability resulting from bodily injury to, 
or the death of one or more persons and loss of, or damage 
to the property of others, other than cargo, in the amount 
of at least: 
 
$1,000,000 in the case of a vehicle with a seating capacity 
of 15 or less used to transport passengers for 
compensation. 
 
$3,000,000 in the case of a vehicle with a seating capacity 
of 16 or more used to transport passengers for 
compensation. 

 
And there’s a form. “The Saskatchewan insurance certificate 
form C1-1, must be completed by your insurer(s) and filed 
with the Highway Traffic Board prior to an operating authority 
certificate being issued.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I think of all the people who are now 
turning to these private companies for their transportation 
requirements — these are people with cancer; these are seniors 
going to visit their grandchildren; these are people with all 
kinds of medical issues that need to get to the city to see their 
doctor. And I think in most cases from Regina to Saskatoon 
because there certainly aren’t a lot of routes that have been 
approved. They can know when they get on that vehicle that 
there’s insurance and that somebody in the government, 
somebody has taken the regulatory oversight to ensure that 
those people — anyone, somebody, anyone has ensured that the 
insurance is in place. 
 
Kind of important, Mr. Speaker. And I think unless the minister 
has ways to make sure that these private buses are being 
overseen, I don’t know what on earth the Highway Traffic 
Board is supposed to be doing. Unless they just like showing up 
for meetings or something. I don’t know, Mr. Speaker. What is 
the role of the Highway Traffic Board if it isn’t to ensure that 
public carriers are properly insured? 
 
What else do we have in this form, Mr. Speaker? All kinds of 
things: safety fitness rating, so they have to fill out these 
sections if they plan to have drivers other than themselves. 
Qualified driver selection. I kind of like that. It’s kind of a good 
idea to have drivers that are qualified. 
 
And how do we find out how they’ve been selected? Well you 
have to answer these questions: did you get a driver abstract? 
Did you examine the driver’s licence for the class and 
restrictions? Did you road-test the driver before hiring? Did you 
contact their previous employer? Mr. Speaker, these are all 
important aspects of ensuring that the drivers, these private bus, 
the privatized buses have in place. And I would think that is 
something in a public safety issue that we would want to 
ensure. 
 
Next question: driver performance. So we want to know: 
 

Do you have a system to obtain and review driver 
abstracts on an annual basis? 
 
Do you have a system for ensuring compliance with Hours 
of Service Regulations? 



2882 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2017 

You don’t want your bus driver to put in a 16-hour day, and 
you’re the one that’s getting on the bus at the end of the day, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

Do you have a system for ensuring compliance with Trip 
Inspection Regulation? 
 
. . . Do you systematically review accidents, moving 
violation, and criminal code offenses reported by your 
drivers? 
 

I think those are important. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, here’s something that maybe we don’t need, 
but vehicle safety, I think it’s kind of important. 
 

Do you have a vehicle preventative maintenance program? 
 
Do you have a system for ensuring compliance with 
mandatory Periodic Vehicle Inspection Regulation . . . 

 
Which program best describes your mandatory vehicle 
inspection program — self-certifying, improved inspection, or 
other? 
 
[16:30] 
 
Other things they have to fill out, Mr. Speaker. Operational 
safety: do you provide training to your drivers for hours of 
service, trip inspection, first aid, air brakes? 
 
Safety compliance: 
 

If you have a company representative responsible for 
promoting safety, please provide . . . [their name]. 

 
Do you have a . . . method for self-evaluating compliance 
with all the standards in the National Safety Code? 

 
I feel like if somebody filled this out, that I would have 
confidence in them if they had all these things in place, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Equipment and safety: you have to provide a list of all the 
vehicles in your fleet, where will they be stored; what’s the 
drivers’ names; give your drivers’ names and their PIC 
numbers. Description of service: if it’s a charter service, where 
are you going to pick people up; if it’s a scheduled service, 
what routes do you plan to operate? 
 
And number 9 it’s: include a current copy of your business 
plan, financial documentation, and operating plan. Again this 
gives us the assurance that these are reliable companies that 
aren’t fly by night, that aren’t going to put people at risk, that 
will have the proper training to know what happens with safety, 
with health emergencies — they’ll have first aid training — all 
of those things that reassure the public that this is a company 
that’s been properly vetted by the Highway Traffic Board. 
 
And then finally there is a certification, and this is where the 
owner of this company has to commit in writing “to meet safety 
fitness requirements under the laws of Canada and the Province 
of Saskatchewan; to comply with highway safety laws; and to 

know required safety standards, practices, and procedures in 
each jurisdiction to which my company or I will operate.” And 
they put their name there, they put it in print, and they sign and 
they assure us that this is what they are committed to. 
 
So I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, what happened, but somehow 
along the line the Highway Traffic Board apparently was 
rubber-stamping these applications. Now I don’t think, with the 
presence of a public transportation company like the STC, that 
there were a lot of people making applications for these 
operating certificates. But we do know that once STC was 
privatized, there was actually a number of hearings and a 
number of businesses that applied for these certificates. 
 
Even in June there were some stories on the CBC about 11 
businesses had applied for these certificates and there were 
hearings. And the people who were concerned about the demise 
of the STC and the privatization of STC actually attended and 
wanted to understand the process and understand who were 
these businesses that were going to be taking the place of our 
public transportation system, one that we had confidence in, one 
that we relied on, one that we knew the drivers would be trained 
properly and all those things that are in this business operating 
authority certificate. 
 
So there were several that applied, I think 11. Of those, I 
believe only two were Saskatchewan companies. The rest were 
from out of province. And only two of those were offering 
similar services as the STC, so it really makes you wonder how 
again this government could have seen fit to get rid of our 
public transportation company in the way it did. 
 
And some of the concerns that were raised is one of the 
companies that applied for this operating certificate was a 
flooring company, and there was concerns raised that if the 
board gives a transportation licence to a flooring company, that 
almost makes a joke of the Highway Traffic Board. That was 
one of the concerns raised by some members of the public. 
 
Concerns that were raised about some of these people applying 
for the operating certificates, safety — major concern — cost of 
service and accommodation for vulnerable passengers including 
cancer patients and people with disabilities. STC buses were 
equipped with cameras and a Zonar safety system which 
allowed drivers to easily connect with ground transportation, 
and police tracked the speed of the bus, the hours the driver 
spent behind the wheel, and maintenance issues. And also STC 
drivers were trained to de-escalate dangerous situations and 
they had exemplary safety standards. 
 
And the call was that these new companies should have the 
same standards. And other people pointed out that the law under 
our public transportation system looked after all of those things. 
And now with these new companies coming in, there’s no way 
of knowing how they’re going to take care of all those things, 
and how. And certainly, I think it’s reasonable for members of 
the public to ask for more information. Of course they were 
denied. They weren’t able to see the business plans of these 
applicants because they were deemed to be confidential. And 
unfortunately because they couldn’t see them, then a lot of their 
concerns were not able to be addressed at the hearing, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 



November 8, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2883 

So it’s just really puzzling and disappointing that, rather than 
beefing this up for companies and ensuring that the public is 
protected, that our minister is now deciding just to dispose of 
the requirement for an operating authority certificate. I think 
this is something that raises a lot of flags and perhaps a few 
alarms, Mr. Speaker. He provided no explanation in his second 
reading speech as to how the Highway Traffic Board or other 
authorities are going to look after these new applications. 
 
And I think, you know, with the introduction of bills to 
introduce ride-share programs, again, how are the safety of the 
public going to be ensured when we license those kinds of 
programs as well? And we’ll have more opportunity to talk 
about that when we get to that bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I think the role of the Highway Traffic Board is being 
diminished here in a significant way. I think it’s of great 
concern to the public. It was established for a reason. These 
operating authority certificates just didn’t sort of appear out of 
thin air, Mr. Speaker. Obviously a lot of thought and concern 
went into them. And if the Highway Traffic Board is 
rubber-stamping, then I think the problem is with the Highway 
Traffic Board, Mr. Speaker, and not with the requirement for a 
certificate. So I think this is something that is going to cause a 
lot of debate and I think the public is going to have significant 
concerns about this. And as we go further into debates here in 
the House, I think others are going to be raising concerns as 
well. 
 
So obviously the two parts of the bill, the first part being the 
increase in penalties on people who are driving well under the 
influence of alcohol, absolutely important and critical in the 
culture that we have now where we see prominent people 
getting charged with drinking and driving and sort of this 
culture of it’s okay to go out for a hockey night or a sports night 
and have a couple beer afterwards. That was also highlighted in 
some of the material that I read, is that generally healthy 
lifestyle people aren’t the ones that get charged with drinking 
and driving, except for sports teams. And there is just a culture 
of . . . And I mean I’ve seen it in any teams I’ve been involved 
with where you go out afterwards and celebrate or drown in 
your tears for your win or your loss. So that is very much part 
of who we are. 
 
And until we get that system of designated drivers or making 
sure that you give your keys to a friend if you know you’re 
going to be drinking, or better yet, where there is public 
transport, take public transport. I mean there’s all sorts of 
programs out there. Obviously MADD is very involved, 
Mothers Against Drunk Driving, and teens that are using that 
knowledge to create safe grads for their fellow classmates. 
 
And, you know, there’s a role for parents. There’s a role for all 
of us in society when it comes to drinking and driving. And I 
guess we have to support people. And I think my colleague 
from Riversdale, Saskatoon Riversdale, talked about that 
because often there are other issues. When people repeatedly 
use alcohol or self-medicate, there are often mental health 
issues that are behind that, and we don’t talk about those issues, 
Mr. Speaker. We don’t go behind the veil of the alcohol or drug 
habits to find out is there something else that we can do to 
encourage this person to look after their mental health or seek 
help. And maybe, you know, using alcohol or drugs as a 

cover-up is just too common in our society, and I think we all 
know people who struggle with that. So it’s a serious problem 
and I think it’s one that we all need to be vigilant for. 
 
When my 21-year-old goes out at night, I worry. I mean I think 
all of us as parents do. Either, you know, whether he might 
drink to excess or his friends will, and he gets in that car. I 
mean that’s a terrible thing. And certainly I know my mother 
did for us six kids, and with good reason actually. And that’s a 
scary part of the culture of drinking and driving that we have 
here in Saskatchewan. So I think these changes will make some 
sense and maybe scare people into the proper behaviour, and we 
can only hope so. 
 
But I think the elimination of the operating authority certificate, 
that’s the second part of this bill . . . There are of course a 
number of other things too, Mr. Speaker, but I think we really 
need to look carefully and find out from the minister how it is 
we can get rid of these certificates and still be assured, as 
members of the public, that the people that we’re getting into 
their vehicle with are safe. Are we safe? And I look to the 
minister to provide more explanation, or I would suggest that 
this bill needs serious amendment. 
 
So I know other of my colleagues are going to want to have 
comments on this as well, and at this point I would move that 
we adjourn the debate on Bill No. 81, An Act to amend The 
Traffic Safety Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana has 
adjourned debate on Bill No. 81. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 82 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 82 — The 
SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to enter into 
debate on Bill No. 82, An Act to amend The SaskEnergy Act. 
Mr. Speaker, I know that there were some comments on second 
reading of this bill by the minister. It is a rather lengthy bill that 
seems to have a few focuses, one of them being housekeeping. 
But there are other two rather significant areas of consequence 
in this bill. In giving his second reading comments on 
November the 6th, the minister didn’t have a whole lot to say 
by way of explanation with regard to again this rather lengthy 
bill. But there were some words that certainly stood out and 
caught my attention in his remarks. 
 
The minister noted that these changes came about due to the 
changing needs of customers, sector business opportunities, and 
to support growth and competitiveness. Well I mean certainly, 
Mr. Speaker, that all sounds good. 



2884 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2017 

But there were some other words, modernizing the Act. I 
believe that that’s a word that we’ve heard before here. We 
heard some need for modernization around definitions within 
The Interpretation Act, Mr. Speaker, which was of course the 
bill that allowed for the sale of 49 per cent of any one of our 
Crown corporations without the say-so of the people of 
Saskatchewan as had previously been provided for under the 
Crown protection Act. 
 
So perhaps with some reason, and I’d suggest that there’s good 
reason, we on this side of the Assembly are a little bit guarded. 
We have perhaps some trust issues around this when we hear 
about this government looking to modernize, to increase 
efficiencies, and particularly with regard to Crown corporations 
as of course SaskEnergy is and enjoys protection under the 
Crown protection Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is not without reason that we have these concerns when we 
hear about tinkering with legislation with regard to our Crown 
corporations. Perhaps we do get our antennas up when we hear 
words as I’ve noted. Other words in the minister’s remarks that 
I would note again, efficiency; enhanced safety. Of course 
that’s another one of those buzzwords that you hear, and it’s 
sort of an apple pie statement that no one here is going to be 
against, enhancing safety of course. But allowing flexibility is 
another one of those words that sets your ear toward that, 
wondering exactly what it is. And again, as I noted, the minister 
had scant detail about what the intention really was behind 
some of these proposed changes to the Act. 
 
He did note that it’s been some time since there was an update 
of this legislation. I believe it was 1992, so that’s probably 
further back than most of us would be willing to acknowledge 
or believe perhaps, Mr. Speaker. So it has been some time, I’ll 
give him that. 
 
And there are some housekeeping issues that are noted in 
section 16, sections 34, 35, and 45 ensuring that the Act is 
current with recent case law and corporate policies. So that 
certainly is understandable and is not where I’m going to spend 
the bulk of my comments. 
 
One of the first provisions is a new provision that outlines 
corporate liability in tort, but not liable in nuisance actions 
while carrying out its duty as a public utility. And certainly that 
is something that is understandable, Mr. Speaker. The need to 
keep insurance premiums at a reasonable level for the 
corporation I think is reasonable. It’s interesting, we’ve seen 
many other changes to legislation over the last year and a half 
—my time in this Assembly — and we saw some more today 
around the government protecting itself from legal action. That 
is not exactly what we’re seeing here. So I just make comment 
on that. 
 
[16:45] 
 
One of the other changes that was necessary was around the 
closure of customer services to pedestrian traffic, and perhaps 
this didn’t impact everyone. There are many people in the 
province who pay their bills online, but we did hear from 
people that this did provide hardship to those who were 
accustomed to being able to pay their bills in person. 
Particularly I think of elderly folks who did have that option 

who no longer have that option. But again they don’t and that’s 
necessitated changes to the legislation. 
 
But I will spend some time here and it’s around section 60(1), 
which is moving the definition of, a number of definitions out 
of the Act and into the regulations. And I’m going to highlight 
this. And I think we should always pay attention any time that 
we are moving sections out of the Act and putting them into the 
regulation. It’s a completely different level of oversight, Mr. 
Speaker, as members here are well aware. 
 
We saw, and I’ll use an important reference point in my time 
here, we saw changes with Bill 63, with The Education Act 
where we had whole wholesale sections of The Education Act 
pulled out, not only just pulled out, put in as a budget bill, Mr. 
Speaker. So it only had five hours of oversight. Still that is 
more hours of oversight, that’s way more oversight than the 
regulations. When a bill is presented — and this I’m sure all 
members here are aware, but perhaps those who are listening at 
home or elsewhere may be interested in this — when legislation 
is passed here we have hours of oversight that we are able to 
ask questions and bring forth concerns of our constituents with 
regard to those proposed amendments. 
 
So about 20 hours which, you know, provides a good deal of 
oversight. It allowed, for example, with the passage of the 
debate around Bill 40, a lot of people in the province to become 
aware of those proposed changes, to contact their member of 
this Assembly, to contact the government. And after passage 
interestingly, the Premier did note that because of that 
oversight, because of that scrutiny, that they had cause to 
rethink that legislation. 
 
So that scrutiny is important and that is afforded to legislation 
that comes to this Assembly. However if it’s pulled out of the 
Act and it’s put into the regulations, we lose that oversight. That 
means that changes can be made to the regulations by an order 
in council in the middle of the night, in the middle of the 
summer, if that were the whim of those making the decision, 
Mr. Speaker. And that’s a totally different, totally different 
thing than having 20 hours of public scrutiny on any proposed 
changes. 
 
And I think that that . . . So any time that I see that there’s a 
proposal for something to be moved from the Act into the 
regulations, it gets your attention. I think that there probably are 
reasonable grounds to do that. Maybe there’s something that 
requires some changing now and then, but it is interesting to 
have whole definitions pulled out of the Act and put into the 
regulations. 
 
So in this case, around section 60, it is around the parameters of 
the distribution franchise into the regulations and also the 
definition of the “distribution of gas,” “metering point,” 
“oilfield facility system,” and supply stream wholly from the 
Act into the regulations. 
 
So I think when we’re looking at wholesale removal from the 
Act, we should probably have a look at what’s being proposed 
here. So section . . . My old eyes are failing me here. Section 60 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I should’ve brought my glasses. 
Section 60 refers to, as I noted, the distribution of gas. So these 
are all with regard to the exclusive right to distribute gas under 



November 8, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2885 

the energy Act, The SaskEnergy Act. So as it stands, the 
“distribution of gas” is defined as: 
 

means the movement of gas, by means of all gas pipeline 
facilities, that is: 
 

(i) downstream of the outlet of the shut-off valves [with] 
. . . gas transmission pipelines at stations where pressure 
reduction first occurs; and 
 
(ii) upstream of the outlet of a metering point at the 
location where the gas is delivered to a person for 
consumption. 

 
It proposed to also take “metering point” definition, currently 
defined as: 

 
. . . means the point at which gas is measured and physical 
possession of gas is transferred to a person for 
consumption. 

 
As well as “oilfield facility system,” currently meaning: 
 

. . . all the piping, process equipment, auxiliary devices and 
associated buildings involved with the extraction of oil 
from below the surface of the ground and with production 
processing before delivery to an oil transmission pipeline. 

 
And also with regard to “supply system,” again pulling this 
definition out of the Act and putting it into the regulations: 
 

. . . means a piping system and associated control devices, 
other than a gas gathering and processing system as 
defined in clause 60(1) . . . [above], through which gas is 
moved from the outlet of a metering point or, where there 
is no metering point, from a well where gas is produced, to 
equipment or appliances for consumption. 

 
So certainly thorough definitions, Mr. Speaker. And as I noted, 
again, I’ll note again the minister was rather scant in the second 
reading as to why these particular changes are necessary. And 
that’s a question that I think others of my colleagues and 
perhaps members of the public will have: why we are moving 
this from the level of scrutiny of this Assembly and into the 
regulations. And, I mean, perhaps there is a perfectly reasonable 
answer, Mr. Speaker, but I think it’s important that we do hear, 
when we’re proposing changes like this, why exactly that is. 
 
Again as I noted, not only the definition . . . It removes the 
parameters of distribution franchise into the regulations. And 
that is certainly a significant change and something that I would 
be interested — I think many people would be interested —in 
the reasons why that is necessary and that is advantageous to 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I think that’s probably a good standard to all legislation, that we 
should be able to answer those questions in an honest and 
transparent way with proper scrutiny and, you know, not trying 
to . . . trying to or not removing scrutiny in favour of more 
secrecy and executive actions without scrutiny. Just as a general 
rule, I would suggest humbly from this place, that that is not a 
bad standard for us to have for all legislation. 
 

There are also some amendments here, amendments “. . . to 
clarify the corporation’s right to enter premises and lands where 
. . . [they have] pipelines, but gas service is not active.” So 
that’s interesting. And this addresses a recent court decision 
around “. . . the section’s non-applicability to customers whose 
service has been discontinued.” So I have to admit that I’m not 
familiar with that particular court decision but, as we see in the 
explanatory notes, that was a recent decision that has 
necessitated this particular change. So that’s interesting, Mr. 
Speaker, and perhaps there will be others on this side who will 
have more to say about that, with more knowledge of that 
particular court decision. 
 
Again as I noted, and is often the case, the Act not being 
updated since 1992, it’s reasonable that there would be some 
housekeeping amendments for language and also the new 
corporate fiscal year, which is interesting. I guess this didn’t get 
caught up last year when a lot of the other corporations changed 
their Act to accommodate the new fiscal year, so that certainly 
is reasonable. 
 
There’s also a new provision that allows for the transport of gas 
via third party-owned trucks subject with conditions. And here 
even an OC [order in council] is no longer needed for each 
trucking firm to engage in this business, which is interesting. 
It’s a paring down of oversight. Again if there are good reasons 
for that I think it’s reasonable that the people of Saskatchewan 
understand why that is the case, why that’s necessary. I think 
we should always take seriously when we’re pulling back 
regulations or oversight, and be prepared to answer why that 
change is necessary. 
 
The final change in this legislation that I will note is around the 
movement of gas over parcel boundaries now prohibited, with 
the exception of enhanced oil recovery operations. So that’s 
interesting, Mr. Speaker. I know there’ll be a lot of people who 
will be interested in the changes and what it is about enhanced 
oil recovery operations that requires a special provision there. 
It’s an opportunity for all of us to learn about that process and 
about why these changes are necessary within The SaskEnergy 
Amendment Act. 
 
So I do hope that people have a chance to ask these questions of 
the minister and have those questions answered. Again I think 
any time that we’re tinkering with our Crown corporations and 
pulling away oversight, people reasonably have had an erosion 
of trust with regard to intentions, with regard of these very 
important public assets. And I think that we should afford every 
level of scrutiny that this Assembly can provide. 
 
Again it made a difference, that scrutiny, with the passage and 
then notice to repeal Bill 40. And I think it is important that, of 
course, we as the official opposition pay attention to that, but 
also that this government hear from people across the province 
if there are concerns or questions that they do have. So I would 
encourage people to continue with that level of engagement 
with the business of this Assembly and with the business of 
their province and these public funds and public assets. 
 
I am sure that there are many of my colleagues who will have 
further comments with regard to this legislation. But I think I’ve 
come to the end of my remarks, and with that I will move to 
adjourn. 



2886 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2017 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview has 
moved to adjourn the debate on Bill 82. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. It now being near 5 p.m., this 
Assembly stands adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 . . . oh sorry, 
sorry. No, that’s a little bit late. Let’s make it 10 a.m. tomorrow 
morning. We stand adjourned. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 
 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 Apology 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2853 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2853 
  Bonk ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2853 
  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2853 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2853 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2853 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2853 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2854 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2854 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2854 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2854 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Sexual Assault & Information Centre’s Fashion Show Fundraiser 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2855 
 Remembrance Day and the Battle of Passchendaele 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2855 
 Recipient of the University of Regina Outstanding Young Alumni Award 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2855 
 A Veteran’s Story 
  Nerlien ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2856 
 Muslims for Remembrance  
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2856 
 A Soldier’s Sacrifices 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2856 
 First Red Cross Hospital in the British Empire 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2856 
STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Ruling on a Point of Order 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2857 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Usage of Private Email Accounts 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2857 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2857 
 Circumstances Around Review of Global Transportation Hub 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2858 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2858 
 Regina Bypass Project and Highway Safety 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2858 
  Marit ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2858 
 Water Management and Environmental Protection 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2859 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2859 
 Support for Municipalities 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2859 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2860 
 Funding for Indigenous and Northern Students 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2860 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2860 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2861 
 Wait Time for Young People to Receive Mental Health Services 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2861 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2861 
 Employment of Women and Provincial Economy 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2861 
  Bonk ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2862 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 89 — The School Choice Protection Act/Loi sur la protection du choix d’école 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2862 



 

 Bill No. 90 — The Heritage Property Amendment Act, 2017 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 2862 
 Bill No. 91 — The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2017 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2862 
 Bill No. 92 — The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Amendment Act, 2017 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2862 
 Bill No. 93 — The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding Corporation Amendment Act, 2017 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2863 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2863 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 87 — The Data Matching Agreements Act 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2863 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2864 
  Brkich (point of order) ........................................................................................................................................................... 2865 
  McCall (point of order) .......................................................................................................................................................... 2865 
  The Speaker (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................. 2866 
 Bill No. 88 — The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2017 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2867 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2868 
  Brkich (point of order) ........................................................................................................................................................... 2871 
  Beck (point of order)............................................................................................................................................................... 2871 
  The Speaker (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................. 2871 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 84 — The Income Tax (Business Income) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2873 
 Bill No. 76 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2017 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2873 
 Bill No. 77 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Superannuation Plans) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2875 
 Bill No. 78 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2017 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2876 
 Bill No. 79 — The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2017 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2878 
 Bill No. 80 — The Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment Act, 2017 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2879 
 Bill No. 81 — The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2879 
 Bill No. 82 — The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2017 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2883 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

 
Hon. Steven Bonk 

Minister of the Economy 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 
Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Larry Doke 
Minister of Government Relations  

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 
Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Nancy Heppner 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Gene Makowsky 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  
and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 


