






















































Hansard: April 03, 2017


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 68A  MONDAY, APRIL 3, 2017, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 

 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 

Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 

 

 

 
 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 

Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 

Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 

Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 

Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 

Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 

Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 

Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 

Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 

Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 

Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 

Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 

Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 

D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 

Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 

Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 

Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 

Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 

Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 

Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 

Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 

Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 

Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 

Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 

Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 

Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 

Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 

Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 

Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 

Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 

Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 

McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 

Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 

Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 

Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 

Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 

Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 

Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 

Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 

Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 

Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 

Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 

Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 

Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 

Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 

Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 

Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 

Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 

Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 

Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 

Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 

Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 

Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 

Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 

Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 

Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 

Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 

Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 

 

 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 11 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2061 
 April 3, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Congratulations to Clerk on 30 Years of Service 
 
The Speaker: — For the past 30 years, our Assembly has been 
well served by an individual that needs recognition today. He 
celebrated on, I believe, April the 1st, 30 years of service to the 
Legislative Assembly Service: Greg Putz. Would everyone 
please congratulate him on 30 years of service. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Bonk: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, to you and through you 
and to all members of the Assembly, today I would like to 
welcome a grade 11 and 12 class from Carry The Kettle First 
Nation, very close to my hometown of Wolseley. And I’d like 
to welcome them here today to their Assembly. They’re here 
with Mr. Chad O’Watch, the teacher; and the students, Denzal 
Rope, Walter Ryder, Marissa Thomson, Kendra Thomson, and 
Austin Adams. 
 
I look forward to meeting with them a little bit later today and 
we’ll discuss a little bit more about politics and . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Yes, and the members opposite have agreed to 
buy you ice cream. So we’re looking forward to meeting with 
you later. So I’d ask all members to help me welcome them to 
their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like 
to join with the member from Moosomin in welcoming the 
Carry The Kettle students. And as one of the few Aboriginal 
members of the Assembly, I want to say to them in my Cree 
language: 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 
 
And to point out that you’re the best and don’t ever think that 
the place for the Aboriginal people does not involve the 
Legislative Assembly because I’m here and many of you will 
be here in the future. So keep up your studies and good luck, 
and I’m glad you came to visit us here today. Thank you very 
much. 
 
The Speaker: — Just barely, I’ll recognize the Opposition 
House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and thank 
you for your indulgence on the clock. I’d just like to introduce a 
group seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. I’m talking about 
some workers from the Palliser Regional Library, Mr. Speaker. 
And we’re joined today by Wendy Robbins, 25 years of service 
at Palliser; Melissa Silzer-Frank, 17 years of service; Hugh 

Armstrong, 10 months; Dale Maier, 8 years of service, Mr. 
Speaker; Jody Arnold, 10 years of service; and Linda Peters, 20 
years working at the Palliser Regional Library, Mr. Speaker. 
They’re joined by the president of CUPE [Canadian Union of 
Public Employees] Local 9, Stacey Landin. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they’re here concerned about the future of 
libraries in the province of Saskatchewan. So if all members 
could join me in welcoming, and thanking, these individuals to 
their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the member opposite in welcoming these individuals to the 
Assembly today. Sometimes we hear divergent views on a lot of 
topics. I suspect we’re going to hear one later today. But 
nonetheless, regardless of what happens, people in our library 
systems, people in our schools do great work. They make our 
province a better place and we thank them and want to very 
much welcome them to the legislature on behalf of the members 
on this side of the House. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Mr. Nerlien: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Kelvington, 
Glaslyn, Nut Mountain, Archerwill, Weekes, Porcupine Plain, 
Rose Valley, Fosston, and Quill Lake. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition to the Legislative Assembly opposing 
the Sask Party’s cuts to spiritual care. Mr. Speaker, the 
petitioners believe and point out that this government clearly 
does not understand the work of or the impact of professional 
spiritual care providers in our hospitals, Mr. Speaker; that they 
point out that in the 2017-18 budget, the Sask Party eliminated 
all funding for pastoral care services, which provided spiritual 
care within health facilities, Mr. Speaker; that Saskatchewan 
will be the only province within Canada to not fund this support 
for patients, residents, and their families seeking wellness; that 
the Sask Party did not share their plan to scrap funding for 
spiritual care within health region facilities during the 2016 
election. 
 



2062 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2017 

The petitioners also point out that spiritual care responds to the 
spiritual and emotional needs of patients and residents and 
provides a compassionate listening presence in times of crisis. 
They point out that spiritual care supports families, patients, and 
residents in making difficult decisions, and that spiritual care 
can provide support for all families, patients, and residents, 
regardless of faith or belief, in obtaining comfort and support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
immediately reinstate the funding for pastoral care services 
in this province’s health region facilities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens of 
Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise in 
my place once again today to present a petition in support of the 
member from Prince Albert Northcote in fighting, in struggling 
to get a second bridge built for Prince Albert, and that the need 
for the second bridge for Prince Albert has never been clearer 
than it is today. Prince Albert, communities north of Prince 
Albert, and the businesses that send people and products to 
Prince Albert require a solution. So: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, ask that the Sask 
Party government stop stalling, hiding behind rhetoric, and 
refusing to listen to the people calling for action, and begin 
immediately to join and then plan and then quickly 
commence the construction of a second bridge for Prince 
Albert, using federal and provincial dollars as being called 
for by the various people throughout the province. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as we’ve done day in and day out, and 
petition page after petition page, I’m very proud to stand in my 
place to present yet another page with names of people that 
have signed this petition. And the page that I am presenting 
today are primarily from Prince Albert, Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, once again I am rising to present 
a petition opposed to Bill 40 and a potential 49 per cent Crown 
corporation sell-off. The people who signed the petition would 
like to bring to our attention the following: that the Sask Party’s 
Bill 40 creates a new definition for privatization that allows the 
government to wind down, dissolve, or sell up to 49 per cent of 
the shares of a Crown corporation without holding a 
referendum; that in 2015-16 alone, Saskatchewan’s Crown 
corporations returned $297.2 million in dividends to pay for 
schools, roads, and hospitals. As we know, over the last 10 
years we have received over $3 billion in dividends from our 
Crown, Mr. Speaker. Those dividends should go to the people 
of Saskatchewan, not private investors. 
 
And we know that our Crown corporations employ thousands of 
Saskatchewan people across the province and that under section 
149 of the Income Tax Act of Canada, Crown corporations are 

exempt from corporate income tax, provided not less than 90 
per cent of the shares are held by a government or province. So 
the Sask Party’s proposal would allow up to 49 per cent of a 
Crown to be sold without being considered privatized. So this 
short-sighted legislation risks sending millions of Crown 
dividends to Ottawa rather than to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately stop 
the passage of Bill 40, The Interpretation Amendment Act, 
and start protecting jobs and our Crown corporations 
instead of selling them off to pay for Sask Party 
mismanagement. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who have signed this petition 
today are from the city of Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition from citizens concerned about libraries in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. The undersigned residents of the 
province of Saskatchewan wish to bring to your attention the 
following: whereas the Saskatchewan government has cut 
funding for regional libraries in half or by $3.5 million and has 
eliminated funding, in part, for libraries in Regina and 
Saskatoon, that this drastic funding cut will have a devastating 
impact on libraries, especially regional libraries and the many 
people who depend on them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they point out that libraries are about more than 
just borrowing books. They point out the meeting rooms that 
are used by community groups, library staff hosting education 
programs and clubs, the publicly accessible computer terminals 
that are essential to many. They point out that there are services 
for seniors, children, employment supports, language and 
reading groups, citizen test preparation, and help for newcomers 
to build their resumés. They point out that these cuts will have a 
disproportionate impact on rural communities where libraries 
are vital community spaces, Mr. Speaker. They point out that 
potential closures or reduction in services will severely impact 
our communities, all of our communities, Mr. Speaker. 
 

In the prayer that reads as follows, the petitioners 
respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan renew its commitment to the invaluable 
programming, education opportunities, and public spaces 
our libraries provide across this province and to restore the 
$4.8 million in funding for public libraries that was cut in 
the 2017-2018 budget. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition — and I know that my 
colleagues, in particular the member from Lakeview, have 
presented other iterations of this petition, Mr. Speaker — but 
this particular petition is signed by citizens from the city of 
Regina. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 



April 3, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2063 

present a petition to ensure job security for victims of domestic 
violence. Saskatchewan has the very dubious distinction, Mr. 
Speaker, of having the highest rate of domestic violence by 
intimate partners amongst all Canadian provinces. 
 
One in three Canadian workers have experienced domestic 
violence, and for many of them the violence will follow them to 
work. Employers lose $77.9 million annually due to the direct 
and indirect impacts of domestic violence. And, Mr. Speaker, 
Manitoba has already enacted legislation and Ontario is on its 
way to enacting legislation that ensures job security for victims 
of domestic violence. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan enact 
legislation that requires all employers to provide a 
minimum of five paid workdays and a minimum of 17 
weeks unpaid work leave with the assurance of job security 
upon return for all victims of domestic abuse in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing the petition today come 
from Moose Jaw. I do so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Saskatchewan Artists Celebrated at Juno Awards  
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 2017 
Juno Awards were held this past weekend, and I’m proud to say 
that there was an abundance of local Saskatchewan artists being 
celebrated for their contributions to Canadian music and 
culture. 
 
Langenburg’s Jess Moskaluke was the big winner of the night, 
taking home Country Album of the Year with her album, Kiss 
Me Quiet. Regina’s Andy Shauf picked up four Juno 
nominations including Breakthrough Artist of the Year for his 
2016 album, The Party, and Regina’s Colin James was also 
nominated for Blues Album of the Year for his album, Blue 
Highways.  
 
Folk duo Kacy & Clayton were nominated for Contemporary 
Roots Album of the Year with their record, Strange Country. 
And, Mr. Speaker, this duo is well known to folks in my area. 
They’re from the Fir Mountain hills. Their ranch is in Fir 
Mountain, and you can basically see the hills from our farm. So 
I’ve known their parents for a long time and am very pleased to 
see this couple, duo, doing so well. 
 
And finally, four of my very good friends: Eric Wright, Ben 
Plotnick, Trent Freeman, and Karrnnel Sawitsky from the group 
called The Fretless, they won a Juno for Instrumental Album of 
the Year for their album, Bird’s Nest. 
 
Karrnnel, in particular, is from Saskatoon. And, Mr. Speaker, he 
was pursuing a musical career here with his wife, Amy 
Matysio, who was pursuing a film and acting career, but when 
the film tax credit was cancelled in Saskatchewan they had to 
move to Toronto. So not only is Amy missed in the acting 

community, but we sure miss Karrnnel here in Saskatchewan as 
well. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me today in 
congratulating Saskatchewan’s Juno nominees and award 
winners, and in thanking them for making our province a little 
brighter with their contributions to our local arts and culture. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Many Canadians 
and music fans from around the world were glued to their TVs 
last night watching the 2017 Juno Awards hosted in our 
nation’s capital. Not only was the show fantastic, featuring 
some of Canada’s greatest musical talents, but the hosts, Bryan 
Adams and Russel Peters, kept viewers laughing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all have examples of extraordinary talent that 
comes from each of our constituencies, but last night one of the 
big winners hails from Langenburg. Jess Moskaluke won the 
Country Album of the Year, one of the most coveted Junos. 
This award has been previously won by well-known artists such 
as Johnny Reid, Terri Clark, and Dallas Smith. Jess’s album, 
Kiss Me Quiet, has won international acclaim and was a 
deserving fit for album of the year. 
 
Not only did she take a Juno award home, she also took a 
number of major awards this past weekend at the Saskatchewan 
Country Music Association Awards, including Single of the 
Year. With all the lights, fireworks, and Canadian talent, Jess 
said winning this award was one of the “coolest things” she has 
ever done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is another example of great Saskatchewan and 
Canadian talent that is succeeding on the world stage. Mr. 
Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating all the 
nominees and winners at this year’s Juno Awards, and 
specifically congratulate Jess Moskaluke on her big win last 
night, and wishing her all the best in her future endeavours in 
her musical career. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Fundraising Efforts in Saskatchewan Raise  
Autism Awareness 

 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday marked 
the international day for autism awareness. About 1 per cent of 
the world population has autism spectrum disorder, but despite 
the high rates of autism in regions around the world, 
stigmatization and discrimination associated with neurological 
differences has had a tremendous impact on individuals with 
autism. This is why autism awareness is so desperately needed. 
 
Here in Canada there are some great organizations and people 
who work to promote awareness and acceptance of autism. In 
fact I’m proud to say that today marks the official launch of the 
Inside Out for Autism campaign across Canada. In 



2064 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2017 

Saskatchewan this campaign is being run by local autism 
support group SaskFEAT [Saskatchewan Families for Effective 
Autism Treatment], in conjunction with Autism Canada. That 
campaign raises awareness, acceptance, and funds for people on 
the autism spectrum. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is doing a great job of promoting 
this event. Here in Saskatchewan, Canada’s top fundraisers 
Katie and Landon Emde from Midale, along with their 
six-year-old son, Avery, who is on the autism spectrum, have 
raised over $1,400. Most of those proceeds will stay here in 
Saskatchewan and go towards front-line services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask all members to join me in 
thanking our local organizations like SaskFEAT and campaigns 
like Inside Out for Autism and people like Katie and Landon 
that help in dispelling the stigma around autism, raise 
awareness, and support people on the autism spectrum as they 
strive to live full, meaningful lives. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Steele: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wanted to draw 
attention to an important awareness today. Today is Inside Out 
for Autism. Mr. Speaker, across the country, thousands have 
joined together to wear their shirts, tops, or sweaters inside out. 
This simple act is a powerful representation of how those with 
autism are no different than the rest of us, and their differences 
are not a weakness. 
 
This awareness today is important for many that have autism, 
and I would like to highlight a constituent who not only has 
drawn awareness to autism, but has also raised money for 
autism research. Berney Weston is a 10-year-old boy from my 
part of the province that wanted to do something to make his 
friend, Chayce, feel more comfortable. You see, Mr. Speaker, 
Chayce has autism, and Berney and Chayce’s friendship 
demonstrates that a few differences isn’t a bad thing. Berney 
has worked with Chayce’s parents and organized a fundraiser 
based on their favourite thing: hockey. They raised $11,000 for 
Chayce’s foundation on pledges based on Berney’s favourite 
player, Edmonton Oiler Cam Talbot, and how many saves he 
would make in the game. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fundraiser was amazing, and I would ask all 
the members to join me in congratulating Berney and Chayce 
and all the organizers on a successful fundraiser. They’re 
helping bring awareness to autism and Inside Out Day. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Kelvington-Wadena is Home of Champions 
 
Mr. Nerlien: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
confirming that Kelvington-Wadena constituency is once again 
the home of champions, I have two that are front of mind today. 
Team Syrota of the Wadena Curling Club, including skip 
Delores Syrota with Bev Krasowski, Donna Liebrecht, and 
Sylvia Broad, defeated Team Leach of Regina with a 6-2 win at 
the Saskatchewan Masters Curling Championship. They will 
represent Saskatchewan at the 2017 Canadian Masters 

Women’s Championship this week in Guelph. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, working together to create a better, 
stronger Saskatchewan has been evident in Porcupine Plain, 
Kelvington, Rose Valley, and surrounding area. Before the 
2016-17 hockey season even began, hopes to have a bantam 
team were very dim for these communities. With many calls 
and negotiating between the communities made, the PKRV 
[Porcupine Plain, Kelvington, Rose Valley] Bantam Blues 
hockey team was formed. 
 
I’d like to take this opportunity to congratulate the PKRV 
Bantam Blues and their coaches on a great season. Not only did 
they take the provincial bantam C championship on March 
26th, but two days later, in league final play, they beat the 
Tisdale Ramblers to take the title of North East Minor Hockey 
League champions. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating the PKRV 
bantam hockey team on their provincial championship, and 
wish Team Syrota the best of luck at the Masters women’s 
championships in Guelph this week. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 

Melfort Senior Girls’ Team Wins Gold at Hoopla 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With pride, I 
congratulate the Melfort Comet senior girls’ basketball team on 
winning the program’s first-ever gold medal at Hoopla on 
March 25th. They defeated three-time champion Moose Jaw 
Peacocks 64-42 in the final championship. Head coach Kelly 
Linnell could not be prouder of this team, and is excited that 
this long-awaited provincial title has finally come to a reality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, though nervous in the first quarter, their team 
found their confidence quickly, giving their fans and families an 
entertaining game to watch and be part of through their vocal 
support. 
 
The Comets gained control very quickly, as they secured a 
13-point lead at halftime. Rachel Linnell led the team with 16 
points as well as 10 rebounds. Her teammate Keely 
Hangs-Copeland had 8 rebounds, supporting their strong 
defence. 
 
What separates this team from the rest is their friendships both 
on and off the court, making the first-ever gold-medal victory 
surely unforgettable. Their win is not just for the Comets 
basketball program, but it is for the community of Melfort and 
the surrounding areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in congratulating 
the Melfort Comets senior girls’ basketball team, along with 
their coaching staff, families, and community, on their first-ever 
gold-medal title at Hoopla. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 

New Schools Opening in Regina 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to stand 
today to highlight this government’s commitment to our 



April 3, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2065 

education system with the completion of two new schools in my 
constituency. École Harbour Landing, Regina Public; and école 
Kateri Tekakwitha, Regina Catholic are two new schools in 
Harbour Landing. They are both wonderful facilities and will be 
home for 1,000 students and 90 daycare spaces when they open 
in September. 
 
Harbour Landing is a growing community, Mr. Speaker. Since 
last January, there have been over 650 new housing starts. 
Many of these new homes will be filled by young families, and 
they will benefit greatly from access to daycare and education 
facilities right in their neighbourhood. Schools surrounding 
these two new schools will also see benefit from reduced class 
sizes and less strain on resources. 
 
I am proud of this government’s record when it comes to 
education. Our record is one of opening 40 new schools, 
including 21 this year, along with 25 major renovations, while 
the NDP’s [New Democratic Party] record was closing 176, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Our government is meeting the challenges and will continue to 
make sure that Saskatchewan is a great place to live, work, and 
raise a family. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Regina Bypass Project 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Governing is all about taking responsibility, and budgeting is all 
about choices. Well that government refuses at every turn to 
accept responsibility, and they’re choosing to make 
Saskatchewan people pay for Sask Party mismanagement, 
scandal, and waste. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in a budget full of callous cuts and billions of 
dollars in tax hikes, they still found some money for the 
Premier to offer special deals to his corporate buddies, and 
there’s a $500 million fund set aside for a foreign company that 
they handed the Regina bypass contract to. Half a billion 
dollars, Mr. Speaker, for 50 kilometres of road. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, how can the Saskatchewan Party ask 
Saskatchewan families to pay more for just about everything — 
to give up STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company], the 
libraries, the care programs, and the list goes on — just so the 
Saskatchewan Party can make good on their backroom contract 
with the conglomerate marred by scandal? How could they do 
that to the Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know where they 
sit around in the backroom and dream up this sense of outrage 
that they’ve got. Look on the Internet. They can see what the 
documents are. They can see where the transaction is. They can 
see how it changed from one small interchange to an entire city 
bypass. Mr. Speaker, the total cost of the Regina bypass is $1.2 
billion. There’s $600 million in a 30-year maintenance program 
that would not be an upfront cost in previous agreements. 

The cost breakdown is for each type of procurement — 
traditional: payments to the private sector, 1.646 billion; 
ancillary costs, 89 million; retained risk, 476 million; 
competitive neutrality adjustment, Mr. Speaker. All of that is 
online. So the total cost if we did a traditional build would be 
$2.261 billion for the total cost of 1.2 that we’ve done, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ll make no apologies for this. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, 99 per cent of the things they 
put on the Internet is blacked out, Mr. Speaker. And the people 
of Saskatchewan have a right to know. They won’t tell us what 
they’re paying for dirt. They won’t tell us what they’re paying 
for asphalt, but we do know a full 60 per cent of the highways 
budget was spent on the bypass. 
 
Meanwhile, the other 99.6 per cent of our 26 000 kilometres of 
provincial road are left with the scraps, and the Sask Party are 
slashing funding for strategic municipal infrastructure. And our 
roads, Mr. Speaker, are really important all throughout the 
province. 
 
But since they say everything is on the table, and they put so 
much of what Saskatchewan families rely on on the chopping 
block, will the minister at least tell us what options are available 
in the contract with Vinci to stop the hemorrhaging of money 
and get control of this bypass back into Saskatchewan hands? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this project, by building it 
as a P3 process, saved $380 million or 17 per cent. There are 
11,300 estimated jobs that will be created through the entirety 
of the project. Seventy-one per cent of the businesses engaged 
are local — 95 local businesses, Mr. Speaker. There’s a 
1,400-page contract online available to the public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite don’t like to see things. 
They don’t like to know things. What I’d like to do is ask them 
to go out and meet with the families of people that have been 
killed or hurt in accidents on the east side of the city. I’d like 
them to go out and talk to people about the safety that’s going 
to come as a result of this bypass. I’d like them to come and see 
how traffic flows might work when it’s finished. As it’s getting 
closer and closer to being finished, Mr. Speaker, the members 
opposite are realizing how wrong they are on this project. And 
Mr. Speaker, I’d urge them to change their mind well before the 
next election. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 

 
Auditor’s Report and Financial Support for Municipalities 

 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, in their own budget promotional 
material, they said that they are investing in their priorities. Mr. 
Speaker, a billion-dollar tax hike to Saskatchewan families and 
half a billion-dollar cheque to a conglomerate from France. Is 
the Sask Party covering Vinci’s tab for their court cases in 
Qatar and elsewhere? 
 
[14:00] 



2066 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2017 

And, Mr. Speaker, what about, what about the Sask Party’s 
GTH [Global Transportation Hub] scandal? Eleven million 
taxpayer dollars made it into the pockets of two Sask Party 
supporters. But in this budget the Sask Party took that same 
amount, $11 million, from the people of Regina, and they took 
$11 million from the people of Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, since 
he has not yet spoken out about the GTH scandal, can the 
Minister of Finance tell us why his priority is to hand $11 
million over to two Sask Party supporters instead of the people 
of our two largest cities? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Economy and the 
GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
premise of the question is of course absurd. The auditor has 
looked into this matter fully. The auditor has done a very 
thorough job with the full co-operation of this side of the 
House. The auditor looked into literally hundreds if not 
thousands of documents pertaining to the matter. The auditor 
spoke to all of the individuals who were involved. The auditor 
made a number of recommendations. We accept those 
recommendations. We’re implementing or have implanted all of 
those recommendations, Mr. Speaker. And I would just quote 
the auditor who said in an open-line show: 
 

In any audit, as auditors we’re always looking for red flags. 
And because this is a land transaction we did look for 
conflicts of interest. We didn’t find evidence of conflict of 
interest or indications of fraud or wrongdoing in the course 
of our work, so there were no red flags there. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, no answer from that Minister of 
Finance. We’re talking about the people of Saskatchewan’s 
money and they deserve answers about these handouts. But this 
government has a problem with being upfront. Saskatchewan 
cities and towns are busy making their own budgets, but they 
were blindsided by the Sask Party’s announcement that they 
would just stop paying the grants-in-lieu funding they’d been 
counting on for decades. Saying everything is on the table is not 
consultation, not by a mile, Mr. Speaker. 
 
At the end of last week, in an attempt to dig themselves out 
from under all the backlash, the Sask Party blurted out that 
they’d capped the cuts for some municipalities. Well some 
communities are breathing easier, but what of the other 
hundreds of our cities and towns that are still starving from the 
Sask Party cut? What is the minister going to do to support the 
rest of our municipal partners, and how can she justify saving 
some but not others? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
last week we did make an announcement that we would ensure 
that the cities that do receive the grants-in-lieu that aren’t 
grants-in-lieu as we think of paying for property tax, but a 

different program, that they wouldn’t be disproportionately 
impacted. However if that member opposite is truly interested 
in the programs and fairness, why is it that only certain cities 
got any funding through these programs, whereas the city of 
Lloydminster, Warman, Martensville, and Meadow Lake got 
nothing, zero? 
 
I looked at a map over the weekend, Mr. Speaker, and I looked 
in my own constituency. And if you go down the Highway 16, 
the town of Colonsay gets something from this program but 
Viscount does not. Then you see Guernsey, nothing. Then 
Lanigan, oh they get something from this program. Kindersley 
got funds from this program and Rosetown, but not Davidson, 
Kenaston, or Outlook. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is very, very convoluted which communities 
qualified for this and which did not. It was an unfair, 
unpredictable, complex program. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the minister can try to square the 
circle all she wants, but this constant downloading on our 
municipal partners across this province is hurting all 
Saskatchewan people. Mr. Speaker, a cut is a cut is a cut. And a 
tax hike is a tax hike is a tax hike. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that Sask Party are forcing Saskatchewan people 
to pay more and get less, and they’re burning relationships with 
the cities and towns who should be a provincial government’s 
partners. Regina Mayor Michael Fougere said if city council 
was forced to raise taxes as a result of the grants-in-lieu cut, 
they would make sure people know why. He says they will add 
a “provincial levy” line on their notice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will the Sask Party come clean and admit 
that by targeting our cities and towns, the Sask Party’s targeting 
and hurting Saskatchewan families? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — This is very rich coming from a 
member who supports a party that, when in government, there 
was very little revenue sharing and it certainly wasn’t 
predictable. 
 
I have a news release here, Mr. Speaker, from 2006 where it 
was announced that there would be a $10 million increase in 
revenue sharing starting in the next fiscal year for a total of — 
are you ready, Mr. Speaker? — 95 million. Nobody knew how 
much they were getting, but there would be 95 million 
available. 
 
Well you know what’s available in municipal revenue sharing 
now, Mr. Speaker — and it’s predictable — is 257 million, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s more than two and a half times as much as what 
was there with the NDP. The NDP, they had to guess from year 
over year. 
 
That’s just one proponent of what goes to our urban centres, 
Mr. Speaker. Let’s talk about infrastructure and the billions of 



April 3, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2067 

dollars that this government has invested in infrastructure to 
backfill the fact that they absolutely ignored it when they had 
the NDP government. And, Mr. Speaker, that is all spent in our 
urban centres to help with their infrastructure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have supported our municipal partners year 
over year over year. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

Funding for Libraries 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party can tie itself in 
knots trying to explain these cuts, but we’ll take the word of the 
hard-working people on the front line over theirs any time, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We’re joined here today by six workers from the Palliser 
Regional Library who have been laid off as a result of this 
government’s short-sighted attack on libraries. These six 
individuals, Mr. Speaker, represent 80-plus years of service, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Palliser Regional Library officials say they may not be able to 
support Saskatchewan rural library branches and has already 
had to slash services, including programming for kids. We 
know this is just the fallout from the cuts to one region, Mr. 
Speaker, and other job losses will certainly be coming. So how 
can the minister justify putting these devoted employees out of 
work and denying Saskatchewan people from the valuable 
services that they provide? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We always 
want to offer sympathy and be very mindful whenever there is 
something that impacts people’s employment. It’s something 
that’s not taken lightly by this government. However we are in 
some changing economic times, and there’s no doubt there’s 
going to be some changes that are there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s incorrect to talk about some of the numbers 
the members were referring to there. The members referred to 
58 per cent cut. In fact the provincial reduction is actually 16 
per cent of Palliser’s budget. They are still receiving $286,000 
per year from the budget from the province. Last year’s total 
budget was $2.44 million. So, Mr. Speaker, they’ve got a 
significant number of reserves. 
 
We want to continue to work with all of the regional libraries in 
the province, find out if there’s better ways we can work to 
continue to deliver service, maintain employment, and, Mr. 
Speaker, our overwhelming concern is trying to do the best for 
the citizens of our province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, let me try and break this down as 
simply as I can for the minister opposite. Tomorrow’s the year 
anniversary of the election that took place in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, when that party of course ran on keeping 
Saskatchewan strong. 
 

The whole question of cutting libraries, Mr. Speaker, was 
precisely nowhere in their campaign. And yet he has the gall to 
stand here today and try to explain away the fact that these six 
hard-working employees at the Palliser Regional Library, who 
have 80-plus years of service amongst them, Mr. Speaker, that 
this is somehow rebalancing reserves. Or, you know, he wants 
to play the numbers game. 
 
The numbers are this, Mr. Speaker: six employees, 80-plus 
years of service, been sandbagged by this government when it 
came to their attack on libraries. So my question to the minister 
is this: can he stand and apologize to those workers for 
expecting better from this government? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
wants to talk about numbers. In Saskatchewan we have roughly 
4,000 people per library; in Alberta, approximately 14,000; in 
Manitoba, 10,000 per library. Mr. Speaker, we have to do a 
better job of ensuring that we deliver good service to the 
citizens of Saskatchewan. We are maintaining the interlibrary 
loans service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1969 legislation was enacted in this province to 
allow libraries to coexist inside schools. Mr. Speaker, that piece 
of legislation exists from 1969 when Ross Thatcher was 
premier, through the Devine era, through the Blakeney era, 
through the Romanow period, through the Calvert era, and has 
always existed, Mr. Speaker. And it allows people to incur 
some significant savings by collocating across the province. 
And that’s taking place in a number of places and perhaps, Mr. 
Speaker, it has to take place in some more places. We will 
continue to work with the libraries to find efficiencies and 
economies as we go forward. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s quite the change of tune from 
that minister. Just last year while honouring Library Week, Mr. 
Speaker, the minister welcomed “. . . opportunities to appreciate 
the contributions [of] the province’s more than 1,200 libraries 
[that they] make to the cultural, economic, educational, and 
recreational development of Saskatchewan people.” 
 
We’re not the only ones, Mr. Speaker, questioning the Sask 
Party’s spin on these cuts. The Regina Public Library issued a 
statement this morning to correct misinformation that has been 
provided to the public. They say visitation is up 13 per cent 
over the last five years and they say that the borrowing of 
e-books and e-audiobooks is up 327 per cent since 2011, Mr. 
Speaker, a lot of which rests on the regional and provincial 
system that we have, Mr. Speaker. They say many of the 
services offered don’t require a library card, but are meeting 
spaces and community hubs where people come to use the 
Internet, learn a second language, search for jobs, and 
participate in library programming. 
 
Will the minister recognize the invaluable services provided by 
Saskatchewan libraries and immediately reinstate the funding 
before any more damage is done? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 



2068 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2017 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, province wide the number 
of items that’s been checked out of our public libraries has 
dropped by 1.6 million since 2007. Mr. Speaker, the member 
opposite actually makes the argument by talking about how 
much the online services has gone up. I think he mentioned a 
number in excess of 300 per cent. And, Mr. Speaker, those are 
the type of things that we have to consider as we go forward. 
We are moving rapidly to becoming an increasingly online 
province. We’re pleased that the infrastructure that we’ve 
provided provides good Internet service throughout the 
province and, Mr. Speaker, we want to ensure that that 
continues so people have access to whatever material they think 
is appropriate. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue to work with that 
type of thing and, Mr. Speaker, we want to make sure that we 
do everything to make sure that the citizens of our province, the 
students of our province, have the best access. And, Mr. 
Speaker, there will certainly be some changes as we go forward. 
We will work with the libraries. We will work with the staff at 
the libraries to make sure that we continue to deliver what 
we’ve committed to our citizens. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Provision of Hearing Services 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, it’s clear the Sask Party didn’t 
think twice before they made families pay more and get less. 
Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has cut funding to the hearing aid 
plan — that’s right, Mr. Speaker, a program that provides 
hearing tests, fittings for hearing aids, prevention programs, 
education, and counselling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these cuts are going to impact the services that 
people across the province access. They’re going to impact kids 
like four-year-old Oscar Klein. Oscar is deaf and uses cochlear 
implants. All of his audiological services thus far have been 
provided by the hearing aid plan in Saskatoon, a program that 
the Sask Party is scrapping. 
 
Oscar’s mom has said this: “It’s been a constant fight for 
services, but the one area that has been stable for us for the last 
few years has been audiology, and that no longer remains.” So 
to the Minister of Health: how can he justify scrapping 
important services like this to kids like Oscar? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know the particulars 
of Oscar’s situation that the member opposite is speaking of, 
but I will say, bone-anchored and cochlear implant hearing 
device services will continue to be provided by the health 
regions, Mr. Speaker.  
 
But having said that, the hearing aid plan that was cancelled 
was not a decision that we made highly. We recognize it will 
have an impact on some people. Mr. Speaker, in a difficult 
economic situation, when health services in the province take 
almost 40 per cent of the budget, if we’re going to get a handle 
on expenditures, obviously there will be some impact on health. 
 

Mr. Speaker, again we didn’t take that lightly, but in the case of 
hearing aids, there’s already been two parallel systems 
operating. There’s a hearing aid plan and there’s private 
services that are delivered by private audiologists, Mr. Speaker. 
And I think in subsequent questions if the member asks, I’d be 
pleased to go deeper into that. We have a wide range of services 
of audiologists and hearing aids that are provided across the 
province, Mr. Speaker. And as I said, I’d be happy to follow up. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, many parents, like Oscar’s 
mom, are coming forward because they are worried about these 
cuts. They’re worried about their kids. Mr. Speaker, the cuts to 
this program means a loss of nine audiologists across the 
province. Some of these audiologists work specifically with 
people like Oscar who need specialized services for their 
cochlear implants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even before these newest cuts, there were already 
concerns that the programs were overloaded and were having 
trouble fitting people in. These services are vital to a child’s 
development and our kids can’t afford to wait. Why does this 
minister think that it is children who need hearing service that 
should pay for this government’s mismanagement, scandal, and 
waste? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, audiologists and hearing aid 
services are not an insured service under the Canada Health 
Act, Mr. Speaker. Most provinces, in fact — Nova Scotia, New 
Brunswick, Quebec, Ontario, Manitoba, and Alberta — don’t 
offer public system hearing services, Mr. Speaker. Private 
audiologists in this province, who have been operating here for 
a great deal of time . . . I’ll just read an excerpt from their news 
release on budget day, Mr. Speaker. It says: 
 

SHAP was originally conceived to serve the people of 
Saskatchewan, especially those in rural areas. Today those 
services are primarily in the large urban centres. Private 
practice hearing services, however, have grown to 
encompass all areas of the province, with 32 private 
principal clinics and 68 satellite clinics providing far 
greater service delivery than SHAP could deliver. 

 
Mr. Speaker, families and individuals that qualify under the 
family service plan and the supplementary plan as well in 
Health — so our most vulnerable — will continue to be 
covered, although receiving their services from private 
audiologists. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again, it’s not a matter that we took lightly but, 
Mr. Speaker, we need to focus on the core services in health. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 



April 3, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2069 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, there are many people who will 
be impacted badly by these cuts, Mr. Speaker, who will not fall 
under that most-marginalized plan, Mr. Speaker. That answer is 
just not acceptable. Saskatchewan is already lagging far behind 
other provinces when it comes to early hearing detection and 
intervention. 
 
All of the evidence demonstrates the importance of early 
detection and intervention. Their plan will hurt the chances of 
early hearing detection and intervention. Mr. Speaker, it’s just 
that simple. Kids across Saskatchewan will not get access to 
audiologists and to hearing aids. We hear all the time that 
everything is on the table, but how is it that our children’s 
health and development ended up on the chopping block? 
 
An essential part of this program is audiology screening for 
newborns and children. At the very least, can the minister 
commit to ensuring those services remain for the children of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, we will be the seventh 
province that doesn’t cover those under a public system. As I 
mentioned already, Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, Quebec, 
Ontario, Manitoba, and Alberta don’t offer public system 
hearing services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this wasn’t an issue we took lightly. Those sorts of 
services would be nice to have. Again we didn’t do this . . . We 
did this somewhat reluctantly. But, Mr. Speaker, we need to 
focus on core services in health, health like doctors and nurses 
and hospitals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a perfectly capable private system that 
already offers services in far greater areas of the province than 
the Saskatchewan hearing aid plan does. Mr. Speaker, we have 
faith that they’ll rise to the occasion and provide those services. 
And again, Mr. Speaker, we will protect our most vulnerable 
under the two plans that I mentioned earlier. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Changes to Taxation 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, at a time when half of 
Saskatchewan people are living paycheque to paycheque, these 
cuts and tax hikes just don’t make any sense. On top of those 
tax hikes and Sask Party power bill increases, this weekend 
marked the beginning of the Sask Party’s PST [provincial sales 
tax] hike too, a billion-dollar tax grab to pay for the Sask 
Party’s decade-long run of mismanagement, scandal, and waste. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just in taxes, the average family will pay about 
$444 more per year. They’re already paying $120 more a year 
in power bills; add on Sask Party’s municipal tax hikes and user 
fee hikes. Mr. Speaker, what do they have to say to young 
Saskatchewan families barely making ends meet who will have 
to pay more for almost everything they buy? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have fully acknowledged, I think the Premier’s fully 
acknowledged, this was a difficult budget. This was a tough 
budget with respect to the shift that we’re making on our tax 
base from taxing income and productivity to consumption taxes 
here, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that we have stable revenue with 
respect to the volatility we’ve seen in the resource sector over 
the last number of years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Even with these changes to the tax base, Mr. Speaker, I can tell 
the hon. member . . . I know she wasn’t here in 2007; I wasn’t 
here in 2007. But even with these changes, Mr. Speaker, 
individuals with $40,000 income, individual families with 
$50,000 income, and families with $75,000 income — in all 
three of those different income levels, Mr. Speaker, combine 
the personal income tax rates along with a new PST expanded 
base, they’ll still be paying less in taxes than they were under 
the NDP government in 2007, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In addition to that, we have increased the Saskatchewan 
low-income tax credit in this province by 40 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker. An individual at the lowest income level would have 
to spend about $5,800 on taxable consumable items to use up 
that Saskatchewan low-income tax credit, Mr. Speaker. We 
believe that’s the way to go. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 60 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2017 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 60, The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill No. 60, the legal professional amendment Act, 
2017 be now introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to question no. 284. 



2070 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2017 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled the 
response to question 284. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 57 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2017 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to move second reading of amendments to The 
Tobacco Tax Act, 1998. These amendments will implement the 
2017-18 budget initiative to increase the rate of tax from 25 
cents to 27 cents for cigarettes, tobacco sticks, cut tobacco, and 
smokeless tobacco products. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this change to the rate of tobacco tax was 
announced on March 22nd, 2017 as part of the 2017-18 budget 
and took effect the following day. Mr. Speaker, this rate 
increase is part of our government’s initiative to shift the 
province’s tax base toward greater reliance on consumption 
taxes, at the same time as we reduce taxes on income and 
productivity. 
 
Section 3 of the Act is being amended to increase the rate of tax 
from 25 cents to 27 cents for cigarettes, tobacco sticks, cut 
tobacco, and smokeless tobacco products. 
 
Section 2 of the Act is being amended to remove definitions for 
the terms “Indian” and “Indian band,” as these terms are not 
referenced in the Act, which instead refers to an “exempt 
consumer.” 
 
Section 2 of the Act is also being amended to create a separate 
tobacco category for smokeless tobacco products. This is 
defined to include chewing tobacco and snuff. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of Bill No. 
57, amendments to the tobacco Act, 1998, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Finance minister has moved to adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 57, The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2017, 
second reading. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
pleased once again to stand in my place to offer initial 
comments on Bill 57, The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the minister briefly alluded to the fact that there 
is going to be an increase in the number of tobacco products 
throughout the province of Saskatchewan as part of their 
measures to address the deficit that the Saskatchewan Party has 
created, Mr. Speaker, we looked through the bill itself. And we 
saw that the Saskatchewan Party are indeed raising a lot of 
taxes that will impact a lot of Saskatchewan families, while at 
the same time we notice, Mr. Speaker, that they decreased taxes 
to their corporate friends. But what we do know, Mr. Speaker, 
increasing taxes on tobacco certainly would provide a lot of 
challenge for those that want to afford to continue smoking or 
continue the use of tobacco, such as snuff. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we all know that there’s a lot of negative 
impacts on smoking as it relates to our health of our 
communities, and especially the young people. We also know, 
through marketing and through promotion, that a lot of the 
tobacco companies are targeting younger people to try to begin 
the process of idolizing the whole notion of cigarette smoking 
or using smokeless tobacco. 
 
So we know those particular challenges are out there, Mr. 
Speaker, but we do know that there’s some great work being 
done by a number of organizations throughout the province to 
look at measures in which they could stop smoking or stop the 
tobacco use overall. And, Mr. Speaker, we want to make sure, 
we want to make sure that the process itself is recognized for 
the better health of our Saskatchewan families, and especially as 
we know that tobacco companies are targeting a lot of the 
young people. 
 
So on that note, Mr. Speaker, we have to make sure that this 
particular taxation regime that’s being put in place, even if it’s 
only on the tobacco products that we made reference to today, 
that there’s always a balancing act that must be maintained in a 
sense that we don’t begin to push people towards contraband 
tobacco products. Mr. Speaker, as we all know that there’s a lot 
of black market opportunities out there, whether it’s tobacco or 
snuff. There’s a lot of organizations out there that are able to 
provide and have the younger people purchase some of these 
products at a much lesser cost. 
 
So those are always issues that are of the challenging nature. So 
obviously our critic and our opposition team will be going 
through this particular bill to ensure that all those issues are 
addressed. And on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move that we 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 57, The Tobacco Tax Amendment 
Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has adjourned 
debate on Bill No. 57, The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2017. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 58 — The Corporation Capital Tax 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of Bill No. 58, 
amendments to The Corporation Capital Tax Act. 
 
These amendments will implement the 2017-18 budget 
initiative to increase the corporation capital tax rate on large 
financial institutions from 3.25 per cent to 4 per cent, effective 
April 1, 2017. The change is one of the revenue initiatives 
introduced in the 2017-18 budget to address the current fiscal 
challenge facing the province. 
 
To implement this change, specific amendments to The 
Corporation Capital Tax Act are as follows: subsection 13(2) is 
being amended to increase the rate of tax on large financial 



April 3, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2071 

institutions from 3.25 per cent to 4 per cent, effective April 1, 
2017. Subsection 13(2.12) is being amended to increase the rate 
of tax on small financial institutions from 3.25 per cent to 4 per 
cent on their portion of taxable capital that exceeds $1.5 billion, 
effective April 1, 2017, and subsection 14(2) is being amended 
to reflect the change in the tax rate deduction for large financial 
institutions from 3.25 per cent to 4 per cent, effective April 1, 
2017, for the portion of tax payable that is allocated outside 
Saskatchewan. Subsection 14(2.2) is being amended to reflect 
the change in the tax rate deduction for small financial 
institutions from 3.25 per cent to 4 per cent, effective April 1, 
2017, for the portion of tax on their taxable capital that exceeds 
$1.5 billion and is allocated outside Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of Bill 58, 
amendments to The Corporation Capital Tax Act. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved second 
reading of Bill No. 58, The Corporation Capital Tax 
Amendment Act, 2017. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Again as customary in the Assembly, I’m proud to take my 
place to offer initial comments as it relates to Bill No. 58, The 
Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as the minister made reference to in his 
opening comments, that this bill basically raises the capital tax 
rate for banks from 3.25 percentage level to a 4 per cent level, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this is obviously an effort by the Saskatchewan Party to 
find every possible penny that they possibly can find to try and 
basically balance the books for a time frame of three years from 
now, Mr. Speaker. They have made a lot of assumptions on that 
particular budget, Mr. Speaker, and particularly paid a lot of 
attention to their predictions on the oil prices, Mr. Speaker. And 
of course the minister made reference to the fact that they hope 
to be back in balance within three years. 
 
And certainly our more-than-capable Finance critic has looked 
at their numbers herself, and with a few key advisers, and 
basically I think people will find out very quickly, Mr. Speaker, 
that this Finance minister doesn’t know what they’re doing, and 
the Saskatchewan Party itself as a caucus, that the caucus as a 
whole absolutely doesn’t know what they’re doing as it pertains 
to trying to balance our budgets from year to year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on this particular amendment, on this particular 
Act, there’s no question that, from our perspective, making big 
banks pay a little more is probably a measure that many people 
in Saskatchewan wouldn’t argue too much.  
 
But, Mr. Speaker, you’ve got to be very careful here as well 
because this cannot be used as an excuse by the Sask Party to 
increase taxes on our credit union system, which is probably a 
smaller bank. I hate to use that word “smaller,” but in terms of 
being national and so on and so forth being able to compete 
with the bigger bank, they certainly are capable of doing that. 

But, Mr. Speaker, you’ve got to be very careful as it pertains to 
taxes on the credit union system because this may be a 
deterrent, it’ll certainly be a threat to their health. So there’s two 
things that you’ve got to keep in mind as we’re looking at this 
particular bill, the impact on the credit union itself, how is it 
going to hurt them. And certainly, I think as I mentioned in the 
earlier part of my presentation, that I think that the larger banks 
that most people in Saskatchewan wouldn’t argue too much in 
the fact that this increase would generate more revenues from 
these larger banks. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it is also really important to point out that 
while the banks are paying more, people in Saskatchewan 
should not let them take that attention away from the fact that 
Saskatchewan families are paying a lot more taxes and for a lot 
more services, Mr. Speaker, than ever before. And that certainly 
is compliments of the Saskatchewan Party government. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have saw the mismanagement, we have 
witnessed the scandal, and we certainly are suffering from the 
waste that the Saskatchewan Party have put this province 
through in the last decade that they have been in power. And, 
Mr. Speaker, while these corporate income tax increases 
certainly won’t have a lot of people defending the larger banks 
in the province of Saskatchewan, what is happening on a equal 
basis, Mr. Speaker, is that this particular government is going 
after not only taxes by the banks, but they’re cutting taxes to 
their corporate friends and they’re also increasing taxes paid by 
the Saskatchewan families by a billion dollars. And that is 
simply not fair and not acceptable. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as I said at the outset, that these are our initial 
comments on this particular bill. We have a Finance critic that 
is more than capable of challenging the Minister of Finance on 
every part of this particular bill, so her opportunity to do exactly 
that over the next several months, Mr. Speaker, will certainly 
become apparent. And on that note I will simply move that we 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 58. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 58, The Corporation Capital Tax 
Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 48 — The Education Property Tax Act 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I rise today to move second reading of 
Bill No. 48, The Education Property Tax Act. Mr. Speaker, 
beginning January 1, 2018, The Education Property Tax Act 
will allow for the redirection of education property taxes, or 
EPT, to the General Revenue Fund, or the GRF. Municipalities 
will continue to collect EPT from taxpayers, but direct the 
money to the province rather than school divisions, this 
response to school divisions’ request to wind up their role 
respecting property taxes, given the changes government has 
made over the last number of years regarding setting EPT mill 



2072 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2017 

rates. 
 
The redirection of EPT will also, Mr. Speaker, achieve 
efficiencies for school divisions, municipalities, and 
government. Both the municipal and education sectors support 
this change. Specifically, Mr. Speaker, this bill, along with 
consequential amendments to a number of other Acts, sets out a 
number of matters related to levying, collection, and remittance 
of EPT to the GRF so that an orderly and smooth transition 
takes place for municipalities, school divisions, and 
government. Taxpayers will not see any changes to how they 
pay their EPT. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will again speak to the main highlights of what 
this bill will do. First, it will maintain the current requirement 
for municipalities to collect EPT from ratepayers. The 
difference is EPT will be remitted to government instead of 
school divisions as of January 1, 2018. To accommodate this, 
government will be added as an other taxing authority for EPT 
purposes. This will allow the application of normal property tax 
processes and practices to continue to apply to the EPT. 
 
Second, the new bill will provide for provincial approval of 
EPT exemptions and abatements above a threshold that will be 
set in regulations following further consultation. Below that 
threshold, municipalities will be able to decide, using their 
discretion. Mr. Speaker, there will be no change to the local 
ability to exempt or abate the municipal portion of property 
taxes. This is entirely at the discretion of locally elected 
councils, and will continue to be. 
 
Other matters such as municipal tax enforcement, the ability for 
municipalities to enter into agreements with respect to the 
collection of taxes, and the ability for separate school divisions 
to assess the property tax base will continue to apply to EPT the 
same as now. 
 
Lastly, Mr. Speaker, the new Act will make consequential 
amendments to a number of other Acts to ensure Government 
Relations and the Finance legislation reflects the redirection of 
EPT to the GRF. Specifically consequential amendments are to 
be made to the three municipal Acts and to The Revenue and 
Financial Services Act to provide the Ministry of Finance with 
responsibility for receiving the EPT collected by municipalities 
on behalf of government. As a result, Finance will have the 
authority for this, similar to the collection of other taxes that it 
is responsible for. The Ministry of Government Relations will 
maintain its current responsibility for policy and auditing the 
monthly and annual EPT returns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of consultations the ministry consulted 
with the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, the 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, New North, 
the Provincial Association of Resort Communities of 
Saskatchewan, the cities of Regina and Saskatoon, the 
municipal administrators associations, the Saskatchewan School 
Boards Association, the Saskatchewan association of school 
board officials, and the Saskatchewan Catholic School Boards 
Association. 
 
Consultations took place over the summer of 2016 and included 
a face-to-face meeting with municipal associations, education 
associations, and ministry employees to discuss the contents of 

the side-by-side drafting instructions. I would like to take this 
opportunity to specifically thank municipal and education 
stakeholders for working closely with the government to 
develop this legislation. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, the main purpose of this bill is to allow 
for the redirection of EPT to the GRF. The new bill will 
continue the current practice of municipalities levying, 
collecting, and remitting EPT, as this is the most efficient and 
cost-effective means of performing these tasks. The government 
will also continue to be transparent in setting the EPT rates and 
reporting to both the EPT revenues and the funding of school 
divisions. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 48, The 
Education Property Tax Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Government Relations has 
moved second reading of Bill No. 48, The Education Property 
Tax Act. Is it the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize 
the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to be able to rise in the House today to enter into the 
debate on the Bill No. 48. I’d like to thank the minister for the 
comments. Usually second reading comments are very closely 
studied by everyone who is trying to understand the intent of 
government and when it comes to introducing bills. So those 
kinds of comments provide a good context for analyzing the 
impact of the bill itself. 
 
Now I think what I’d like to start out with, Mr. Speaker, is just a 
reference to some of the media quotes that have been made 
about this bill, and in particular the Saskatchewan School 
Boards Association president, Shawn Davidson. And what he 
said is, while they are looking forward to working with the 
minister and the minister has indicated there has been 
consultations, he says he does not want to see divisions lose 
their autonomy. 
 
And certainly we know that this shift from the collection of the 
educational property taxes from the school boards to directly to 
the GRF is a significant change and a significant loss of 
autonomy for school divisions. He went on to say . . . And this 
is an article from March 23rd, 2017. This is a quote. “The 
reasons why local boards are elected is because our ratepayers 
in our communities want to see an elected trustee that makes 
decisions about their kids’ futures,” Davidson said. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to share a little story with you 
about my hometown and something that happened way back 
when I was a little kid in the ’60s. Mr. Speaker, my dad was on 
the local school board for the public school division, but my 
family . . . My mother was born and raised a Catholic and all of 
us kids were born and raised Catholic, so we were going to the 
separate school division. But dad, as a community-minded 
person, he decided to step up to the plate and provide that local 
leadership and local service to the public school board. 
 
In those days the inclusion of French as a subject matter in the 
curriculum was hotly, hotly contested and a very divisive issue 
in our community, Mr. Speaker. It was one that split people 
along certain lines. There was people who left the Catholic 



April 3, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2073 

division and went to the public division and vice versa. And 
there were a lot of people really, really upset about the way 
French language instruction was being handled. 
 
Now you can imagine how that could really tear apart a small 
town like mine, Mr. Speaker. And so thankfully for the 
presence of the local school board, and I would say my dad’s 
leadership and his calm leadership, they were able to work 
through a very divisive issue at the community level, at the 
local level, with local leaders and local elected school board 
officials being able to lead the way in seeing that the 
community was brought together and wasn’t divided. So that’s 
just one very small example, but it’s one that I have of how 
local autonomy is so critically important to the success of 
schools in communities but also to solving disputes and 
managing conflict in terms of local-level conflicts. And that’s 
something that is irreplaceable and I think something that really 
speaks to the value of having local leaders step up to the plate. 
 
I just was at home this weekend, Mr. Speaker, and my dad 
celebrated his 90th birthday. And he took a lead there too and 
was leading the singalong. My dad is a leader in so many ways. 
But his leadership on the public school boards in the ’60s, I 
think, and his experience with the Catholic school division . . . 
His kids were going to the Catholic schools, so he understood 
both sides of the coin. He understood all the community that 
was involved. And I think his level-headed leadership was a key 
to the success of resolving, at least managing, a divisive issue 
within our community. 
 
So we know how important local school boards are, and 
certainly I think this government heard that message. And they 
were floating balloons before the election, as you’ll recall, that 
perhaps amalgamation of school boards would be on the table. 
Everything’s on the table. Everything . . . We don’t know 
what’s going to happen. And I think many, many people 
expressed concern about that to the point where this 
government actually listened to those concerns and said, well 
we’re not going to amalgamate the school boards. 
 
But what are they doing, Mr. Speaker? With this bill, they’re 
doing the same thing that they are to STC through the Crown 
protection Act. They’re emasculating the ability of locally 
elected, autonomous school boards to be able to make decisions 
relevant to their community. And so what have they left? And 
that is part of the problem. When you take away control of the 
money, then you take away a large part of the local, 
autonomous decision making. And it’s pretty evident, Mr. 
Speaker, that that’s the case. There hasn’t been anyone speaking 
out in favour of this move, but somehow the minister seems to 
think that this is a move that, because they consulted, that 
everybody agrees with it. And I don’t think anything could be 
further from reality, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the things that we see with the STC . . . Well they say 
they’re winding it down, so it’s not affecting the Crown 
protection Act. But when you wind it down, that’s basically 
taking it out of the Crown protection Act because, Mr. Speaker, 
there will be nothing left. And I think we say the same thing 
here when you’re talking about the autonomy of local school 
boards. You can say they’re there in presence and allow the 
elections to continue, but when you have these kinds of bills 
that take away any power that they might have to make those 

local decisions, to be autonomous, it’s definitely questionable 
whether or not that they actually have that autonomy anymore, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:45] 
 
So I mean the government has indicated they actually listened, 
and I’m hoping they’ll do the same with libraries. And I’m 
hoping they’ll do the same with a number of other of the cuts 
that are hurting Saskatchewan people quite profoundly, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Certainly they will be hearing now about that, although they 
didn’t ask before the election and I don’t think they consulted 
with a lot of people on those issues. They did do the pre-consult 
in terms of amalgamation, but I don’t think they talked a whole 
lot with school boards about taking away their autonomy when 
it comes to the education property tax portion. 
 
We had some words from the Minister of Finance after the 
budget was delivered, and he said that these amendments will 
allow the Education minister to provide decision making on 
some of these things going on in school divisions that do not 
occur right now. So that, to me . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s a different Act. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — It’s an education Act amendment. And I thank 
the minister for pointing out that’s a different Act, but it’s the 
same idea. What we’re doing is we’re seeing the removal of 
local autonomy. And so that’s another example of the removal 
of local autonomy, that school boards are now going to have to 
answer to the Education minister when they aren’t in agreement 
anymore. 
 
What the Minister of Finance said was, when divisions are 
uncooperative. Well to me, Mr. Speaker, that’s when divisions 
don’t agree with the Education minister or the minister 
responsible for municipalities or the Minister of Finance. Is that 
the definition of uncooperative that we’re talking about here? 
 
And so might is right, Mr. Speaker? Is that what that’s 
suggesting, is that because you’re a minister, you are able to say 
to someone else who’s being perfectly reasonable, but doesn’t 
agree, that they are being uncooperative? I don’t know if that 
reflects well on democracy, Mr. Speaker, and it certainly 
doesn’t reflect well on the local autonomy that school boards 
would have. 
 
And so we know that these changes are very concerning, and 
certainly taking away the spending ability and the control over 
the property taxes is concerning as well. What’s also 
concerning is the increase in property taxes. And we know that 
the mill rates, according to an article that came out in the press 
recently, mill rates for education property taxes are actually 
decreasing, but reassessment and increased property value 
means tax revenues will increase by about 9.8 per cent. So we 
can see there’s a tax hike here of 9.8 per cent on property 
owners, primarily I think people that live, you know, in urban 
areas, that they’re going to have to absorb in addition to all the 
other cuts and increased taxes that they’re facing in this budget. 
 
And we know school boards are being asked to trim their costs 



2074 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2017 

by 3.5 per cent, which is . . . You know, when you’ve been cut 
to the bone and the cupboard is bare, Mr. Speaker, it’s really 
difficult to find any more resources. You know, the old saying 
is, you can’t get blood from a stone. And I think, you know, our 
school boards are certainly a good example of that where 
they’ve been forced to dig into their revenues, or sorry, their 
reserves, Mr. Speaker, and those were meant for something 
entirely different. But because they have no control over their 
finances, these kinds of bills actually make it worse for school 
boards instead of better. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I believe that other of my colleagues are going 
to want to weigh in on this particular bill. And you know, we’re 
certainly hearing a lot of feedback from people across the 
province, school boards, teachers, parents, and we’re going to 
continue the debate as we go along. So at this point I would 
move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 48. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana has 
adjourned debate on Bill No. 48, the education property tax 
amendment Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 49 — The Education Property Tax Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2017/Loi de 2017 portant modifications 

corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Education Property Tax Act 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of Bill No. 49, The Education Property Tax 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2017. This bill amends one 
bilingual Act, The Education Act, 1995. As a result of this being 
a bilingual Act, consequential amendments to this Act require a 
separate bill. Mr. Speaker, this bill simply repeals existing 
sections in The Education Act, 1995 related to school taxes as 
these will now be contained in The Education Property Tax Act. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 
49, The Education Property Tax Consequential Amendment Act, 
2017. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Government Relations moves 
second reading of Bill No. 49, The Education Property Tax 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2017. Is the Assembly ready for 
the question? I recognize the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A few 
brief comments on this particular bill. It’s a very short bill, and 
as the minister indicated in her opening comments that it’s in 
relation to the fact that the amendments are being made to The 
Education Act, and therefore there’s a requirement for some 
changes to be made separately in Bill 49. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, The Education Act is a bill that’s 
provided in both official languages. Therefore these changes 
need to be made in a separate piece of legislation. By taking out 
all of the references to education property tax out of The 

Education Act and putting it into a separate . . . This is a brand 
new bill, The Education Property Tax Act itself, which will be 
unilingual — appears at least for the time being — so all of 
those provisions that are in, the bilingual provisions that are in 
The Education Act, are now being yanked and they’re being put 
into a unilingual Act where they will no longer be available in 
bilingual form. Plus of course there are changes that are being 
made to the education property tax in Bill No. 48. So as far as 
that goes, Mr. Speaker, there’s really no need for further 
comment but I would then move at this point that we adjourn 
Bill No. 49. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 49. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 53 — The Provincial Health Authority Act 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Provincial Health Authority Act. 
Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to ensuring the 
people of our province receive high-quality, timely health care 
regardless of where they live in Saskatchewan. To support and 
improve front-line patient care, we appointed an advisory panel 
to make recommendations for the most effective and efficient 
health system for our province. The advisory panel received 
over 300 submissions from Saskatchewan residents and directly 
met with over 20 health system stakeholder groups. 
 
In January our government released and accepted all of the 
panel’s final recommendations. This includes the transition of 
the 12 existing regional health authorities into a single 
provincial health authority and other system wide 
transformation initiatives to better coordinate and deliver health 
care services across the province. The proposed legislation 
brings Saskatchewan another step closer to creating a single 
provincial health authority that will improve front-line patient 
care by removing arbitrary health region boundaries. 
 
This change represents a consolidation of administration, not a 
centralization of services. It means a first step to improving 
special care placement and emergency medical services by 
removing arbitrary health region boundaries. It means 
integrated systems will enable nurses, physicians, and support 
staff to coordinate their efforts to serve our residents better. And 
it also means removing unnecessary duplication of 
administrative support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Provincial Health Authority Act is focused on 
important administrative and operational requirements that must 
be in place the day the new organization begins operations. This 
includes enabling specific roles and responsibilities of the new 
organization and the authority to appoint a board of directors 
with up to 10 members to oversee the operations. A board and 
CEO [chief executive officer] will be put in place in the coming 
months to help guide the transition and prepare for those 
operations. 



April 3, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2075 

Mr. Speaker, the proposed legislation will provide the ability 
for oversight of the contracts of the CEO and those that report 
to the CEO. While leaders in our health system will be paid 
appropriately, our government will continue to ensure that tax 
dollars are spent wisely. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to providing 
high-quality health services in every part of this province. In 
particular, that includes our rural and remote communities. 
 
As recommended by the advisory panel, this legislation allows 
for the creation and continuation of community advisory 
networks. We are committed to ensuring that local voices 
continue to be heard and that the people of Saskatchewan have 
a relationship and representation with the new provincial health 
authority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that local fundraising foundations are 
important partners in the delivery of quality health care in our 
province. The proposed legislation ensures foundations will 
continue to be independent fundraising organizations and that 
the funds they raise continue to be used for the local health 
services or facilities that they were raised for. 
 
The Provincial Health Authority Act will carry forward many of 
the existing provisions of The Regional Health Services Act, 
which will be repealed and replaced by this Act. Following 
passage of the new Act and establishment of bylaws and 
regulations, the new provincial health authority will come into 
force. This is currently anticipated to occur in the fall of 2017. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s important to note that many transformational 
initiatives recommended by the advisory panel will be 
implemented in a phased approach over time. This includes full 
health system policy and program integration and clinical 
services redesign, including the areas of laboratory and 
diagnostic imaging, acute care services, and emergency medical 
services. As well, engagement with indigenous people will 
occur in the coming months to seek guidance on how to 
improve services to First Nation and Métis people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new provincial health authority will support 
our government’s commitment to providing high-quality 
front-line patient care to the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 
Provincial Health Authority Act. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Health has moved second 
reading of Bill No. 53, The Provincial Health Authority Act. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 
Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am glad 
to join debate this afternoon on Bill No. 53, The Provincial 
Health Authority Act, and then consequently on the consequent 
amendments Act, Bill 54. 
 
It was with great interest that I saw this bill come forward, or 
received the news about the intention of the government to 
proceed with one big health region, Mr. Speaker. Because of 
course not a year ago, you know, a year less a day, we were out 
on the campaign trail and this, the one big health region as a 
policy initiative, Mr. Speaker, was in fact a central plank in the 

platform of the Progressive Conservative Party of 
Saskatchewan. And you know, certainly the Sask Party had 
something to say about, they were going to look to finding 
savings from administration and how to better put that onto the 
front lines, Mr. Speaker. But this, what is represented here in 
Bills No. 53 and 54, is actually not their policy, Mr. Speaker. It 
belongs to the Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan. 
 
And you know, it’s always kind of interesting to see the way 
that these circles go round in politics, Mr. Speaker. But if their 
big health initiative on the part of this government is to take the 
central plank out of the Progressive Conservative Party of 
Saskatchewan’s platform, Mr. Speaker, if that’s their central 
initiative right out of the gates after there’s been, you know, in 
the intervening year there’s been plenty of talk about 
transformational change, Mr. Speaker, and the meetings and the 
this and the that. If after all that, Mr. Speaker, that their big 
move in health care is on one big health region, you know, 
that’s interesting. 
 
And we’ll certainly take the time to examine this initiative as 
best we’re able, Mr. Speaker. But any time we find this 
government coming forward and saying that they’re going to 
find savings out there in the land . . . Of course there’s not just 
years but several years on the record, Mr. Speaker, not just of 
rhetoric but of actual experience when it comes to the way that 
this government wrote lean into everybody’s mandate for the 
ministers over there. And certainly health care was the main 
beachhead for the lean initiative, Mr. Speaker. Health care was 
where they brought John Black lean to town, you know, paid 40 
million and counting, Mr. Speaker, on lean consultants. 
 
But certainly, Mr. Speaker, any time this government gets out 
there and talks about how they’re going to find administrative 
savings, the tendency on the part of the people of Saskatchewan 
is to check their wallet, Mr. Speaker. And any time that this 
government . . . You know, it’s been a long way away from 
when this government had Tony Dagnone come in to do the 
patient-centred care review, and how far they’ve come from 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[15:00] 
 
So any time they talk about administrative savings and then, 
you know, out of the gates aren’t able to identify what those 
savings might actually be, Mr. Speaker, and coming to the 
dance belatedly with that information, Mr. Speaker, any time 
that they talk about how this is going to be better for the front 
lines, you know, it’s not hard to harken back to all the guff that 
got spent on the lean file, Mr. Speaker, by this government. 
 
Lean was their signature initiative. It’s what they were 
recommending to first ministers right across this country as the 
brand new approach in health care, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve 
seen how that worked out, or rather did not work out, Mr. 
Speaker — the tens of millions of dollars that went into the lean 
file, the way that there was a bit of preaching around listening 
to front-line workers, but the practice was something very 
different, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So when it comes to an initiative like this, Mr. Speaker, the fact 
that they’ve taken it from the Progressive Conservative Party of 
Saskatchewan’s electoral platform in the last campaign, that’s, 



2076 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2017 

you know, that’s always cause for concern, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Then secondly that, you know, we just hope to goodness that 
they learned the lessons from another Progressive Conservative 
government, and that was the one that ruled Alberta for many, 
many years, Mr. Speaker. That one big health region was an 
initiative of that government. And that was a disaster, Mr. 
Speaker, in terms of the way that that did not serve the people 
of Alberta, that it did not serve the patients who were counting 
on care from that system, and did not deliver on the 
administrative savings that were touted on the front end, but in 
fact made a system that already has its challenges with 
bureaucracy and the division of resources between 
administration and the front lines, Mr. Speaker, it made that that 
much worse, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So you know, that they’ve . . . They didn’t run on this. They 
lifted it, you know, holus-bolus from the Progressive 
Conservative Party of Saskatchewan’s platform after the 
election, you know, despite not having talked about that with 
the people of Saskatchewan and in fact having run against the 
PCs [Progressive Conservatives] and having not, you know, 
looked at that policy prescription from the Progressive 
Conservatives and offered up support. That wasn’t the case, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But here we go again with the people that brought you John 
Black lean and, you know, deploying the senseis and the 
paper-airplane-making exercise and the many different ways 
that they got so far away from patient-centred care, Mr. 
Speaker. So we’re going to be watching that aspect of this 
government’s approach to health care very carefully. We’re 
going to be watching very closely to see what lessons they have 
or have not learned from the disaster of an experience that 
happened with one big health region in Alberta, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we’re going to be interested to see how . . . You know, it’s 
hard to look at this effort and think, you know, don’t you 
already have outstanding work to be done as it regards bringing 
indigenous people’s interest to bear within the system, Mr. 
Speaker? You know, isn’t there a years-old promise 
outstanding, Mr. Speaker, to work with, in this case, the FSIN 
[Federation of Sovereign Indigenous Nations] on the whole 
question of indigenous health and how that is or is not served 
by the Saskatchewan health care system, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And you know, so when they come to the table yet again with 
another promise of, well we’re going to take a look at this and 
we’re going to see how we can better incorporate these 
interests, Mr. Speaker, here’s a way they could do that is, you 
know, keep your promises that you’ve made already. Do the 
work that you’ve said you were going to do in conjunction, in 
partnership, in co-operation with First Nations and Métis 
people, and not forget about that. But yet again come to the 
table like this and say, here we go again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the issues go wanting. The care for patients goes 
wanting as this government, you know, seems to be more 
interested in diversionary tactics than actual service of the 
people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again in terms of where this initiative comes from, 
in terms of the way that this government has entered into this 

particular policy position, I hate to be a suspicious person, Mr. 
Speaker, in this political life, but we’ve seen parts of this movie 
before. And it didn’t work out terribly well for the people of 
Saskatchewan who are supposed to be at the base of all of this. 
Certainly, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be looking to the sector in terms 
of the consultation to go on. 
 
But this government has come forward proclaiming savings. 
They couldn’t tell us what they were out of the gate. You know, 
some of the hard numbers we have seen so far involved the 
buy-out packages with the CEOs. And again, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ll be interested to see how those generous packages, how 
that approach works for the rest of the system in terms of the 
people who are on the front lines in Saskatchewan health care. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’ll not have much more to say when we get to 
Bill No. 54, but I know that this is something we watch very 
closely in terms of how this government does or does not serve 
the interests of Saskatchewan people in the health care system. 
But without any further ado, I would move to adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 53, The Provincial Health Authority Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 53, 
The Provincial Health Authority Act. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Bill No. 54 — The Provincial Health Authority Consequential 

Amendment Act, 2017/Loi de 2017 portant modifications 
corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Provincial Health 

Authority Act 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Provincial Health Authority 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2017. As I outlined in the 
second reading speech for The Provincial Health Authority Act, 
the creation of a new provincial organization will improve 
front-line patient care by ensuring health care services are better 
coordinated across the province. Mr. Speaker, The Regional 
Health Services Act will be repealed and replaced by The 
Provincial Health Authority Act. 
 
There are a number of other Acts that are also impacted by this 
change. To ensure consistency of legislation, The Provincial 
Health Authority Consequential Amendment Act, 2017 outlines 
all of the Acts where reference to The Regional Health Services 
Act will be replaced with The Provincial Health Authority Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 
Provincial Health Authority Consequential Amendment Act, 
2017. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Health has moved 
that Bill No. 54, The Provincial Health Authority Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member from 
Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 



April 3, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2077 

Mr. McCall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Again as the minister has outlined succinctly, and I thank him 
for that, this has to do with updating the language 
consequentially. And the real policy impact certainly comes in 
Bill No. 53. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would move . . . I don’t know 
that my colleagues will have much more to say about this in the 
days that come, but certainly I’m sure they may have some 
points to add in, in the train of the real star of the show here, 
Bill No. 53, The Provincial Health Authority Act. 
 
So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move to adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 54, The Provincial Health Authority Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre, the Opposition House Leader, has moved 
to adjourn debate on Bill No. 54. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 50 — The Provincial Capital Commission Act 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central 
Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
in the House to move second reading of Bill 50, The Provincial 
Capital Commission Act. This bill is being proposed to address 
core recommendations from a comprehensive review completed 
in 2011-12. It was recommended that Wascana Centre be 
preserved, enhanced, and protected. The Government of 
Saskatchewan assumed leadership for the continued operation 
of Wascana Centre and each landowner — the province, the 
city of Regina, and the University of Regina — be responsible 
for their own lands and assets under an overarching agreement 
to ensure consistency in approaches and standards for land 
management. 
 
Once passed, this legislation will move responsibility for the 
Wascana Centre and all of its assets to the Provincial Capital 
Commission and will also repeal the existing Wascana Centre 
Act. The bill will enable a streamlined approach to operations 
and investments in the park and will bring stability to Wascana 
Centre’s funding. We also believe efficiencies can be reached 
through economies of scale gained by working closely with the 
Ministry of Central Services. The Act will help ensure 
sustainability of these lands which serve not only as a natural 
urban retreat for the people of the province but also as the seat 
of provincial government and an area of provincial historical 
significance. 
 
Key elements of the new legislation include: the creation of an 
enhanced Provincial Capital Commission with direct oversight 
of Wascana Centre among other features of the provincial 
capital such as Government House and the Territorial Building; 
a new streamlined governance board composition with 
continued input from the city of Regina and the University of 
Regina for decisions affecting all partners; responsibility for 

land management and upkeep residing with the respective 
landowners subject to an overarching agreement managed by 
the commission to ensure consistency and common standards; 
collaborative planning among the partners for the management, 
operation, and investment into common areas, assets, and 
infrastructure; the contribution of provisions related to the 
long-standing master plan development and updating process; 
and the continuation of the engineering advisory committee and 
architectural advisory committee to assess and guide land use 
development activities in the park. 
 
The new legislation is also more streamlined and modern and 
does not require duplication of existing provisions covered by 
other provincial legislation. Mr. Speaker, the proposed 
provincial capital commission Act allows for an improved 
approach to operations and investment in Wascana Centre. It 
ensures that the centre can continue to serve the people of 
Saskatchewan, not only today but also into the future. It also 
aligns with the efforts of the Provincial Capital Commission to 
ensure this significant feature of the capital city and the home of 
the Legislative Building remain a source of pride for 
Saskatchewan people. Therefore I move second reading of this 
bill. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Central 
Services has moved that Bill No. 50, The Provincial Capital 
Commission Act be now read a second time. Is the Assembly 
ready for the question? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased once again to stand in my place to offer the initial 
comments on Bill 50, The Provincial Capital Commission Act. 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as the minister basically explained what 
they have planned, as we sat here and listened to some of the 
comments, some of the most basic information that we gleaned 
from the bill that was presented to us, Mr. Speaker, is the fact 
that, in the past, the land that is being administered and being 
made reference to in Bill 50 was actually negotiated in a 
three-partnership deal — the U of R [University of Regina] was 
obviously one partner and the second partner was the city of 
Regina and of course the Provincial Capital Commission. 
 
And if my information serves me correct, Mr. Speaker, I believe 
that the city had three representatives, the university had three 
representatives, and I think the Capital Commission had five, a 
total of 11 representatives that basically managed the affairs of 
the legislative grounds, the grounds on which this building of 
course is located on. And over the years, Mr. Speaker, the city 
has lobbied, as the U of R has lobbied, and certainly as the 
various respective governments have lobbied all kinds of 
partners in trying to make sure that the Wascana Centre was a 
showcase.  
 
It was an opportunity where many of our visitors that came to 
the province obviously you want to bring them into the 
legislative grounds where the Assembly of course is built. And 
of course you want your Assembly and the grounds in which 
your Assembly sits to be very attractive, being well maintained 
and certainly is able to have our visitors become in awe of our 
capital city. So all of those points that the minister raised is 
absolutely important to recognize that if you wanted to have a 
showcase centre, Mr. Speaker, that represents democracy here 
in Saskatchewan, then the legislative ground certainly has to be 



2078 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2017 

maintained and something that we can quite frankly show off. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Now as I said at the earlier part of my comment, Mr. Speaker, 
that in the past we had an 11-member board. Three were 
appointed by the U of R, three were appointed by the city, and 
of course five were appointed by the provincial government. 
The minister wants to change all that, Mr. Speaker. She wants 
to take over the grounds. Now people within the opposition 
circles are wondering what is that all about. What is the purpose 
of the provincial government with all their mismanagement, 
scandal, and waste, now want to take over the very grounds in 
which the Assembly sits on? What happened to the partnership?  
 
And as I mentioned, the partnership often lobbied a number of 
organizations in the federal government to help beautify the 
legislative grounds. Now obviously the U of R had good history 
in that, Mr. Speaker. The province also had a good history in 
this, and of course the city. Now what happened though in the 
past, I can, you know, I can certainly point out that one of the 
examples that I witnessed, Mr. Speaker, was the big dig. As 
people know, the actual lake that sits in the front of the 
Assembly, that there was a joint effort, not only by the city and 
by the province, but the federal government got involved as 
well. 
 
And as you can see, that partnership was really, really thriving 
in a sense of getting federal dollars, city dollars, and of course 
provincial dollars to make sure that the big dig was successful, 
and that now we see evidence of that partnership, Mr. Speaker, 
as you walk the grounds. There are beautiful grounds. The lake 
itself has been refurbished, so to speak, as best you can. And 
there was a lot of work put into making sure that our centre of 
democracy was a showcase centre, something that we can be 
very proud of. 
 
That was a direct result of the partnership we had between the U 
of R, the city, and the province, Mr. Speaker. That partnership 
brought in many more partners and more particular, Mr. 
Speaker, the federal government. They became partners in the 
big dig, and you’re seeing evidence of how partnerships can 
thrive and work. 
 
Now the minister comes along and says through this particular 
bill, Bill 50, we’re going to do away with that partnership. We 
are not going to assume authority over the Wascana grounds, 
Mr. Speaker. We’re going to get rid of the partnership. We’re 
going to make sure the city only has one representative, the U 
of R has one representative, and I think the other number for the 
other provincial representatives on this commission, I think, is 
five. 
 
So what’s happening, Mr. Speaker, is that you’re going to have, 
quite frankly, a total of five members. You’re going to have the 
Saskatchewan Party control all decision making as it pertains to 
the Wascana Centre grounds, Mr. Speaker. So we are 
wondering what is the reason for that, Mr. Speaker. Why are 
they doing this? What is the objective that they have? Because 
obviously, if you look at everything that the Saskatchewan 
Party has touched, Mr. Speaker, everything from the smart 
meter fiasco, the bypass boondoggle, Mr. Speaker . . . Now 
we’re paying a carbon capture tax on all our power bills, Mr. 

Speaker. They took a billion dollars out of people’s pockets as 
of this past weekend, Mr. Speaker, and yet we’re still in deficit 
and our debt’s still climbing at an alarming rate. 
 
And so I was sitting there saying, well why would they take 
over the centre? What is the objective? Why would they be 
doing this, Mr. Speaker? And once we begin to ask questions on 
this particular bill, we find out that many of the workers, some 
of the janitors that they fired from this very building . . . As you 
look outside there’s a lot of workers. I believe they’re SGEU 
[Saskatchewan Government and General Employees’ Union ] 
members, Mr. Speaker. They maintain the grounds as part of 
the partnership under the U of R, under the city, and of course 
under the province. So I worry about those particular workers, 
Mr. Speaker. Is this another attempt by the Sask Party to go 
after our working men and women by taking over this 
partnership that was thriving, that has been in place for a long 
time? They come along. They swoop in. They take control of 
the centre. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, it’s the first step in 
privatizing the maintenance of the grounds of the Wascana 
Centre, Mr. Speaker. And that’s what I believe is the objective 
behind this particular bill. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, you are, quite frankly, as an opposition 
member, you would be . . . One would be very careful to point 
out to workers that you don’t want to see them lose their jobs. 
But it’s important to warn them that, when the Sask Party does 
things of this sort, the last people that they look after are 
working men and women of our province. We’ve seen evidence 
of that time and time again. 
 
So the big question I have on the Wascana Centre Authority 
Act, Bill 50, is, what is the government’s objective? Why are 
they throwing away that partnership that was thriving? Why are 
they throwing away those partners that were contributing to the 
Wascana Centre enhancements over time, Mr. Speaker? Why 
all of a sudden that this is a pressing necessity for the 
Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker? 
 
I can only surmise, Mr. Speaker, that their plan is to get rid of 
all the working men and women and privatize the care and 
maintenance of the centre, Mr. Speaker, and once again proves 
that the Sask Party had all of this information and really quite 
frankly didn’t have the courage to tell the people of 
Saskatchewan what their plans are. So once again I think I 
would really be worried about the workers that maintain the 
parks now because I think that their jobs are being looked at by 
this particular Act, by this bill, by the Sask Party government, 
Mr. Speaker. Everything that they have touched has either gone 
broke or they’ve privatized and they have not told the people of 
Saskatchewan any of these actions prior to the last election. 
And I say shame on them. The people of Saskatchewan will not 
forget the fact that their trust was betrayed by the Sask Party, 
and this is yet another nail in the coffin of our working men and 
women from my perspective. 
 
And I point out that today because we can’t figure out for what 
reason would the province of Saskatchewan destroy that 
partnership, take over the Wascana Centre, Mr. Speaker. And I 
think the only reason they’re doing that, Mr. Speaker, is they 
can bring in their private, for-profit companies to privatize the 
service here and eliminate the working men and women of our 
province that have given a lot of time and effort in maintaining 



April 3, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2079 

not only this particular building, but the hallowed grounds in 
which it sits on. So, Mr. Speaker, it is something that is totally 
confusing to the opposition. 
 
We have other members of the Regina caucus who are 
obviously going to speak up on this as time goes on. There’s a 
lot of people really watching what this bill is all about. And the 
fundamental question is why are they doing this at this time. 
And, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of theories, but the opposition’s 
going to hold the government to account. On that note, Mr. 
Speaker, we have 10 other members that want to have 
discussions on this bill and will have further comment from the 
opposition. So at this time I move that we adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 50, The Provincial Capital Commission Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 50. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 51 — The Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation 
Repeal Act 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to move second reading of Bill 51, The Saskatchewan 
Grain Car Corporation Repeal Act. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Saskatchewan Grain Car Corp. was 
established in 1979 at a time of crisis in the grain handling 
system. A shortage of railcars made it hard to move grain. As a 
result, Canada lost some major international sales and others 
were at risk. The provincial government of the day made the 
decision to purchase 1,000 hopper cars, 900 of which remain in 
service today. 
 
Today those cars are nearing the end of their service life. 
According to our officials, the Saskatchewan Grain Car Corp. 
cars have about 14 years of service left. This leaves us with two 
choices: either we plan to replace the fleet over the next 14 
years at an estimated cost of over $100 million, or we sell the 
cars while they still have some commercial value. There were 
good reasons for the government to get into the grain car 
business back in the ’70s, but times have changed and we’re in 
a much different place. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, a lot of work has been done with the key 
players in the grain handling system — producers, industry, and 
government. More work is needed, but we feel like the grain 
handling and transportation system is well positioned to meet 
the transportation needs of Saskatchewan producers. 
 
And the issues that do exist are more about capacity at key 
points in the system rather than the shortage of cars. In fact, 
SGCC’s [Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation] fleet represents 
less than 4 per cent of the hopper cars in the entire grain 
handling system. In other words, the SGCC just doesn’t play 
the same role in the grain handling system that it once did. 

It also needs to be pointed out that the corporation’s financial 
statements have shown a loss of the last number of years despite 
the claims by members opposite. In 2015-16, SGCC ran a 
deficit of $221,000. 
 
The cars also came with maintenance costs. In 2014, 293 of the 
cars were repainted for $2.4 million. It is estimated that 
repainting the rest of the fleet would cost about $4.1 million, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. As a result, we will be selling the fleet. 
 
Essentially the bill transfers the assets of the SGCC to the 
Ministry of Highways and Infrastructure. The ministry will then 
manage the winding down of the corporation. There is already 
interest in our fleet, and we expect a sale to occur in this budget 
year. Saskatchewan’s shortline rails will be given the first 
chance to purchase the cars. Transferring ownership of the cars 
to shortlines will reduce their reliance on the class 1 railways 
for cars. 
 
It will also ensure the cars continue to move Saskatchewan 
grains, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is important for Saskatchewan 
farmers and shortlines. It allows them the opportunity to move 
grain to market, and it also gives the grain producers a chance 
to load producer cars if they so wish. And it also gives an 
opportunity for other grain industries to do business with 
farmers, which will help create a competitive atmosphere for 
farmers to move their products through different companies and 
through different mechanisms, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The most 
important thing is that the cars will be used by Saskatchewan 
farmers to move Saskatchewan grains. 
 
It’s important to note that under previous leases, the cars were 
being used, for example, by CP [Canadian Pacific] Rail. Under 
CP, the cars were being used all over North America. Now they 
will be hauling grain or commodities for Saskatchewan farmers, 
which is very positive. 
 
I would also like to mention that with the winding down of the 
Grain Car Corporation, we’ll also be eliminating the shortline 
rail sustainability program. For shortline operators, I know this 
is not welcome news. However, as the Premier and the Minister 
of Finance have repeated over the past several months, difficult 
decisions needed to be made given our current financial 
realities. And this is certainly one of those difficult decisions, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
While the program is being eliminated, we want to continue to 
work with our provincial shortlines to investigate opportunities 
for federal funding in the future. And with that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I move second reading of Bill 51, The Saskatchewan 
Grain Car Corporation Repeal Act. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure has moved that Bill No. 51, The Saskatchewan 
Grain Car Corporation Repeal Act be now read a second time. 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased once again to stand in my place to give initial 
comments as it pertains to Bill 51, the Saskatchewan Grain Car 
Corp. repeal Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 



2080 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2017 

And all I can say is that, well, well, well, Mr. Speaker, here we 
go again. This is another example of how the Saskatchewan 
Party is going be selling every tangible asset that they’re able to 
sell, Mr. Speaker. Anything. They’re going to have a 
wall-to-wall sale of our assets. And, Mr. Speaker, this is another 
example of what we have said all along, that the Saskatchewan 
Party didn’t have the courage to tell the people of Saskatchewan 
what their plans were prior to the last election. They sat on all 
this information, Mr. Speaker, and they would not tell the 
people the truth behind things like the land titles office, Mr. 
Speaker, the liquor stores, and now the Grain Car Corporation, 
Mr. Speaker, and shutting down STC, Mr. Speaker. These are 
examples of what the people of Saskatchewan really are angry 
about today — the fact that there is going to be a sale of as 
many assets as possible. 
 
And the minister didn’t surprise anyone when he said, oh, 
we’ve had interested parties come forward. We knew all along 
that his plans were to sell them, Mr. Speaker, even before he sat 
in that chair. The moment that the Sask Party won the election, 
their plan was to sell as many of the assets that the people of 
Saskatchewan have in order for us to try and backfill what we 
think is a disgraceful attempt to try and balance the books — 
their bad books, Mr. Speaker — on the backs of Saskatchewan 
people’s assets. And certainly the Saskatchewan Crown 
corporation assets, Mr. Speaker, have served Saskatchewan 
well over the years. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what I’ll point out is that along with the 
shutdown, the impact that it’s going to have on the farm 
community and where CP fits, Mr. Speaker. These are some of 
the things that people ought to really begin to assess before they 
sell off assets that are attached to the Grain Car Corporation, 
Mr. Speaker. The minister alludes to things like shortline rails 
and also spoke about the fact that we’re moving Saskatchewan 
grain. All these words, Mr. Speaker, really there is no 
guarantees whatsoever that any of the conditions that they put 
on the sale of these grain cars, Mr. Speaker, will ever be 
respected in the future. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Now I point out that there was a lot of discussion around CP, 
Mr. Speaker, as it relates to moving grain, a number of years 
ago. I can remember when the current minister was the . . . I 
think he was the president of SARM [Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities], Mr. Speaker. And during 
the history of the greatest grain transportation crisis in the 
history of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, where billions of dollars 
of grain were sitting in bins, Mr. Speaker, were sitting in bins, 
that member as president of the SARM sat on his hands. Didn’t 
say a peep, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know why he didn’t say a peep, Mr. Speaker? It’s because 
his party was in power. So he sat on his hands, was very, very 
quiet. Was very, very quiet. So we don’t in any way, shape, or 
form take any advice from him as it pertains to helping out the 
farm families and the farm communities in this province. I 
refer, Mr. Speaker, to the Finance critic, who’s got a great 
background and a great history with the family farm and she 
gives us a lot of information about what the struggles are for 
many farm families throughout the province. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as we sit here and we sit here, we talk about 
the Grain Car Corporation. And yes, there’s no question from 
my mind that perhaps the member from rural Saskatchewan, the 
current minister, would have greater understanding of rural 
Saskatchewan than me, Mr. Speaker. But actions that he has 
undertaken, or non-actions in the past dictate to me that he has 
political masters that he would listen to at the expense of the 
farm community. And we’ve seen that, many examples of that 
in his history as president of SARM, Mr. Speaker. He didn’t say 
a peep when there was a crisis happening in transporting the 
grains and the commodities of the farmers of this province, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s why on this side of the Assembly anything 
that he says about, generally says about the betterment of the 
family farm, Mr. Speaker, we all have a smile and we’re saying, 
yes, okay, based on your history, we’re going to take lessons 
from you on protecting the interests of family farms throughout 
the province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, whether it is the Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company, our bus service, Mr. Speaker, whether it is the liquor 
stores, whether it’s land titles, or whether it’s the selling off of 
the Grain Car Corporation’s assets, we know the Saskatchewan 
Party is so broke they’re going to sell everything that is not 
nailed down. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is yet another example of how they said 
they’ve had interest. And can you ever see, Mr. Speaker . . . 
And we will see who those interested parties are. We will see 
who they sell these grain cars to, Mr. Speaker. We will see what 
they sell these cars for, Mr. Speaker, and we will see what 
ironclad guarantees that they would have to make sure that 
these grain cars are committed to moving grain, Saskatchewan 
grain, for Saskatchewan farmers after they sell these assets. 
 
And I go back to that point, Mr. Speaker. Quite frankly, their 
agenda is their political party. Their agenda is their 
philosophical beliefs, Mr. Speaker. It is not the people of 
Saskatchewan, and it’s certainly not the Saskatchewan’s farmer 
interest that they’re looking at because as evidenced in the 
current, in the current minister that’s proposing this bill, Mr. 
Speaker, he sat on his hands when the farmers were struggling 
to get their grain to market, and we will never forget that. As 
long as he sits in the Assembly, that’s all we see is someone 
that bowed down to political masters and did not represent the 
interests of the farmers when the time to do so was very 
apparent, Mr. Speaker. And that’s one of the reasons why we’ll 
continue to hold them to account. We’ll continue challenging 
him and the Minister of Agriculture on what they’re doing for 
the farm communities, Mr. Speaker, because we don’t see no 
evidence of that whatsoever. 
 
So on that note, we have many of our caucus members that 
know a lot more about the farm business, Mr. Speaker, as 
opposed to me, but what I do know, what I do know is that 
minister should be ashamed of himself. He sat on his hands, 
didn’t say a word while the rest of the farm community 
suffered. He sat there, and like political masters told him, don’t 
say nothing, don’t say nothing, and he never did. 
 
And that’s why we sit here, we look at some of these bills, and 
they’re actually laughable for us to think that he’s going to now 
protect Saskatchewan farmers’ interests. It is corporate interests 
that he’s concerned about. Let us not forget that, Mr. Speaker, 



April 3, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2081 

because quite frankly this is another example, another example, 
Bill 51, of how the Saskatchewan Party want to sell off any 
asset they can to their corporate buddies. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, based on the history of this minister and 
based on the actions of this government, the interest is not of 
the people of Saskatchewan. It is not for the farm community, 
Mr. Speaker. It is for their corporate buddies, and that’s what 
this bill is going to do. And that’s why we’re very interested in 
who’s buying these grain cars and for how much. And what 
guarantees does this government and that minister have for 
moving Saskatchewan grain by the Saskatchewan farmer? And 
I say to people of Saskatchewan, based on his history, that ain’t 
on. He’s not going to take care of the interests of the farmers to 
move their product to market, Mr. Speaker. He’s shown that in 
the past, and he ain’t about to change his style in the future. 
 
So on that note, more capable people that have an agricultural 
background will be challenging the minister and the 
Saskatchewan Party as it pertains to Bill 51. So on that note, I 
move that we adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 51, The Saskatchewan 
Grain Car Corporation Repeal Act. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 52 — The Meewasin Valley Authority 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, 
Culture and Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, today I rise to speak 
about The Meewasin Valley Authority Amendment Act, 2017. 
As a result of a $1.2 billion reduction in revenues, the 
provincial government this year were forced to review the role 
of government in a number of service areas. As part of our 
transformational change process announced last year, a 
reinvigorated commitment to core service provision has been 
our priority. Through this process our government has been 
reviewing our role in many spending areas. 
 
In the past, some of our urban parks have been jointly funded 
by government, cities, and in some cases universities and rural 
municipalities. With this in mind, the province commissioned a 
study into the funding and governance structure of the 
Meewasin Valley Authority. The study was completed by MNP 
and a report was provided to the government in late 2016. The 
findings of that report stated that when compared to other urban 
parks with similar sizes and mandates across Canada, the 
Meewasin Valley Authority’s funding and governance structure 
were indeed unique. 
 
Meyers Norris Penny recommended that the Government of 
Saskatchewan transfer funding responsibility to the city of 
Saskatoon. In addition, since 2007-2008 the Government of 
Saskatchewan has provided record grants, an increase of more 
than 103 per cent to municipalities through municipal revenue 

sharing. The city of Saskatoon alone has seen an increase, Mr. 
Speaker, of 161 per cent in municipal revenue sharing grants, 
taking that grant total from $17 million in 2007 to $46 million 
today. And when you include infrastructure capital grants, 
Saskatoon has received $500 million since we had the privilege 
of forming government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We believe municipalities are in the best position to make 
decisions about and take responsibility for their parks and their 
conservation areas. But we do not take this decision lightly. 
When presented with all of the information, it was decided that 
the government would be reducing funding to the Meewasin 
Valley Authority. The Meewasin Valley Authority’s allocation 
from the Ministry of Parks, Culture and Sport will drop from 
$909,000 to $500,000 in 2017-18 for a savings to the 
government of $409,000 over the last year. To do this, we have 
amended the Act to remove the subsection that deals with the 
provincial statutory funding and a section that deals with 
allocation of monies paid to the authority. My ministry will 
work with Meewasin to develop an agreement that covers this 
year’s $500,000 funding to be used to support conservation 
activities on the provincial Crown land. 
 
The Meewasin Valley Authority Act also provides for statutory 
funding from the University of Saskatchewan. Although the 
Ministry of Advanced Education will provide targeted funding 
to the University of Saskatchewan for Meewasin this year, the 
subsection that deals with the University of Saskatchewan 
statutory funding has also been removed from the Act. 
 
As a result of the removal of statutory funding requirements 
from the province and the University of Saskatchewan, it was 
also decided that the clause mandating one-third of all funding 
should be directed to trail and infrastructure expansion be 
removed to ensure that the Meewasin Valley Authority was 
afforded greater flexibility to direct grant funds as it sees fit. 
 
Overall this bill provides greater flexibility for the province to 
provide funding as the fiscal environment allows while offering 
the Meewasin Valley Authority greater autonomy to direct 
funds to their priority areas. 
 
To conclude, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move second reading of 
The Meewasin Valley Authority Amendment Act, 2017. Thank 
you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport has moved that Bill No. 52, The Meewasin Valley 
Authority Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
from Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
can hear some members opposite calling, you know, thinking 
that maybe we shouldn’t have the debate on this bill, but I think 
it’s a very important bill and it’s one that’s very indicative of 
the style of government that this government is engaging in 
here in Saskatchewan. And we can see that people from 
Saskatchewan, like I say, if they had seen some of this 
information a year ago before the election, we might have had a 
very different result. But it’s coming out now in the wash, and 
now the people of Saskatchewan are recognizing exactly what’s 
going on here. 



2082 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2017 

The minister used the words “greater autonomy.” Now that is a 
slap in the face to the people of Saskatoon and to the Meewasin 
Valley Authority. That’s like saying, I’m taking away all of 
your allowance, but you can decide how you’re going to spend 
it. Mr. Speaker, that’s just shameful that he even has the 
audacity to use those words in the context of what’s happening 
within this bill. 
 
Now I just took a look at the electoral boundaries for some of 
the members from Saskatoon, and the minister is from the 
riding of Silverspring-Sutherland. And if you take a look at the 
map . . . Oh no, that’s the member . . . [inaudible]. Sorry, I was 
thinking ahead. He’s the one that I was thinking would need to 
speak up then. He moved over to Willowgrove, I believe is the 
new riding. So he’s adjacent to Silverspring-Sutherland, his 
former area that he was responsible for a lot. 
 
One of the things you look at, and I’m sure the member from 
Silverspring-Sutherland is aware of this and is hearing from 
people, is the northwest swale. That’s a very, very important 
part of the Meewasin Valley Authority. There are a number of 
people in Saskatchewan — or in Saskatoon, but in 
Saskatchewan as well — that are very concerned about the 
future of the northwest swale. It’s in a particularly important 
part of the Meewasin Valley in Saskatoon. And as it flows north 
of the city out beyond the city boundaries, and what you see in 
that swale, Mr. Speaker, it is the location of millennia ago, or 
many, many thousands of years ago, that was where the river 
flowed before it changed course to where it is now. 
 
And the northwest swale, there’s a group of people that are very 
concerned about, the Northwest Swale Watchers. And I’m sure 
many members would be aware of the concerns that these 
people are raising within the city of Saskatoon, but also beyond 
the boundaries in terms of the importance of that ecosystem. It’s 
an ecosystem that’s very rare in Saskatchewan, and it’s one that 
needs protection. It very clearly needs protection, and with the 
sprawling of urban development as it grows further out in that 
direction, Mr. Speaker, that is threatening the integrity of that 
particular ecosystem. 
 
So bring in the Meewasin Valley Authority. This is the 
authority that was designed to do the protection for that 
particular watershed. And we know that watershed’s important. 
We’ve heard that from this government many, many times. We 
know that the importance of the work they do doesn’t just relate 
to the ecosystem itself and the value of that valley, but what 
happens when people move into those valleys, what happens 
when people use those valleys for entertainment, for recreation. 
 
We have things like the Beaver Creek along the other, on the 
other side of the city. We have the wonderful trail system that 
exists, the work that’s being done through Saskatchewan Trails, 
and the work of Cathy Watts from Saskatoon in terms of 
ensuring that these trails are protected and developed so that 
she, her family, her grandchildren, Olive and Hamish, that they 
have the opportunity to understand the importance of an 
ecosystem like the Meewasin Valley and the importance of 
protecting those types of ecosystems, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And as we know, the funding for this is a responsibility of all of 
us as Saskatchewan taxpayers, and it has been for many, many 
decades. So the concern is great. We kind of suspected this was 

coming, Mr. Speaker. We saw the prelude last year in the 
budget when funding was cut for other authorities. For example, 
the Wakamow Valley in Moose Jaw, we had members there 
that didn’t bother to stand up for it, and now we have Saskatoon 
members that aren’t even wading into the conversation here. 
 
[15:45] 
 
I know there’s very high-ranking officials, both at Potash 
Corporation, and also I got a letter from an engineer at the 
synchrotron who moved to Saskatoon because of the particular 
protection and beauty of our Meewasin Valley, Mr. Speaker. So 
it’s definitely something that people are attracted to. I think it’s 
a real draw. And I think it’s really important that we show the 
people of Saskatchewan how important these urban parks are. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, the cuts to Wakamow Valley and the 
Swift Current River Valley and also the one . . . I think there 
was a couple others that were impacted, Prince Albert as well. 
That just shows again, I think we’ve talked about this before, 
but you have to really question the moral compass of this 
government, Mr. Speaker. We need to talk about that more. The 
compass of this government has gone askew. And when we see 
increases to cuts for corporations, large corporations, when we 
see decreases to income tax for the richest people in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, when we have a Premier inviting 
companies to move here at peril of risking his own New West 
Partnership Agreement and he’s, you know, involved in those 
companies, Mr. Speaker, you’ve got to wonder where the moral 
compass of this government is. 
 
And it’s something like, when you see cuts to this, I would like 
the minister to actually table the analysis that was done under 
the transformational change rubric. Is there like a checklist, Mr. 
Speaker? Does each program go through a checklist? Or is it 
just something to say, we like this and we don’t like that. We 
don’t like the grain cars. We don’t like the community pastures, 
and we don’t like the Meewasin Valley. So as far as 
transformational change goes, they’re out. We like large 
companies. We like our well-connected friends. And so, we like 
them, so in terms of transformational change, they’re in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a lack of a moral compass here. And it’s 
highly concerning for I think this side of the House for sure, but 
it’s also highly, highly concerning for all the people that are 
contacting me now about all the changes in this budget. 
Somebody said that reacting to this budget is like drinking from 
a firehose and, Mr. Speaker, that can’t be further from the truth. 
There is so much damage in this budget.  
 
And this is a clear example from a member from Saskatoon 
who has said no to the Meewasin Valley Authority and the 
incredibly important work that they’ve done . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . They’ve done it over and over again. And he’s 
yelling at me that I’m wrong, Mr. Speaker, but you know darn 
well that I’ve got the facts straight on this one. They are cutting 
$500,000 from the budget, and in fact they’re changing the 
statutory obligation of the government. Let’s take a look at that 
section, just to make sure that we know what it used to say so 
that we can understand what changes are being made. 
 
Currently under The Meewasin Valley Authority Act, there are 
three parties that are responsible for paying amounts to the 



April 3, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2083 

authority. We have in the case of the government, $740,169; in 
the case of the city, Saskatoon, $556,700; and in the case of the 
university, $574,000. 
 
Now let’s take a look at how this section’s going to look when 
the bill goes through, if it goes through, if they don’t pull it 
before then. Of course we hope they will. The new section is 
going to read this: “In every fiscal year, the city shall pay 
$556,700 to the authority.” That’s it, Mr. Speaker. Nothing in 
the statute anymore from this government. And they have said 
they’ll voluntarily give some money this year, they’re not 
cutting it all. 
 
But mark my words, Mr. Speaker, let’s see what happens next 
year when this government has to find the other $600 million 
that they’re going to be in deficit of. What do you think is going 
to happen, Mr. Speaker? Again the moral compass has gone 
awry. They’re heading towards the South Pole, and they are not 
clearly thinking about what is important to the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I would like to know from that minister, from any MLA 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly] from Saskatoon, 
whether they heard people on the doorstep saying, you’ve got to 
cut the funding to the Meewasin Valley Authority? How many 
letters did they get? The member from Silverspring-Sutherland, 
did he get any letters or people on the doorstep saying, you 
know what, you’ve got to cut the funding to Meewasin Valley 
Authority? I don’t think he heard that. 
 
And I wonder about the member from Willowgrove or the other 
members across the way, perhaps Churchill-Wildwood heard 
that on the doorstep. I don’t know, but I certainly didn’t hear a 
single word. Every time I’m out in public it’s about the 
importance of the Meewasin Valley Authority, the importance it 
plays in the character of the city but also as a valley authority 
protecting one of the most important watersheds in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So this move, this move by this government for $740,000 is one 
I think that indicates the misdirection that we see. When we see 
a focus on enticing and bringing in companies from other 
provinces against the New West Trade Partnership, which 
we’ve heard the Premier go on and on about how wonderful it 
is . . . All of a sudden it’s not so wonderful. You’ve got to 
wonder what the heck’s going on over there, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
This clause goes on to say a lot more than what the new bill 
says as well. It talks about how the funding is to be allocated 
through the three people, how the amounts are to be paid, what 
percentage each one is paying. And of course we know that the 
$740,000 is 40 per cent, represents 40 per cent of that funding. 
 
We’ve already seen Meewasin’s value-for-dollar being cut from 
the 1970s significantly. And I’ve talked about that in the House 
before when the Minister of Finance was the Minister 
Responsible for Parks, Culture and Sport. And he kind of said, 
well that’s too bad; cities are going to have to pick it up. That 
was his attitude, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we see that attitude being carried on by this current 
minister, from Saskatoon of all things, Mr. Speaker. We know 

that he received a number of petitions from people that are very 
concerned about this. And did he table them in the House? Did 
he read them out loud, Mr. Speaker? No, he didn’t because he 
doesn’t want to talk about it. But if he thinks that people are 
asking for this, if any of the members from Saskatoon think 
people are asking for this, if any of these members think that 
this is something the people of Saskatchewan want, they are 
seriously out of touch with what the pulse of Saskatchewan 
people are, Mr. Speaker. And I think we’re seeing that more 
and more and more. 
 
And on the eve of the anniversary of the last election, I think 
the true colours are starting to come out, Mr. Speaker, and I 
think that’s something that people of Saskatchewan are waking 
up to. And we certainly see that in the polling results that came 
out today. That’s a good indication that people are starting to 
wake up to where the moral compass has gone awry with this 
government. This bill is an indication of everything that’s going 
wrong over there, Mr. Speaker. It’s an awful attack on the 
important role that the Meewasin Valley Authority’s played for 
decades. 
 
Even in the worst years of the ’90s, we didn’t see the 
government going after the Meewasin Valley Authority, and 
things were a heck of a lot worse in ’92 than they were now, 
Mr. Speaker. And we know that, and they know that. And they 
like referring to those years disparagingly, Mr. Speaker. But if 
you look at what was going on then, compared to what is going 
on now and the amount of money that was coming in to the 
coffers, at no time did the moral compass waver, Mr. Speaker. 
And the Meewasin Valley Authority was protected and 
supported, and in fact there was additional money. There was 
supplementary funding that was being given to the Meewasin 
Valley . . . [inaudible] . . . to ensure that it was able to do the job 
for which it was created, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we see them walking away from that, and it’s 
unacceptable. And they’re going to hear about it, but sadly 
we’ve got to wait for three more years. That’s the biggest 
problem that we have in front of us right now. If we had heard 
this a year ago in March, I can tell you they would be making 
different decisions today, Mr. Speaker, if they were even in 
government, Mr. Speaker. So for that, Mr. Speaker . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . They laugh. They think it’s funny, 
Mr. Speaker, but when you’re not straight with the people, and 
you don’t come clean with them in terms of what your plans 
are, then there’s going to be people that are very, very 
disappointed. 
 
And I know, for example, some of the letters that these 
members are receiving. They’re not talking about them, but I’m 
seeing them because they’re being forwarded to me, Mr. 
Speaker. And they have a lot to think about, and it’s not too 
late. It’s not too late for them to change this bill. And I think we 
need to call upon them to reverse the impact of this bill even 
though the minister likes to chirp away from his seat, you know, 
but it’s clear that they’re removing the statutory limit. I don’t 
think he can disagree with that because he’s the one who just 
introduced the bill. And so if he can’t stand up with this 
Meewasin Valley Authority and make it viable and able to do 
the role for which it was created, then I think he needs to have 
the courage to withdraw this bill and pull it off the order paper, 
Mr. Speaker. 



2084 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2017 

So I know other of my colleagues are going to want to speak to 
this bill as well, but I certainly am not in favour of this bill. I 
think it’s one of the worst moves this government has made, 
amongst many, unfortunately in this budget, Mr. Speaker, but 
we’re stuck with it. And I think we’re going to have a lot to say 
about it in the days that come, Mr. Speaker. So at this point, I’d 
like to move that we adjourn Bill No. 52, The Meewasin Valley 
Authority Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 52, The Meewasin Valley 
Authority Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Bill No. 55 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Economy — Audit 

Assessments) Amendment Act, 2017 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to rise today to move second reading of The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Economy — Audit Assessments) 
Amendment Act, 2017. This Act comprises amendments to The 
Crown Minerals Act; The Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax 
Act, 2010; and The Mineral Taxation Act, 1983. 
 
The proposed amendments would set out identical terms and 
conditions under which penalty and interest on audit findings 
will be calculated and paid. This would be with respect to crude 
oil, natural gas, and minerals produced or delivered in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, any mineral, oil, and gas producers currently 
found to be non-compliant with the terms of the aforementioned 
Acts and their supporting regulations are upon audit findings 
assessed interest of prime plus 3 per cent. For refunds, interest 
is at prime. This is relevant to royalties of oil, gas, uranium, 
diamond, base and precious metals, and taxes on oil, gas, and 
potash. 
 
For consistency, interest on audit findings on the remaining 
regulations for potash, coal, and sodium chloride Crown 
royalties, and coal and sodium chloride production tax is being 
updated to a rate of prime plus 3 per cent. As well, interest on 
refunds is being updated to prime. 
 
In addition, this amendment will include an application of a 
penalty of 10 per cent of amounts found owing. Mr. Speaker, 
this penalty will be consistent with penalties associated with 
audit findings pursuant to other provincial statutes. It will also 
promote compliance with the royalty and tax laws intended to 
protect the revenue base for the Government of Saskatchewan. 
This would generate estimated incremental General Revenue 
Fund revenue of approximately $4.5 million annually. 
 
It should be emphasized, Mr. Speaker, that this is a penalty for 
not complying with the laws with respect to taxes or royalties 
owing. 

In addition, upon coming into force on April 1st, 2017, these 
amendments would in fact bring Saskatchewan in line with the 
legislation currently in place in Manitoba and Alberta. 
Manitoba has legislation that allows for a 10 per cent penalty 
and interest at a rate of prime plus 6 per cent. Alberta has 
legislation that allows for a 10 to 50 per cent penalty in interest 
at a rate of prime plus 1 per cent. 
 
Our proposed amendments reinforce the policy and regulatory 
environment in Saskatchewan that is regarded by the oil and gas 
and mineral resource industries among one of the best in the 
world. The evolution of our regulatory environment is 
undertaken with a mind to sustaining that reputation for clarity 
and consistency, and sustaining it at the highest standard 
possible. Ensuring that a consistent interest rate is applied on all 
audit assessments and refunds is a positive step and one that 
promotes increased integrity in the approach to regulation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of The Miscellaneous 
Statutes (Economy — Audit Assessments) Amendment Act, 
2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Energy and Resources has 
moved second reading of Bill No. 55. Is the Assembly ready for 
the question? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again 
I’m very pleased to offer initial comments as it pertains to Bill 
55, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Economy — Audit 
Assessments) Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as the minister made reference to on this 
particular bill, he mentions audits and he mentions royalties and 
the fact that there’s penalties, and there’s also interest being 
charged on those penalties and that they’re going to derive 
something like 4 or $5 million out of this whole audit process, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is important for the Saskatchewan people to know this, is that 
when they assumed government in 2007, Mr. Speaker, they had 
a royalty regime and a taxation system designed by the NDP to 
encourage oil and gas development. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
brought . . . The Government of Saskatchewan, at the time 
being led by Premier Calvert, brought the oil sector into 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re very proud of our history. And we’re 
also very proud of the fact that we developed what I think was a 
very competitive royalty structure at that time. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we saw an unbridled investment into Saskatchewan’s 
oil and gas sector. Many companies from Alberta moved over, 
Mr. Speaker, primarily because there was great discussion at the 
time in cabinet to make sure that we were able to bring in 
investment and, therefore, job creation and opportunity and 
certainly, Mr. Speaker, royalties into the provincial coffers so 
we’re able to provide basic services and good services, whether 
it was health care or education. 
 
[16:00] 
 
And as we began to embark on that particular journey, Mr. 
Speaker, we began to see, and of course as I mentioned at the 
outset, investments. And we also saw that the job numbers are 



April 3, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2085 

going up, Mr. Speaker. And we can credit architects of that, of 
the whole royalty plan, Mr. Speaker, on people like Eldon 
Lautermilch, Mr. Speaker, on people like Eric Cline, Mr. 
Speaker, on people like Maynard Sonntag, on people like 
Andrew Thomson, Mr. Speaker, who sat in cabinet and had a 
great amount of discussion on how we can get the Alberta oil 
companies to come to Saskatchewan and help develop this nice 
solid opportunity under the oil and gas sector, Mr. Speaker. And 
that was all set up. 
 
Calvert bought the oil and gas companies into Saskatchewan. 
We know that. The Saskatchewan Party inherited, Mr. Speaker, 
inherited a booming economy, a growing population, and 
money in the bank — and money in the bank. And the only 
thing the NDP asked at that time, the only thing that we asked 
at that time is we asked the current Saskatchewan Party, don’t 
mess it up. Don’t mess it up. That’s all we said. Just simply 
inherit our policy. Follow the path blazed for you. Don’t 
deviate, don’t deviate from the messages. We’ll even write out 
the messages for you because we didn’t want to see any kind of, 
any kind of harm come to this relationship that it took years and 
years and years to establish, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But here we go again. Now we’re in this process as Bill 55 is at 
. . . They are so broke that they now have to go back and begin 
to audit some of these oil and gas companies, and if they find 
any money that’s owning back to the government . . . There’s 
also interest that, I think he said prime plus three. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we asked the Saskatchewan Party not to try 
and do things on their own when it came to the royalty regime 
that was established by the NDP. It served Saskatchewan well. 
They were the political benefactors of that particular work, 
granted. We’ll certainly grant them that. But quite frankly, Mr. 
Speaker, one of the most bored guys on that side of the 
Assembly in 2007 was their Economy minister. Basically he 
had nothing to do because everything was all set up for him. 
 
So now we sit here and we look at Bill 55, and the Sask Party 
has mismanaged our economy and our province so badly, 
they’re now going after oil and gas companies to try and find 
any kind of dollars that they can wring out of these oil and gas 
companies, under audit, to try and help them recover the billion 
dollar deficit that they have put this province in this year, and 
many other years that they have been since government. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there’s two things that could have happened 
under this particular bill. Either the Saskatchewan Party is so 
desperate for cash that they’d go against oil and gas companies 
to try and find audits, or put audits on these companies to try 
and wring as many dimes and pennies off them as they possibly 
can, or the fact that there’s no oversight to begin with by the 
Sask Party. Those two scenarios do not serve the oil and gas 
sector well, nor do they serve the people of Saskatchewan well. 
So the fact that (a) they could have had oversight, there’s no 
oversight on this process; or quite frankly they need to wring 
out every penny they possibly can from a sector that has been 
invested in Saskatchewan for years and years and years. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, under this particular bill we have seen, we 
have seen a dereliction of duty when it comes to the 
Saskatchewan Party. From my perspective — I’ll continue 
saying it as long as I’m sitting in this particular chair — they do 

not know what they’re doing on that side of the House. That’s 
why it’s important we get rid of them so we’re able to have a 
government that’s able to work with the oil and gas sector as 
proven in the past, so we’re able to not have a process where 
there’s no oversight or that you’re going to try and wring every 
penny you possibly can out of an oil and gas company, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This is an example of what could go wrong, and the people of 
Saskatchewan should not continue to pay for Sask Party’s 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste, Mr. Speaker. And this is 
an example of how they have not done their job to make sure 
that they have a good relationship with the oil and gas sector 
because they simply can’t figure it out on their own. 
 
For a company that’s supposed to be right wing . . . for a party 
that’s supposed to be right wing, Mr. Speaker, the message is 
clear. Figure it out, get things done properly so the people of 
Saskatchewan will see that you’re getting things done properly, 
and work with the oil and gas sector. What is so difficult about 
those directions? And finally we said, the number one message 
we gave them — don’t mess it up. That’s all you had to do is 
not mess it up. 
 
Just follow the trail blazed for you by the NDP and you’ll do 
well. But they couldn’t do it. They couldn’t do it. And here’s 
yet another example of how the minister now says we’re going 
to try and wring every penny off the oil and gas companies we 
possibly can, and we’re going to tax them. If there’s something 
wrong, we’re going to charge them interest. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s not good relationship building with 
the oil and gas sector. That from our perspective, from the NDP 
perspective, we know we need their investment and we know 
we need their partnership. And we know that there are certain 
things that we have to work with the oil and gas sector on, and 
one of them is of course protecting the environment. That’s 
pretty darn important for everybody in this particular province, 
except the Sask Party simply doesn’t get it. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there are certain things that partners have to 
agree on. And, Mr. Speaker, having a good, cordial relationship 
with the oil and gas sector is number one, Mr. Speaker, 
understanding that we will develop the resource together but the 
environmental integrity cannot be compromised in any way. 
But that is how partnerships are built. So I’ll say once again, 
once again to the Sask Party: don’t mess it up. All the work was 
done for you. Simply follow the formula and things will be 
okay. But when you start bringing in bills of this sort that’ll 
really begin to focus negative attention on the oil and gas 
sector, that’s messing it up, Mr. Speaker. And making sure that 
there’s no partnership approach on environmental protection, 
that’s messing it up, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So once again I can say there’s a lot of people much more 
informed on this particular bill that’ll have many, many more 
things to say on this particular bill, Bill 55, so on that note I 
move that we adjourn debate on Bill 55. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 55. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 



2086 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2017 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 56 — The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment  
Act, 2017 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to rise today to move second reading of The Oil 
and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2017. This Act 
addresses several changes regarding the well levy introduced in 
2014 to recover 90 per cent of the costs of oil and gas regulation 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
First, the number of licensees subject to the levy will be 
expanded to include the holders of licences issued under The 
Pipelines Act, 1998. Second, the well levy will be renamed the 
administrative levy to reflect its broader application to both 
wells and pipelines. 
 
In addition to these changes, amendments will establish 
regulation-making authority for the purposes of calculating the 
annual administrative levy assessed against well licensees and 
pipeline licensees. Consultations with industry on the 
supporting regulations which implement the changes to the 
administrative levy will occur over the next few months for 
implementation this year. 
 
These changes are part of a number of initiatives included in the 
2017-18 budget that continue the trend of strengthening oil and 
gas regulation in Saskatchewan. The new administrative levy 
for licensed pipelines will directly support the implementation 
of the multi-year pipeline regulation enhancement program. 
This is in addition to the ongoing regulatory activities related to 
pipeline approvals and inspections. 
 
The introduction of a levy on licensed pipelines will partially 
shift the cost burden tied to the annual assessment from well 
licensees to pipeline licensees. This will ensure the regulatory 
costs are fairly distributed within the industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we appreciate that continued public confidence in 
the oil and gas regulatory system is central to the continued 
growth and development of Saskatchewan and our oil and gas 
industry. We also place a high priority on maintaining 
Saskatchewan’s excellent standing with global industry as a 
jurisdiction of choice for investment and development. 
 
This is a province which is open to investment, values our 
stakeholders, and strives to hold our regulatory role to the 
highest possible standards. The proposed amendments before us 
today are integral to these efforts. Mr. Speaker, I now move 
second reading of The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment 
Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Energy and Resources has 
moved second reading of Bill No. 56. Is the Assembly ready for 
the question? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again I 

want to preface on my comments that it’s been, it’s certainly 
been a great opportunity for me to see the connect between Bill 
55 and this particular bill, Bill 56, The Oil and Gas 
Conservation Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
And I wanted to explain to the Sask Party caucus across the 
way the importance of when I mentioned partnerships at my 
concluding remarks around Bill 55. One of the things that the 
people of Saskatchewan want — and I think it’s pretty 
important and pretty basic that we share what I believe they 
want — number one is that a lot of people need 
mortgage-paying jobs. People that are out there, that are raising 
their families, they want a roof over their children’s heads. 
They want their children to go to a school. They want to be safe 
and comfortable in their community. These are basic things that 
the people of Saskatchewan have always maintained and have 
always wanted, Mr. Speaker. And that goes right across the 
province as well. 
 
Many families in northern Saskatchewan have the same 
aspiration. They also have the same desires for their children. 
And as I often mention, this Saskatchewan is a great province. 
And there are Saskatchewan people all throughout the province 
— north, east, west, and south — that do a remarkable job of 
contributing to overall health of our province and certainly the 
overall health of our population. 
 
That being said, Mr. Speaker, we want to be able to attract 
investment to our province. We have maintained that from day 
one. As an opposition party, when we were in government, Mr. 
Speaker . . . And you look at the history of Saskatchewan under 
the robust economic times of Saskatchewan’s history, the NDP 
were certainly in charge of what was going on in the province. 
And they brought forward a very good economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s no question in my mind, in many people’s minds 
throughout the province, that the Saskatchewan Party simply 
inherited a booming population, a solid economy, and money in 
the bank. They had absolutely nothing to do with the 
groundwork that was done prior to their arrival. They are 
simply benefactors. 
 
Now everybody knew that in the province everywhere you go, 
Mr. Speaker. All walks of life, they say . . . And I think the 
Saskatchewan Party in their deep mind know, the Saskatchewan 
Party know, Mr. Speaker, that they inherited a booming 
economy and they inherited a growing population and there was 
money in the bank. They didn’t do anything to get it, Mr. 
Speaker; they just came in at the right time. And the people of 
Saskatchewan all throughout the province, they all know that. 
 
That being said, Mr. Speaker, it’s important for the NDP to 
teach the so-called right wing party called the Saskatchewan 
Party what you should not do. Selling off the Crowns, you 
should not do that. Forgetting about the vulnerable people, you 
should not do that. Winding down STC, you should not do that, 
Mr. Speaker. Penalizing the working men and women in the 
province, you should not do that, Mr. Speaker. Putting in a 
carbon capture levy on all our power bills, you should not do 
that, Mr. Speaker. Working with the oil and gas sector in 
developing a solid partnership, yes, you should do that. We’re 
telling them that they should do that. 
 



April 3, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2087 

Secondly is that, in the relationship-building process with the 
oil and gas sector, the people of Saskatchewan also want to 
make sure that the land is protected. I think the oil and gas 
companies recognize that as well. And that’s why it’s 
important, when you look at the process of the pipelines 
necessary to move our oil and gas, Mr. Speaker, that when you 
look at a well levy that’s being implemented under Bill 56, and 
you’re looking at the phrase being replaced to “administrative 
levy,” well, Mr. Speaker, what this is is primarily a tax grab for 
the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
It is not going to be utilized to make sure that there are good 
checks and measures and balances in place between the 
partnership developed by the province of Saskatchewan and the 
oil and gas sector. You’ve got to have these checks and 
balances. It’s all part of a healthy relationship with the industry, 
Mr. Speaker. We understand that on this side of the House. 
 
So my point being is that in Bill 56, as you put an 
administrative levy, my message to the Sask Party is that 
administrative levies should not be construed as a tax grab for 
you guys to put in your deep, dark hole called a deficit that you 
created through your own mismanagement, that those levies 
should be used to ensure that there is environmental integrity 
being placed at the foresight of any project that you want to get 
into as a partnership between the oil and gas sector and the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So as you look at some of these processes, you don’t simply say 
to the partner, you look after your own environmental work 
that’s necessary; we just want the administrative levy so we can 
put it into the deep, dark recesses of our deficit, Mr. Speaker. 
Because that doesn’t work good. The partners don’t like that 
notion of paying a levy, and it not being used to mitigate things 
such as environmental issues that might come back to haunt 
these companies later on. 
 
So it’s important to know that anything you do for the 
economy, there has always got to be the balancing performance 
as it pertains to the environment. The people of Saskatchewan 
like that full gambit of making sure that there’s environmental 
integrity and protection as well as stimulating economic 
opportunity for the province. 
 
So we look at some of the contents of this bill, Mr. Speaker. 
Again, again the Saskatchewan Party simply doesn’t get it. 
They just don’t know what they’re doing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[16:15] 
 
They’re asking the industry to police themselves when it comes 
to pipeline inspections, Mr. Speaker, but they’re also charging 
them a levy. And whether it’s an administrative levy or a well 
levy or a pipeline levy, whatever levy that they have in mind, 
they are so broke they need to collect as much cash as they 
possibly can. So what does that do to the partnership with 
industry? Well the industry probably is not too happy with 
some of the levies that are being put in place. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, you look at also the fact when you look at 
the whole notion of the environmental protection. Well the 
public wouldn’t like that either if there was no consideration for 
environmental protection. So it’s always a critical, crucial 

balancing act, Mr. Speaker. All the time jobs are really 
important and jobs really drive the agenda in many people’s 
minds, including mine, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s really important 
we look at the job issues. 
 
But there are other compelling arguments, that under the 
environmental front we’ve got to have a good solid partnership, 
and there’s got to be good checks and balances. And what is 
wrong with that common sense, middle-of-the-road approach, 
Mr. Speaker? I say that there’s nothing, there is nothing wrong 
with that position and that’s why it’s important we establish a 
relationship with the oil and gas sector so they keep coming 
here, that they keep staying here, and that we don’t have to sell 
the house to keep them here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We just have to have a respectful relationship that each partner 
recognizes and therefore they endorse and they support. And 
once you have a good clear understanding and there’s no 
surprises, I think the oil and gas sector would be better served if 
we had that approach as opposed to having a piecemeal 
approach, as we witnessed by the Premier writing letters to try 
and attract oil and gas companies here, offering them tons of 
incentives that’s going to cost the Saskatchewan people money. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if we do a good partnership and 
consummate that partnership with some good, solid, respectful 
relationship building, I think that’s probably the better way to 
go, but at the same time you don’t ever affect the integrity of 
your environmental argument because that’s pretty sound as 
well. And I think the people of Saskatchewan would like that 
approach. 
 
So again you look at this as simply a tax grab, and if all it is is a 
grab, a financial grab for the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker, 
then I say shame on them because they simply can’t figure this 
out on their own, and that these levies and the language here in 
this particular bill will probably hurt industry over time but not 
achieve the objectives of having environmental monitoring, Mr. 
Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan would also like to see 
when it comes to bills of this sort. So on that note, Mr. Speaker, 
we have many more of our caucus members that will be 
speaking on this bill at greater length so I move that we adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 56, The Oil and Gas Conservation 
Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 56, The Oil and Gas Conservation 
Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 43 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 43 — The 
Pipelines Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 



2088 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2017 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again 
this all pertains to our particular argument around Bill 56 and 
Bill 55, which I spoke at great length about, the importance of 
the collaboration of all the Acts and all the activities of 
government. 
 
Again, from the NDP perspective I think it’s important that we 
point out to the people of Saskatchewan, we want to attract 
investment. We want to see oil and gas come and excite the 
economies of our communities. We think it’s a great 
opportunity. We’ve shown that historically, that we are good 
stewards of that particular message and that there’s no question 
that investment in our province is very welcome under an NDP 
government in the past and certainly into the future. 
 
All the while, Mr. Speaker, I talk about establishing 
relationships that are very solid and very understanding and 
very respectful of each other. Environmental stewardship is a 
role that the province should play, and certainly to ensure that 
there isn’t any challenges to the environment that are so great 
that it would affect many people’s lives. It is obviously a 
balancing act, so I think it’s important that we continue that 
train of thought as it pertains to this bill. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think other people will be speaking to this 
bill as we move it forward. So I thank you for your time and 
certainly entertaining my comments around Bill No. 43, The 
Pipelines Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the minister that Bill No. 43, The Pipelines 
Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 43, The Pipelines Amendment Act, 2016 be designated 
to the Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 

 
Bill No. 44 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Moe that Bill No. 44 — The Water 
Security Agency Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And as 
always, it’s my honour to be able to rise in the House today to 
debate the bills that are being brought forward by this 
government. 
 
Bill 44 is an Act that I think is designed to complement some 
regulations that were brought in in August 2015 to deal with 
some very significant issues this province is facing regarding 
drainage. And certainly since I was elected in 2011, Mr. 
Speaker, I would say this is the most common issue of concern 
that’s been raised to me as the Environment critic but also, Mr. 
Speaker, as the Agriculture critic because this bill actually 
impacts producers in a very significant way. 
 
And although the Minister of the Environment is the one who’s 
introduced the bill, I think it really impacts the areas relating to 
the Minister of Agriculture’s sphere much more than it does to 
the Minister of the Environment. And I think that could be 
evidenced, and I’m sure if we could get a little peek at the 
Minister of Agriculture’s log we would see the number of 
complaints and concerns that have been raised about the way 
this bill is being brought forward and the impact it’s going to 
have on producers. 
 
And certainly I do want to share some of those comments today 
that I’ve been getting, and there’s a number of concerns within 
the bill itself that I think . . . This isn’t me making this up, Mr. 
Speaker. This is bodies like SARM and the Saskatchewan Farm 
Stewardship Association who are very concerned about some of 
what they call draconian measures that are found in this bill. 
 
Now I don’t want to underemphasize the importance of finding 
a solution for drainage. We know that this is a problem that has 
plagued producers and communities for a long time and 
certainly very drastically in the last few years. If you look at the 
PDAP [provincial disaster assistance program] payments that 
have gone to people who have been affected by flooding, you 
know, certainly when it comes to homes and when it comes to 
businesses, there’s assistance available. 
 
But when you look at something like the Quill lakes watershed, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that that is impacting producers in an 
incredibly negative way. The amount of entire quarter sections 
that are now under water in that closed basin, Mr. Speaker, is 
affecting a large number of producers. 
 
But Bill 44 will have an adverse impact on other producers, and 
I think that’s something that the minister has indicated he would 
take a look at even. When concerns were raised, SARM, 
Minister Moe . . . or the Minister of the Environment. I 
apologize for that, Mr. Speaker. The Minister for the 
Environment has said that he wants to take another look at some 
of the bills. And now we haven’t received any notice. We have 
seen no indication from the minister as of yet in terms of what 
amendments he might be willing to make. And certainly we’ll 
have some of those comments available, or hopefully we’ll 
have some of that discussion when we get into committee, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
But I think it’s important that, like the producers . . . I’m just 
going to share some comments I’ve received from one producer 
from the Quill lakes area, and this is what he is telling me. He 
says: 



April 3, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2089 

We’ve been working with the RM of Lakeside and 
surrounding RMs on this issue, and they introduced a 
resolution to rescind Bill 44 at the SARM convention. We 
are also working with the Saskatchewan Farm Stewardship 
Association who are trying to have Bill 44 rescinded or 
amended. 

 
He goes on to say: 
 

For governments to say that all prior farm land drainage is 
illegal and must now be approved and filled in is wrong. 
Governments past and present have not only funded some 
of this drainage, they made them legal by standing by and 
doing nothing. We need sustainable laws where permanent 
water should not be drained by farmers or special interest 
groups. It’s time government started to listen to farmers 
instead of special interest groups. 
 
As for the Quill Lake situation, there is strong historical 
evidence that this lake was almost this high, and it ran out 
— all of this without drainage. The natural outlet has been 
changed with the building of railways and highways. 
 
As for private farm land that has been flooded around the 
lake by government inaction, there definitely should be 
compensation. Agriculture has been and will continue to be 
the leading economic driver of this province but only if 
governments do not put us at a disadvantage with 
overregulation and draconian legislation. 

 
Those are strong words, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I know that 
producers are not saying that illegal drainage is right. I mean, 
obviously, illegal drainage is not right, but I think that 
producers have not been consulted properly on the impact of 
this bill. Some of the concerns this particular producer has, he 
says if you deem there’s no outlet, then the people in the Quill 
lakes are hooped, basically, Mr. Speaker. There will be no 
option for them to ever get their farm land back, so the no-outlet 
clause is of concern. 
 
There’s no right for litigation anymore. Under this bill, the 
government can’t be sued. If farmers lose their entire farm 
because of this bill, they will not be able to sue the government 
for losses. And I think compensation is something that 
producers are looking for. When you’re removing the 1981 
arbitrary cut-off, and you’re going back to when the lands were 
broke . . . He told me stories of an elderly woman who wants to 
sell her farm, but she’s been, received a notice that she needs to 
push water back onto her land. And she’s going to lose about a 
hundred acres, so that’s very concerning to this particular 
producer. She’s elderly and ready to retire and there’s no 
compensation for her. So that’s something that I don’t think . . . 
I’m not sure where the Minister of Agriculture’s going to weigh 
in on this. It would be helpful maybe if he came to committee 
and indicated how producers are going to be assisted with the 
fairly draconian impacts of this bill. 
 
And, yes, the other point which he raised in the email that I read 
is that for up to a hundred years some of these illegal drainage 
activities have been approved simply by omission, by failure to 
act by previous governments, by governments over the last 
hundred years. So it’s difficult now for producers to understand 
how they will be called upon to lose productive land. 

Now on the other hand of the discussion, Mr. Speaker — and I 
have to talk a little bit about this as well — is the impact on our 
wetlands. And we know the importance of wetlands in 
Saskatchewan, and we know the importance of productive land. 
So this is a very difficult situation and I think one that needs 
balance. 
 
Getting rid of the Water Appeal Board under this bill is a 
concern as well, Mr. Speaker. And I think we’ve seen farmers 
pitted against farmers before and we know that we need to 
understand how the new regulations are working. We also know 
that Water Security Agency is highly understaffed and doesn’t 
have the requisite people that they need to be able to respond 
adequately to all the concerns that arise when we are in a wet 
hydrology cycle, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I just received a letter recently, to the minister, regarding the 
Kingsley conservation and development authority drainage 
ditch, and this is near Kipling. It was constructed in 1956 and it 
was an important component of local infrastructure. The ditch 
has not been maintained and there’s a lot of pollutants and silt 
that are now flowing into Pipestone Lake. And the person that’s 
writing this letter is saying that the damage is a direct result of 
the local conservation and development authority being allowed 
to de-engineer the project and remove all flow structures within 
it. Then in summer 2016 the local C & D [conservation and 
development area authority] approved with and the provincial 
Water Security Agency permitted new drainage into this 
situation. And this individual says, “In my view that is wrong. 
This is neither an example of managed drainage nor is it an 
example of sustainable environmental management.” 
 
So I have to say I do get a lot of producers’ concern, people that 
are being impacted on both sides if, you know, water is flowing 
down onto their land. I’ve had a number of people calling with 
concerns about that and it not being addressed properly, and 
also this new bill which will cause people to retain water that 
hasn’t been on their land for the last 100 years or 120 years or 
from the day the lands were broke. 
 
So it’s a fairly . . . From the producers’ perspective, I think it’s 
being seen as a very draconian piece of legislation. I do hope 
that the Minister of Environment will take that into account in 
terms of adjustments that are being asked for but, on the other 
hand, we need to ensure that our wetlands are protected. And 
the current drainage that’s happening now, I mean you could 
see it when you drive between Moose Jaw and Regina, Mr. 
Speaker. Those illegal actions are illegal and it’s happening 
now. And if we can’t handle what’s happening now, I’m not 
sure that going back to 1920 or 1930 will be of much assistance 
for producers. 
 
So I think let’s deal with the problems we have before us. We 
need to ensure wetlands are maintained properly but we also 
need to ensure that producers who are losing large parts of their 
productive land right now will be able to at least find some way 
to make up for that loss. And there’s probably a few ways that it 
could be done. I think the government needs to be a little more 
aggressive and directed, I guess, or determined to deal with the 
both sides of the issue. And I’m not saying it’s an easy one, but 
I think it’s one that’s very important, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[16:30] 



2090 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2017 

Now I’m going to have a lot of questions for the minister when 
we do get a chance to get into committee and just get a better 
understanding of how they came to the decisions like getting rid 
of the Water Appeal Board, for example. I think that was 
something that was seen as a useful tool and a deterrent that 
would hopefully cause people to think twice before they had 
decided to undertake improper drainage without proper 
approvals. 
 
But I think this bill is being seen by many producers as going a 
little bit too far. And I think the minister undertook to review 
that at the SARM convention just last month. So until we know 
exactly what the minister has in mind, it’s going to be difficult 
to see whether or not this is an adequate response or not. But I 
do look forward to those discussions in committee. I suspect he 
may have a couple of amendments that we need to look at in 
committee as well, so we’ll have to have the questions and the 
debate at that time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I think at this point in time, I’m going to reserve any further 
comment until we are in committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the minister that Bill No. 44, The Water Security Agency 
Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 44, the water security amendment Act, 2016 be 
committed to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 
I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that the Assembly do now 
adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly now stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:32.] 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Congratulations to Clerk on 30 Years of Service 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2061 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Bonk ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2061 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2061 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2061 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2061 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Nerlien ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2061 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2061 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2062 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2062 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2062 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2062 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Artists Celebrated at Juno Awards  
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2063 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2063 
 Fundraising Efforts in Saskatchewan Raise Autism Awareness 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2063 
  Steele ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2064 
 Kelvington-Wadena is Home of Champions 
  Nerlien ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2064 
 Melfort Senior Girls’ Team Wins Gold at Hoopla 
  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2064 
 New Schools Opening in Regina 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2064 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Regina Bypass Project 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2065 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2065 
 Auditor’s Report and Financial Support for Municipalities 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2065 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2066 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2066 
 Funding for Libraries 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2067 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2067 
 Provision of Hearing Services 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2068 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2068 
 Changes to Taxation 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2069 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2069 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 60 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2017 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2069 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2069 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 57 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2017 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2070 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2070 
 Bill No. 58 — The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2017 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2070 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2071 
 Bill No. 48 — The Education Property Tax Act 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2071 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2072 



 

 Bill No. 49 — The Education Property Tax Consequential Amendment Act, 2017 
 Loi de 2017 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Education Property Tax Act 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2074 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2074 
 Bill No. 53 — The Provincial Health Authority Act 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2074 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2075 
 Bill No. 54 — The Provincial Health Authority Consequential Amendment Act, 2017 
 Loi de 2017 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Provincial Health Authority Act 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2076 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2077 
 Bill No. 50 — The Provincial Capital Commission Act 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2077 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2077 
 Bill No. 51 — The Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Repeal Act 
  Marit ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2079 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2079 
 Bill No. 52 — The Meewasin Valley Authority Amendment Act, 2017 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2081 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2081 
 Bill No. 55 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Economy — Audit Assessments) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2084 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2084 
 Bill No. 56 — The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2017 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2086 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2086 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 43 — The Pipelines Amendment Act, 2016  
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2088 
  Merriman (referral to Economy Committee) ....................................................................................................................... 2088 
 Bill No. 44 — The Water Security Agency Amendment Act, 2016  
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2088 
  Merriman (referral to Economy Committee) ....................................................................................................................... 2090 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


