






















































Hansard: November 14, 2017


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 11A  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 14, 2017, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Nicole Sarauer 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Hon. Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Hon. Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 
Vacancies — Kindersley, Melfort 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 47; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 2 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2909 
 November 14, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would ask leave of the members of the House to make a 
statement of condolence. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 

STATEMENT OF CONDOLENCE 
 

Kevin Phillips 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you, 
colleagues in the House. 
 
“I have led a life of security, and family, and community.” 
These are the words of the late member from Melfort, Kevin 
Phillips, in his maiden speech in this Legislative Assembly 
sometime in late 2011. “I have led a life of security, and family, 
and community.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s interesting — if we examine these 
words, we see what is intentional about them on the part of the 
man who said them in this place. Because, Mr. Speaker, I don’t 
think you can make that claim, to have led a life of security, 
unless you also acted in that way, unless you committed 
yourself in an effort to live a life of security. And I think, I’m 
pretty sure what Kevin was referring to when he said that was 
the industry and the enterprise and the work ethic with which he 
conducted his life to bring that security for himself and for his 
family. It’s an intentional statement. 
 
And we know the record bears it out — his work ethic and his 
industry and his enterprise. 
 
We know that he was a publisher at the Melfort Journal, that he 
was an entrepreneur. He was in the newspaper business. We 
know he was an investor and a partner in other businesses as 
well, that he worked hard to provide that security, to live a life 
of security. There are members on this side of the House that 
know the kind of business person he was, and the values he 
brought to this House, he brought also to that life. I’ve heard 
specific accounts of that. 
 
I have led a life of family, he said. And, Mr. Speaker, the record 
bears that out for Kevin as well. In that same speech and others 
that followed, he talked a lot about his parents. He noted that 
his father was ahead of the curve, that he moved from Alberta 
to Saskatchewan in 1940 where he got into the newspaper 
business eventually in Kinistino. 
 
He talked about the values that his parents instilled in him. He 
said this, and I quote, as a lesson from his parents that taught 
him about empathy, and I quote, “. . . that if you can appreciate 

what other people are feeling, then that’s the beginning of 
solving any situation or problem that you may have and that 
they may have.” You know, having read that quote from his 
speech of him referencing that lesson from his parents, a lot of 
what we were able to witness as his colleagues makes even 
greater sense. That’s how he went about his work of advocacy 
here inside this Chamber and in ministers’ offices and through 
the building and back home in his constituency. 
 
And then in that Speech from the Throne that he gave just a 
little while ago, he talked a lot about his kids. He went on, a 
long paragraph. I’ll quote it for you if I may because it’s pretty 
recent. It’s pretty current. It’s just a few days ago. He said, “I 
visited . . .” This was of his report on his summer vacation, I 
guess, as a part of his Throne Speech. Kevin said this: 
 

I visited my daughter Kelli, and her husband, Howard, and 
I attended the graduation of two of my grandchildren in the 
same ceremony. I also visited with two other grandchildren 
when I was there, Autumn and Tempestt. Got to visit one 
of the kids we lost to Alberta a few years ago . . . my son 
Brenden and his wife, Carly, in Edmonton. Spending time 
with my stepdaughter and her husband, Brandi and Zach, 
and their two really neat kids. And then my other stepson 
Riley and his spouse, Felisha, [they] had three children, 
and they decided to have one more, and the twins were 
born last month. Best-laid plans [Kevin says]. 
 

He led a life of family. 
 
He also led a life of community, as he noted in that maiden 
speech. And boy, his record is replete with evidence of that, Mr. 
Speaker. It in many respects seems to have been his life work 
even beyond his vocation, his avocations. 
 
He tells the story in his maiden speech about being upset about 
principals being rotated around the school division in that 
northeast area, and this must have bothered him and a few other 
parents because he organized and went to a meeting. And I’m 
not sure of the result of that effort, but someone told him, as he 
noted in his Speech from the Throne, in his maiden speech in 
this House, he noted that someone had told him, you know, 
“You should put your money where your mouth is and run for 
the school board.” And so he did, and he served for nine years 
as a trustee in the Melfort School Division, three as the Chair of 
that school division. And then later on he became . . . He was 
the mayor of Melfort. And that’s when I got to meet him. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s been my great fortune over these 
years to meet with wonderful community leaders, civic leaders, 
mayors, and councillors, women and men who are just 
obviously very dedicated to their community. They aren’t in 
those jobs for the money — that’s for sure — or the glory. And 
Kevin was no exception to that. 
 
I remember Kevin’s approach to me in my various positions. 
But before he ran in ’11, even when he was thinking about 
running for us, he was very deliberate and direct about what 
Melfort needed from its provincial government in terms of a 
partnership. He was also one to recognize when maybe he 
thought we had done some things right. And that was the 
balance with which I think he conducted himself in this place, 



2910 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2017 

even when he was a declared partisan. I think he offered that 
same generosity of balance to members regardless of where 
they happened to sit, to your left or to your right. 
 
He led a life of community. There are any number of examples 
we could point to in this respect, but there are few that are as 
compelling as the domestic violence centre that he helped 
champion for the city of Melfort, which has also of course been 
a benefit in service to northeast Saskatchewan. 
 
And I remember how he was with me on that issue. Kevin was 
a very . . . He was a good-humoured man, and so when he was 
serious about, very serious about something, you understood its 
importance to him. And I would say that’s how he was with me, 
and dare I say with ministers, the Minister of Justice at the time, 
the member for Saskatoon Northwest about the importance of 
that particular centre. 
 
And there are any number of community leaders and people 
that are still to this very day champions of that centre that 
deserve every bit of the credit that Kevin might get for that 
centre being there, but today we should remember him for his 
efforts for that centre. 
 
I don’t think any male member of our caucus and maybe across 
the way walked as many miles in those red pumps as Kevin 
Phillips did. The Minister of Finance recounts that on his first 
such walk he may have, he may have fallen down in a 
spectacular way at the beginning, but got right back up and kept 
walking and was encouraging all of us to do the same. And 
there’s a pretty iconic picture in our family, of our family 
photos as a caucus, and as the member for Carrot River Valley 
and the member for Saskatoon Northwest and Kevin, and there 
were others of course as well. We got pictures of them in those 
red high-heeled shoes walking, both to raise awareness and 
money for something that was very close to his heart, an effort 
that has resulted in a centre that will be part of his legacy, to be 
sure. That will last beyond the political life of anybody in this 
room and obviously beyond his own life as well. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it is a difficult day today for us, for all 
members. I thank members on the other side of the House for 
their generosity and their kindness, and the Leader of the 
Opposition extending that to me personally today, because it’s a 
difficult day. We know that when we work together in this way, 
especially during session, we are more family than colleagues. 
I’m sure that is true of every caucus that has gathered and 
served in this place. 
 
And we have faced loss as a caucus before recently, 11 months 
ago, with Roger Parent’s passing. And though Roger’s was 
quite sudden, there was still some indication that there were bad 
things to come, that Roger would leave us too soon. Mr. 
Speaker, there was no such warning at all in the case of Kevin’s 
passing, and so that’s what makes it all the more difficult, I 
think, today. 
 
Members of the House should know — as I found out today and 
didn’t know until today and the people listening should know 
— about the quality of the character of this man. The reason 
that April, his wife, knew there was something wrong is that 
Kevin, when he was in Regina, would phone her at 9:30. 
Regularly, routinely he would call his wife at 9:30, and they 

would have a discussion. And that obviously didn’t happen last 
night, which is why April took the steps that she did. And then 
she found out and we later all found out what had happened. 
 
But you know that fact speaks to the faithfulness of a man and 
the reliability of a man. Someone who was interested in service, 
someone who indicated to me that it didn’t really matter to him 
whether he served in cabinet or not or any other official titles. 
He was happy to serve, happy to serve. May that be said of us 
all. 
 
So is there any good that can come from yesterday, from 
someone leaving us at 63 so tragically? You know, there is 
scripture that would say there is, that all things work together 
for good but, boy, it’s hard to see it on a day like today unless 
you consider his daughter Kelli and her husband, Howard. They 
have five kids: Autumn and Tempestt and Justice and Desiree 
and Denzel. Unless you consider Kevin’s son Brenden and his 
wife, Carly, who live in Alberta. Unless you consider his 
stepdaughter Brandi and her husband, Zach. They have two 
kids, Tyson and Haley. If you’re wondering if anything good 
can come from a day like today, well, there’s his stepson Riley 
and his wife, Felisha, and they have five kids: Kaleb and Raigen 
and Dexter and twins, Mia and Ava. 
 
And so there’s every expectation, there’s every hope that we 
can have that the kind of person that Kevin was, the qualities 
that I have tried to inadequately describe today, are going to get 
passed on, that they’ve already been passed on, that they’re 
manifest in the lives of his kids, his stepkids, and his 
grandchildren. And so that’s the good that will come not from 
yesterday, from his death, but most assuredly from his life, from 
a life that is well remembered. Because I believe his was a good 
example, a very good example, a compelling one and for that 
example some day it will be said of his grandkids and maybe 
subsequent generations, that they led lives of security and 
family and community. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of all 
Saskatchewan New Democrats, but more specifically my 
colleagues on this side of the floor, I want to extend our 
sincerest condolences to Kevin’s family, in particular his wife, 
April, his children, his grandchildren — of whom he talked 
frequently about and fondly — but also to his friends and his 
legislative colleagues on the government side. 
 
Kevin was an incredibly kind man. I often had the opportunity 
to speak with him at MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] receptions. He always took time to speak to me, to 
speak to many of my colleagues. We shared stories this 
morning. He often shared with me advice, wisdom, life, 
politics, even as recently as last week at the Sask Watershed 
Authority reception. And I’m so grateful that I made it to that 
reception last week because I know now that that’s the last 
opportunity that I’ll have to get to talk to Kevin. We talked 
about life. We talked about family. We talked about plans for 
after politics. 
 
And we also talked about what the Premier mentioned. He was 



November 14, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2911 

a strong advocate for his community. He’s an even stronger 
advocate for improving supports for survivors of domestic 
violence. And he was so proud of the work that he and his 
community partners did in the creation of the Melfort shelter, 
and he absolutely should be. His legacy will live on through his 
children and his grandchildren, but he will also have a piece of 
that. That shelter is in part because of him. 
 
I’m very sad that our relationship is going to be much shorter 
than I thought it was going to be. My family has a cabin in his 
riding at Kipabiskau Lake. We often talked about, we joked 
with each other because nobody really knows that Kipabiskau 
Lake is a thing in Saskatchewan. Not a lot of people know it 
exists or where it is, and it sounds like a strange name. But 
Kevin knew, and we often swapped stories about the people that 
live there, and I’m sad I won’t be able to do that anymore. 
 
Know that our hearts and our thoughts are with Kevin’s family 
and his friends today. I know that he will be missed by his 
family, and I know that he will be missed by his family on the 
government side. But I also want his family to know that he is 
going to be deeply missed by the legislators on this side of the 
House as well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On a day like 
today I wish I was a great orator like so many of the members 
in this House. Kevin was more than my colleague. As some of 
you may or may not know, he was my business partner for 
many, many years. And besides being my business partner, he 
was my good friend. We’ve been friends for nearly 20 years. 
 
Many times, Mr. Speaker, we would leave this House on a 
Thursday after session, and he would drive ahead of me. I 
always got him to drive ahead of me in case . . . because he 
would like to drive a little faster, and I thought he could get the 
ticket instead of me. But we’d phone each other, on our 
hands-free of course, and we’d talk probably 20 minutes, half 
hour. And just about life, you know, about things. About the 
House, about the business. Just about life mostly. He was so 
proud of his new grandkid twins. He just couldn’t stop talking 
about them. 
 
I talked to him on Friday. I talked to him this Friday. I said, 
“Kevin, what are you doing?” I told him what I was up to. What 
he was up to. And I said, “Oh, I left my keys to my truck. Are 
you happening to come to town? You know, into P.A. Because 
I left my keys to my truck, and you could bring the spare set 
from Melfort.” And he says, “No I’m not. I’m doing up my 
remarks,” he says, “because I’m speaking tomorrow at 
Remembrance Day.” He says, “It’s one of the most important 
days of the year for me.” 
 
Remembrance. We’ll all remember Kevin. He believed, like 
me, if you want to make a difference in your community, in 
your province, in your country, you have to get involved. I 
strongly believe that. And Kevin and I were friends because we 
talked about that all the time. You have to get involved. And 
Kevin got involved in his community from the day, forever. 
You know, as the Premier had said, he was involved in the 
school board. He was the mayor. When he was the publisher of 

the paper there and owned the paper there, he was involved in 
everything. And he continued to this day to get involved 
because he wanted to make a difference. 
 
And I know he made a difference here. He made a difference in 
the lives of so many members here because he would take them 
aside and he would talk to them as a friend. As a friend, he 
would talk to so many different people. 
 
You know, back in my smoking days, him and I often would go 
outside for a smoke at the dealership, and we’d go out. And 
okay, we’ll have a seven-minute conversation, Kevin, let’s you 
and me. And we’d go out. And now, you know, even though 
I’ve quit smoking for many years, 10 years or so, when I was 
back in Melfort we’d say, well let’s go out for a smoke. And 
he’d have a smoke and I’d sit there or stand there and talk to 
him outside behind his constituency office. 
 
He was a true friend. When I first thought of getting into 
politics, he’s the first person I called. I said, Kevin, have you 
got a few minutes? I want to drive out to Melfort and see you. 
I’ll always have a few minutes for you, he said. I remember it 
clearly. I got out there and I said, Kevin, I’m thinking about 
running in Prince Albert Carlton. I says like, I’m throwing my 
name in for the nomination. He didn’t take long to think about 
that. He said, you would be fantastic. He said, like, whatever I 
can do to help you. You should run. You would do a good job 
because we do believe in the same things and we always have. 
And that’s why we were great partners.  
 
We never had, in all the years we’ve been partners, we never 
had one disagreement — not one. And it’s not very often you 
can say that about any partnership. Well I guess the one . . . We 
did have one disagreement. I was driving home with him, and 
he liked to smoke in his car, and kind of . . . So I said, Kevin, 
gee, you know, I’m bothered by the smoke. So that was the only 
disagreement that we ever did have. 
 
But I know Kevin loved his community. Most of all, he loved 
April and he loved his kids and he loved his grandkids and his 
community. He loved this province. He loved this province, and 
I’ll never forget that. And if I could be involved and show as 
much and care as much about my fellow colleagues and about 
my community half as much as he did, I’ll be a very happy 
man. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
initially and first and foremost offer my condolences to Kevin’s 
family: to his wife, April; and his children and grandchildren; 
and to his colleagues in the government, and just express the 
shock that we all felt this morning when we heard this terrible 
news. 
 
Just a few comments about my connection with Kevin. When 
we were the class of 2011 — and yourself, Mr. Speaker, was 
one of those — and Kevin and I and I think the member from 
Moose Jaw North and Silverspring, we were chosen to sit on a 
committee to go to Ottawa. And it was just a couple of months 
after we got elected, so we were all still pretty new. And you’ll 
recall that visit, I’m sure. 



2912 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2017 

We went to Ottawa to sit in on a committee on the development 
. . . We were planning the development of the lobbyist registry, 
so we had been established as a standing committee to do that. 
And that’s when I first got to know a number of the people who 
were elected the same time I was in the class of 2011. And my 
remembrances of Kevin, right from the get-go, was this warm 
friendliness that he would express.  
 
And I was scared of those guys. I mean I was a new MLA, and 
it was terrifying in some ways to be the only new MLA on this 
side of the House when there was at least a dozen on that side 
of the House. So I was learning my way and I just felt, and I’m 
sure the rest of us that were at that conference felt that sort of 
easy friendliness that he brought with him to any conversation 
and just that gentle sort of almost laconic laid-backness that 
really put me at ease. And we had some great conversations 
right from the get-go. So I’ve always sort of cherished that 
opportunity because I met some of the new MLAs on a team 
basis rather than this adversarial world that we live in in this 
Chamber. 
 
So that was sort of my initial encounters with Kevin, and of 
course since then, in the last six years, we’ve had a number of 
friendly exchanges. And as my leader expressed, it was always 
sort of that open friendliness and understanding why we’re all 
here despite our differences maybe in a political level.  
 
I always kind of thought he had this great voice and somewhat 
of an armchair philosopher. I always felt like Kevin could be 
the Lake Wobegon voice on a radio and tell these nice stories in 
that sort of lazy drawl that he had. And even when he got up in 
the House here, Mr. Speaker, it was sort of a gentle roll to his 
voice that just put me at ease except, of course, when he was 
railing on the previous government which he liked to do. But he 
always did that with a twinkle in his eye, and I really 
appreciated that as well. And we could go back and forth and 
enjoy those exchanges. 
 
Certainly the Melfort sexual assault centre was something he 
was so very, very proud of. And I mean, that exemplified for 
me his ability to be self-deprecating because he was so proud of 
those high-heeled shoes, those red high-heeled shoes, and loved 
talking about it. And I mean, I have this image in my head. And 
it takes a brave man to do something like that, and I always sort 
of appreciated his willingness to sort of put himself in that 
position, in the self-deprecating . . . 
 
In his speeches . . . I know the Premier shared some of his 
remarks, but I look to it at his recent Speech from the Throne 
and throughout his speeches, there is sort of a sprinkling of this, 
oh, you know, I’m not any great shakes but here it is. And I just 
want to share this quote from October 31st. So this is part of his 
speech, a reply to the Speech from the Throne. He said, “And I 
want to talk . . .” I’m sure you can all hear his voice. I’ll do my 
best: 
 

I want to talk just for a minute, about camping. I went 
camping this summer. It was probably not overly 
successful because I forgot the wind flap on the tent, but it 
was somewhat successful. But that’s quality of life. You 
know, I think back to when my daughter was 13 years old 
and she wasn’t a huge fan of camping and so she says to 
me, Dad, why do you work so hard all year long just so 

you can live poor for two weeks? And you know, I 
thought, she’s missing the point of camping. And I laugh 
about that every time I hear that they’re back from 
camping for the weekend. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think — and it’s clear from his speeches — 
that family was first and foremost for Kevin. His wife and his 
children, grandchildren, were the joy of his life. And I think 
because of them, he was willing to serve here in this Assembly, 
to serve in his community as mayor, and all the community 
efforts that he put in because he believed in his family. And 
that’s why, I mean, he’s still sad that his son had to move to 
Alberta during a different government, but that was part of it. 
He wanted his family near to him and close to home. 
 
And when these kinds of tragic events hit us hard, I think it’s a 
reminder to all of us of the Latin words carpe diem, seize the 
day, because these things are so shocking and so sudden. And I 
think if there’s something for us to take away from this is to call 
our loved ones tonight and tell them we love them — probably 
at 9:30 would be a good time to do that — and to hug them and 
keep them close, and not just to forget from day to day how 
much we do love our families, how much they love us. And I 
think Kevin Phillips was an example of that for all of us. And I 
will miss his speeches and the exchanges we had here in the 
House, but certainly I will miss him as a man. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
North. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
lost a colleague, but more than that, we lost a friend. 
 
I guess I was blessed to know Kevin since somewhere around 
1976 when we moved to Melfort. I was running a furniture 
store and he was the advertising for the Melfort Journal at the 
time. I can remember the first advertising we booked with him. 
Always very helpful, always there to try and do his best for his 
clients, and we were no exception. Later on I moved into radio, 
into sales, so we were actually in competition with each other. 
But with Kevin there was never any animosity. You didn’t have 
to watch your back because of Kevin. You knew that he was a 
gentleman first and foremost, working for the community and 
for his clients. And he could never do enough for the 
community. It was always at Kevin’s heart, was the community 
of Melfort. 
 
We became even closer friends because we both belonged to the 
Kinsmen club. Mr. Speaker, here was a man with ideas. He had 
ideas that most of us would never scratch the surface with. One 
time there was a gathering of all the Kinsmen clubs for the 
province to meet in Moose Jaw. Well it was Kevin’s idea, but 
we found this garage that had been abandoned. At the time it 
was empty. We hauled in truckloads of sand. Because Kevin 
worked at the paper, we had rolls of newspaper and we 
decorated all the walls. We even had a pool there, and had a 
beach party in the middle of February. We had the music and 
the bar and painted the walls so that the scenery was . . . it 
would go forever, the sand and the sky and the seagulls. And it 
just was an awesome event that we pulled off there. And he was 
always coming up with these kinds of things. 



November 14, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2913 

One time there was . . . all the billboards in Melfort were about 
Julius Caesar. At the car dealer, Julius Caesar drives our 
chariots. At the restaurants, Julius Caesar eats here. At the 
clothing store, Julius Caesar buys his apparel here. And nobody 
knew who Julius Caesar . . . what this was all about. And it 
went on for a few days, and finally it came out in the 
newspaper: it was part of a Kinsmen presidential campaign, that 
they were backing somebody that took on the character of 
Julius Caesar. But that’s what he did. He got people involved. 
Can you imagine a car dealership putting up this on this 
marquee? And just ideas after ideas, just to build the enthusiasm 
of the community and do things. 
 
One of his wildest ones . . . and I’m a little hesitant to even 
bring it up because it was such a great idea. There was an old, 
abandoned house on an acreage just a few miles out of town. It 
had been a family home forever. It was just one of those pieces 
of property you look at and you think, you know, at one time 
there was a family there; there was love and compassion and all 
the things that family does. And now here’s this house, forlorn, 
abandoned, sitting there empty. 
 
Kevin wanted to give it one last hurrah. He phoned the owners 
who had moved away and said, you know, your house is just 
dilapidated, but I’m sure you’ve got lots of memories there. He 
wanted to have one big party at this house just to send it off, 
and in the end, ignite it, have it burn up. That was the kind of 
ideas he had. It never materialized because there was just a 
fraction, an element of doubt that if some little thing went 
wrong, it could be a catastrophe. But that was his mind. That’s 
what he was thinking, always looking out of the box. What can 
we do different? What can we do to make a splash? 
 
Mr. Speaker, he did so much for the community. He did so 
much for the province. His leadership abilities were certainly 
evident here, and certainly in his community with his business 
entrepreneurship, his being the mayor of the city, and being 
elected here. And one of the . . . I don’t think anybody ever had 
an unkind word, and he certainly didn’t have an unkind word 
for anybody. He was just the kind of person you would love to 
sit down and just have a beer with. He was just that great of a 
guy. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I rise today on what 
is undoubtedly a very, very sad occasion. The shock, as the 
member for Nutana noted, this morning of hearing the news of 
Kevin’s passing, I think hit all of us very hard. And I want to 
offer my sincere condolences to the members opposite, his 
legislative family; and of course his family — his children, and 
his grandchildren, and especially April. 
 
I did sit on a committee with Kevin, and I had probably more 
seven-minute breaks than I should care to admit with him. And 
in those seven-minute breaks, I feel like I got a little bit of a 
sense of who he was, and I certainly looked forward to it. I 
won’t blame the fact that I continued longer than I should’ve on 
him, but I did enjoy it when I was out there, the opportunity to 
speak with him. 
 
And you know, I didn’t ever meet April, but when he talked 

about her, he lit up, and you could just tell how much he cared 
about her, and how proud he was of his family and his 
grandkids, and how proud he was of his community. He just 
glowed when he talked about where he was from, and his 
involvement in the community. And he did offer easy advice, 
and I found myself looking forward to his advice and his 
insights. 
 
And I don’t want to make this really lengthy, but there are a 
couple of things I wanted to say. The first was just how, having 
not met April, I could tell how much she meant to him, and how 
incredibly sad I am that they don’t have each other anymore. 
And just to express those condolences. 
 
But the other thing I really wanted to express, Mr. Speaker, is 
this. When we stand here day after day there is a lot of tension. 
There’s a lot of division, and necessarily so perhaps at times. 
But when you were talking with Kevin, it was very, very easy 
to remember the things that we share to find common ground. 
 
I’ll never doubt his love of his community, his love of this 
province, his respect for all of you, his respect for this 
Assembly and the role that we play — public service. And I 
don’t think anyone could question his love and devotion to his 
family 
 
And I guess the third thing I wanted to say was just that you left 
a mark, Kevin, and we’re going to miss you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And certainly 
condolences to Kevin’s family, and Kevin’s family here as well. 
Kevin was a friend to everyone really in this caucus, but 
especially to the class of 2016. I know it was a rather 
intimidating place as we’ve heard when you first come here, 
and Kevin was one of those who had to find out who you are, 
what you’re about, and what are your plans, what are you 
thinking. That was Kevin’s way of introducing himself, I think, 
to each and every one of us, especially us as first years. 
 
And you know, every time that we made a presentation — 
whether it was just a simple introduction or maybe it was a 
reply to the Throne Speech — as a minimum you’d get a nod 
and a wink, or you might get an “attaboy” or “you nailed it” or 
“good on you.” Kevin made what was . . . really could be a 
rather intimidating place, a very friendly place. And I really, 
sincerely hope that we can all pay that forward sometime. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
add my condolences to the family of Kevin Phillips and his 
wife, April, and their children and their grandchildren, and to 
the members of the government side. 
 
I too first met Kevin when he was the mayor of the city of 
Melfort. And he was a true champion of his citizens. I think the 
issue that we were talking about was housing and how he really, 
truly was, as the member from Moose Jaw . . . somebody who 
thought outside the box and looked for positive solutions for 



2914 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2017 

everyone. 
 
But most recently I had the opportunity, along with the member 
from Saskatoon Wildwood, to travel to Charlottetown for a 
Canadian parliamentarians’ association conference with Kevin 
in October. And this was pretty special. It was Canada’s 150th. 
But this is a real opportunity, when we get together for CPA 
[Commonwealth Parliamentary Association] conferences, 
where we get to know each other as people and our families, 
and I got to know April a little bit. 
 
It was a pretty special conference. And Kevin, as many have 
noted how easy he is to make friends and conversation with, he 
was a really good ambassador for the province of Saskatchewan 
in Canada. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, you know, he’s a true and 
principled parliamentarian. But he was asked to speak on behalf 
of the Turks and Caicos Islands delegation who could not be 
there because of the hurricanes, Irma and Maria, and the 
devastation. And he gave a very good presentation on their 
behalf. He’s always thinking of others. 
 
So thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Phillips family, Melfort, our 
House, and the province of Saskatchewan has indeed lost 
someone very special today, and our thoughts and prayers are 
with the family. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’m going to 
actually ask for some help from my colleagues. Today I lost my 
friend Kevin, and we’ve lost our friend and colleague. 
 
Kevin and I were “colleagues” for about one day. We were 
colleagues that almost immediately and instantly become 
friends. We were seatmates in the back corner when we were 
first elected in 2011. We sat beside each other in caucus from 
the start. 
 
He’d bring me coffee, and sometimes it would be half full. I’d 
ask why, and he’d say, “Just because. It looks like that’s all you 
can take today.” We ate lunch together, and I’d always joke 
with the cafeteria staff that today I was going to get a free lunch 
as the millionth customer. I would do this every day and look 
with hope that the confetti would just suddenly start raining 
down and I’d get a free lunch. One day he got together with 
them and as they rang in my order, he excitedly said, “You 
won. You get a free lunch.” They also had some makeshift 
confetti and threw it. Kevin said, “Are you happy now? You 
finally won.” I said, “Yeah, I am. I am kind of happy. Thank 
you.” And he said, “You’re welcome. I don’t want to hear about 
it again.” I said, “All right.” 
 
We would leave the building at 5 o’clock together, telling one 
last anecdote from whatever the day brought. There wasn’t a lot 
in common at first glance between the two of us — Melfort and 
Regina. I’d say, “Kevin, do you even have one bridge in 
Melfort?” He’d say, “Damn rights we do.” And I went to 
Melfort, looked around for his bridge. I go, “Where is it?” And 
he finally, he took me to a park, and it was this little 
cross-bridge thing. And I said, “That’s it?” He goes, “Yes, 
that’s it, but it’s still a bridge. You’ve got nothing in Coronation 
Park.” I go, “Okay, fair enough.” 

We would joust and debate many topics if either of us was 
bored. It was a simple exercise to engage the other, and we 
would. He was fascinated by research. He would look at policy 
or criticism of policy and he would dissect. He knew there was 
more to an issue. Inevitably he would go off in some direction, 
and I’d make some snide comment, and he would convince me 
there was something there. He was embedded in the minutia, 
some factoid. He loved his factoids. Many of us would know he 
loved coming up with some sort of a fact and say, “There, I told 
you so. There’s something in there.” 
 
We were seatmates for a few years in a place we referred to, in 
the back corner there, as the hinterland. We joked whether 
anybody knew we were there. There were occasions when the 
Speaker would just miss us and we’d stand up and we’d look 
and have to wave and go, “We’re here.” We would joke with 
our colleagues if they walked past. We would introduce 
ourselves to our colleagues that sat in the front row, and they 
would look at us with this puzzled look: “Why are you 
introducing yourselves? I know who you are.” He said, “Do you 
really? We’re just checking. We’re in the back.” They would 
never forget that one. 
 
He would ask me a question and I’d think about it and maybe 
not answer immediately. He timed me one day and he said it 
took me 28 seconds to respond. He would happily relay this 
information to anyone, given the chance: “You know, it takes 
him an average of 28 seconds to respond. Is he the same with 
you?” And they’d say, “Yes, he is kind of stunned.” I would 
accept that. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Maybe it was his ability to see the world differently. He was 
upbeat and hopeful. He believed in people. He was inquisitive. 
He asked questions. He was sometimes childlike. The world 
had not jaded him. He was a good and decent man. He was here 
to serve. He was honoured to represent Melfort. He fought for 
that shelter. And what hasn’t been said is, it burned down. It 
had to be rebuilt. He was jaded and miserable for one day. He 
said, “We’ve got to get going. We’ve got to build it again.” And 
away he went supporting it. 
 
Most of all, he loved April and his kids, his grandkids. I had the 
opportunity to spend an awful lot of time with him and his 
family. He was just proud. He was just so proud — always 
family first. 
 
Thanks for making a difference, Kevin Phillips. Rest easy, my 
friend. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — You know, I’m just like everybody in this 
House today. I was in shock when I heard the news. I still am in 
shock. I want to send my condolences to April and his family. 
 
I never knew Kevin before political life, but I’d heard of him 
before. Heard of him before from the member for Melfort. 
Heard about him from our party people when he was seeking a 
nomination. And they spoke glowingly of him, just saying that 
. . . I know I remember Rod just saying, you know, you couldn’t 
get a better guy to represent that area than Kevin. And he was 



November 14, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2915 

right. 
 
As we, as all members here — men and women — first get 
elected, we all come here with ideas. We’re going to change the 
world, make a difference, leave the partisan at home. But a lot 
of MLAs lose that after a number of years. Kevin never did. He 
came here to represent the people of Melfort and to make 
Saskatchewan a better place, and he did. I mean look at the 
centre and what he did for that. And I remember how hard he 
fought for that. He walked . . . the many miles he walked in 
them shoes. He’d have walked a thousand miles to get that 
centre for the people of Melfort. That’s the kind of man he was. 

 
He’s a man that I think that everybody here would still like to 
be, representing their constituents, because he never forgot that. 
He, in all the years I’ve worked with him on the leadership 
team, never lost his temper. He was always cool, calm, and 
collect. A lot of days I’d be, you know, a little on edge at times 
and, you know, just things. And you want to get calmed down 
with House business or committee business, and you always 
talked to Kevin. He could always just kind of bring a 
perspective to why we’re here and that there’s always 
something more than political life, which was his family. 

 
His family was very important to him. He talked about them 
constantly and, you know, as I listen to the tributes from both 
sides of the House, I mean, everybody’s right. There was a man 
that was, that never cared as much for this province and for his 
family. The last few times . . . Last week we talked. I was with 
Kevin when he had his injury. He tore his Achilles, and we 
were on the football field with special-needs children. You 
know, and he never, he didn’t even think he hardly got hurt. He 
didn’t want to show, in front of them kids, he didn’t want them 
to get upset. And I always think back, when I injured myself 
just recently, I wasn’t like that. I wish I could’ve been as tough 
as he was. I remember him being helped off the field. He just 
said to the kids, “I’m all right. I’m just stretched a little bit. I 
just want to go rest.” And then he was telling me how, you 
know, he had to . . . I told him I was having a little trouble 
sleeping, you know, with this brace, and he always said, well he 
had used a pillow, and different things. And we talked about our 
injuries, mostly giving me a rough time about them. 
 
But I’ll miss him. I’ll miss his advice, even though I’ve been 
here a lot longer than he has been. He knew his job, and if I 
needed to ask him anything, being Deputy Whip, he knew it. 
And if he said it, you knew it was right. He never ever told you 
. . . He never guessed at anything. If he said a statement or said 
something, you knew that you could take it to the bank. You 
knew that it was right. I didn’t have to go to the book and look 
it up in the rules and regulations. He knew it, you know, if he 
said it. I’m going to miss him here as all of us will. 
 
He was a steady influence and somebody that, when I finish my 
career, that I would like to look back on my career, as people 
are going to look back on his, and say he made a difference, 
because he did. He made a difference to the people in his 
constituency. He made a difference to the people in this 
province. And I think he made a difference to each and every 
one of us in this House. 
 
He will be remembered for what he has done, for what he has 
accomplished. He will be remembered in the city of Melfort. 

And for that I will thank him, as many people will in the time to 
come. I just know that I’m going to miss him. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 

TRANSMITTAL MOTION 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
thanks to all of the members who have so eloquently offered 
tributes. 
 
I would like to move a motion of transmittal of these statements 
that have been made. And just before I do, I want to finish off 
the quote that I leaned heavily on for my remarks that came 
from Kevin’s maiden speech. The rest of the quote is as 
follows. He says, “. . . I have led a life of security, and family, 
and community.” And then he switches to his hometown of 
Kinistino, and he says, “It was a place where each of us looked 
after each other and watched out for each other. It was just the 
way things were done and the way things still are done.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we need to look after each other, especially 
April and the family, in the days ahead. I have talked to 
members today who said they remembered them walking hand 
in hand in the hallways on Throne Speech day. They were just a 
wonderful couple, and I can’t really fathom the loss that April is 
feeling right now. And so we need to make sure that all of us 
are looking out for those who are just most bereaved by this 
very tragic loss. 
 
And so it is with that sentiment in mind, Mr. Speaker, that I will 
move: 

 
That this House send to the family of Kevin Phillips a copy 
of the tributes and statements of condolence on his passing 
and that the transcripts be sent under the cover of letter of 
transmittal signed by Mr. Speaker. 

 
The Speaker: — The Premier has moved the motion. We’ll 
take the statement as read. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that this Assembly do now 
adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly now stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:24.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

STATEMENT OF CONDOLENCE 
 Kevin Phillips 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2909 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2910 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2911 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2911 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2912 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2913 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2913 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2913 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2914 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2914 
TRANSMITTAL MOTION 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2915 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

 
Hon. Steven Bonk 

Minister of the Economy 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 
Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Larry Doke 
Minister of Government Relations  

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 
Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Nancy Heppner 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Gene Makowsky 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  
and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 


