






















































Hansard: March 06, 2017


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 52A  MONDAY, MARCH 6, 2017, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 

 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 

Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 

 

 

 
 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 

Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 

Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 

Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 

Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 

Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 

Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 

Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 

Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 

Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 

Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 

Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 

Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 

D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 

Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 

Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 

Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 

Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 

Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 

Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 

Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 

Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 

Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 

Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 

Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 

Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 

Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 

Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 

Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 

Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 

Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 

McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 

Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 

Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 

Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 

Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 

Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 

Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 

Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 

Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 

Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 

Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 

Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 

Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 

Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 

Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 

Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 

Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 

Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 

Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 

Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 

Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 

Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 

Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 

Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 

Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 

Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 

Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 

 

 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 11 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1535 
March 6, 2017 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

[Prayers] 

The Speaker: — Why is the Government House Leader on his 
feet? 

Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to 
introduce and consider all stages of Bill No. 46, The Saskatoon 
Meewasin Constituency By-election Act immediately. 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave to introduce and consider all stages of Bill No. 46, The 
Saskatoon Meewasin Constituency By-election Act 
immediately. Is leave granted? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

Bill No. 46 — The Saskatoon Meewasin Constituency 
By-election Act 

Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 46, The Saskatoon Meewasin Constituency By-election 
Act be now introduced and read the first time. 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill No. 46, The Saskatoon Meewasin Constituency 
By-election Act be now introduced and read the first time. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader may proceed 
to move second reading of this bill. 

SECOND READINGS 

Bill No. 46 — The Saskatoon Meewasin Constituency 
By-election Act 

Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 46, The Saskatoon Meewasin Constituency By-election 
Act be now read the second time. 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
second reading of Bill No. 46, The Saskatoon Meewasin 
Constituency By-election Act. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Government House Leader that Bill No. 

46, The Saskatoon Meewasin Constituency By-election Act be 
now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 
that Bill No. 46, The Saskatoon Meewasin Constituency 
By-election Act be committed to the Committee of the Whole 
on Bills and the said bill be considered in the Committee of the 
Whole on Bills immediately. 

The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Committee 
of the Whole on Bills. 

Clerk: — Committee of the Whole. 

The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair for the Assembly to 
go into Committee of the Whole on Bills. 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ON BILLS 

Bill No. 46 — The Saskatoon Meewasin Constituency 
By-election Act 

The Chair: — The item of business before the committee is 
Bill No. 46, The Saskatoon Meewasin Constituency By-election 
Act. Clause 1, short title, is that agreed? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Chair: — Carried. 

[Clauses 1 to 6 inclusive agreed to.] 

The Chair: — Her Majesty, by and with the advice and consent 
of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, enacts as 
follows: Bill No. 46, The Saskatoon Meewasin Constituency 
By-election Act. I recognize the Government House Leader. 

Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I move that the 
committee report the bill without amendment. 

The Chair: — The Government House Leader has moved that 
the committee report Bill No. 46, The Saskatoon Meewasin 
Constituency By-election Act without amendment. Is that 
agreed? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 

Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I move that the 
committee rise, report progress, and ask leave to sit again. 



1536 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2017 

The Chair: — The Government House Leader has moved that 
the committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit 
again. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 
[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the committee to 
report Bill No. 46, The Saskatoon Meewasin Constituency 
By-election Act without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader may proceed 
to move third reading. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 46 — The Saskatoon Meewasin Constituency 
By-election Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
this bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that Bill No. 46, The 
Saskatoon Meewasin Constituency By-election Act be now read 
the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready 
for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Agreed? Carried. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
I’m advised that His Honour Justice Neal Caldwell, the 
Administrator of Saskatchewan, is here for Royal Assent. 
Please all rise. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
[At 13:39 His Honour the Administrator entered the Chamber, 
took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent to the 
following bill.] 
 
His Honour: — Pray be seated. 
 

The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 
Assembly in its present session has passed a bill which in the 
name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour, and to which 
bill I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 
 
Clerk: — Your Honour, the bill is as follows: 
 
Bill No. 46 - The Saskatoon Meewasin Constituency 

By-election Act 
 
His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to this bill. 
 
[His Honour retired from the Chamber at 13.41.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 
leave to move a motion to recess for the swearing-in ceremony 
of the new member for Saskatoon Meewasin. The motion is: 
 

That this Assembly recess for the administration of the 
oath of allegiance for the new member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader who made the motion. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 
 

That this Assembly recess for the administration of the 
oath of allegiance for the member of Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved: 
 

That the Assembly recess for the administration of the oath 
of allegiance for the member for Saskatoon Meewasin.  

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly stands recessed to the 
call of the Chair. 
 
[The Assembly recessed from 13:42 until 13:54.] 
 

INTRODUCTION OF NEW MEMBER OF THE 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY 

 
The Speaker: — Order. This Assembly is now reconvened. I 
hereby inform the Assembly that pursuant to an Act of this 
Legislative Assembly respecting a by-election in the 
constituency of Saskatoon Meewasin, which was assented to 
today, March 6th, 2017, Mr. Ryan Meili is authorized to take 
his seat as a member for the constituency of Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 



March 6, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1537 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — I have the honour to present to you Mr. 
Ryan Meili, member for the constituency of Saskatoon 
Meewasin, who has taken the oath, signed the roll, and now 
claims the right to take his seat. 
 
The Speaker: — Mr. Ryan Meili, I want to welcome you to the 
Legislative Assembly. I hope that your time here will be one 
that serves to be a record of honour to yourself and your 
constituents. Let the hon. member take his seat. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I’d like to take this opportunity to welcome 
Michael Boda, who is in my Speaker’s gallery today. I’d like to 
congratulate him and the staff at Elections Saskatchewan for 
running a successful by-election. 
 
Nearly 5,000 Saskatchewan voters expressed their preference 
for a candidate in the constituency of Saskatoon Meewasin. I’d 
like to thank all political parties, their volunteers and supporters 
that took part in the election, and more than 200 of our residents 
were part of the Elections Saskatchewan team supporting the 
successful administration of this election. 
 
We want to publicly thank all those who took part in this 
important process. Note that the strong participation of voters, 
candidates, and election officials is a testament to the health of 
our democracy in Saskatchewan. Thank you all for taking part 
in the process. 
 
I recognize the member for Regina Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sitting in the west 
gallery, I’d like to take the opportunity to introduce somebody 
that’s no stranger to politics, and certainly no stranger to 
advocacy and helping out with a number of different 
campaigns. It’s Conrad “Tigger” Johnson, and I’d like to take 
the opportunity not only to welcome him, but looking forward 
to continuing to work with you, Tigger. All the best. Take care. 
Thanks. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to welcome a 
couple of special guests to your gallery. First of all, Ms. Pamela 
Guest is here, no stranger to this Assembly, and someone who 
has and continues to do great work and advocacy on behalf of 
sexual abuse survivors in our province. So I welcome her. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to also 
recognize and welcome Ms. Monique Goffinet Miller to this 
Assembly, someone who I’ve introduced before who comes to 
us from BC [British Columbia] with a long history and 
continued passion for advocating for women in leadership roles. 
And we’re very glad to have her as one of our new residents of 
Saskatchewan and of Regina Lakeview. Thank you. 
 
I would ask all members to join me in welcoming these two 
visitors to their Assembly. Thank you. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition organized by the Saskatchewan 
Seniors Association. They were concerned with the 
government’s per-prescription increase last year to the seniors’ 
drug plan, the increase of $5 an individual for a prescription, 
Mr. Speaker, yet again. They’re worried that with the upcoming 
budget that there will be further damaging changes, Mr. 
Speaker, that will have a huge impact on seniors and others, Mr. 
Speaker. They point out that this change affects 120,000 seniors 
by an average of about $80 a year, Mr. Speaker, and when 
you’re on a fixed income, that makes a huge difference. I’d like 
to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the Government of Saskatchewan take the necessary steps 
and immediate action to end this discrimination of the 
elderly and people afflicted with illness of Saskatchewan 
with per-prescription fee increase. 

 
Mr. Speaker, today this petition, the pages that I’m handing in, 
Mr. Speaker, are signed by citizens of Nokomis, Nipawin, Quill 
Lake, Lanigan, many more Lanigan signatures, Stenen, 
Norquay, Perdue, Chitek Lake, Spiritwood, Goodsoil. You get 
the sense, Mr. Speaker, that many people across Saskatchewan 
have signed this petition. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Steele: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today in the presence of . . . for the citizens who are opposed to 
the federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 
[14:00] 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop federal 
government from imposing the carbon tax on the province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of Hazlet, 
Gull Lake, Swift Current, Shaunavon, Pennant, Webb, 
Tompkins, McMahon, Carmichael, Piapot, Lancer, Weyburn, 
Regina, Maple Creek, Kincaid, and Saskatoon. I do present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, mister speaky or 
Speaker. I want to present a petition today as it relates to the 
second bridge in Prince Albert that people have been calling 
for. And obviously, Mr. Speaker, the need for a second bridge 
for Prince Albert has never been clearer than it is today. 
 
Prince Albert communities and communities north of Prince 
Albert and the businesses that send people and products to 
Prince Albert require a solution. So: 
 



1538 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2017 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan ask that the 
Sask Party government stop stalling, hiding behind rhetoric 
and refusing to listen to the people calling for action, and 
to begin immediately to plan and then quickly commence 
the construction of a second bridge for Prince Albert using 
federal and provincial dollars [Mr. Speaker]. 

 
The people that have signed this petition have signed from all 
throughout the lands, Mr. Speaker. And on these two particular 
pages, the people that have signed these pages are primarily 
from Prince Albert and area. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to 
present a petition regarding pay equity here in Saskatchewan. 
And the following residents of Saskatchewan want to bring to 
our attention that the citizens of this province believe in an 
economy powered by transparency, accountability, security, and 
equity; and that all women should be paid equitably; and that 
women are powerful drivers of economic growth and their 
economic empowerment benefits all. 
 
The Centre for Policy Alternatives found that in Saskatoon in 
2016 women earned, on the average, 63 cents for every dollar 
that a man makes. And in Regina, women earned on average 73 
cents for every dollar that a man makes. And according to the 
most recent StatsCan data, the national gender wage gap for all 
full-time workers is 72 cents for every dollar a man makes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan eliminate 
the wage gap between women and men across all sectors 
where the Government of Saskatchewan has jurisdiction, 
provide a framework under which this can be done within 
this term of this Assembly, and that the Saskatchewan 
government call upon all workplaces within Saskatchewan 
within the private sector to eliminate the wage gap between 
women and men. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition today are from the 
city of Saskatoon. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
present to you a petition to increase funding to Prince Albert 
mobile crisis. The residents of the province of Saskatchewan 
wish to bring to your attention the following: Prince Albert 
mobile crisis unit has had to close its doors during daytime 
hours, resulting in a loss of resource to people in distress. 
 
The daytime closure of Prince Albert mobile has put stress on 
the Prince Albert Police Service, Victoria Hospital, and other 
agencies who may not be trained and/or qualified to provide 
counselling and intervention services to clients. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to increase funding to 
Prince Albert mobile crisis unit so they may once again 
offer 24-hour emergency crisis service. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing this petition are from the 
city of Prince Albert. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
the petition in support of sexual abuse prevention curriculum in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Those signing this petition wish to draw our attention to the 
following: Saskatchewan has the second highest rate of sexual 
child abuse in Canada. Child sexual abuse has lasting impacts 
throughout the lifetime of the victim; those include mental 
health impacts, PTSD [post-traumatic stress disorder], 
depression, anxiety, panic attacks, and low self-esteem. They 
also include decreased school attendance and achievement and 
decreased productivity throughout the lifetime. Currently there 
is no comprehensive elementary or secondary curriculum 
regarding prevention of child abuse in Saskatchewan. I’ll read 
the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan take immediate and 
concrete action to develop and implement Erin’s law; and 
that such legislation would ensure that a comprehensive 
health education program be developed and implemented 
which would require age-appropriate sexual abuse and 
assault awareness and prevention education in grades 
pre-K through grade 12, along with training school staff on 
the prevention of child abuse. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those signing the petition today reside in Regina. I 
do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition calling for a stop to the Sask Party sell-off of 
SaskTel. The undersigned residents of the province of 
Saskatchewan wish to bring to your attention the following: that 
after nearly a decade of wasting the economic boom and 
blowing through the savings, the government is now forcing 
Saskatchewan people to pay for Sask Party mismanagement. 
 
They point out that in the recent election, the Sask Party 
promised that they would not privatize SaskTel. But now the 
petitioners point out that instead of looking at their own waste 
and scandal, the Sask Party is talking about breaking their 
promise and looking to sell off SaskTel to make a quick dollar. 
 
And the petitioners point out that SaskTel is owned by all of us. 
It was built with Saskatchewan hard work, innovation, and 
pride. And they point out that SaskTel creates thousands of 
good jobs, ensures services to parts of the province that other 
providers ignore, and offers the lowest mobile phone rates in 
Canada. 



March 6, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1539 

Mr. Speaker, this particular batch of petitions in the prayer that 
reads as follows: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan call on the Saskatchewan Party government 
to keep their promise, stop their plan to sell off SaskTel, 
and keep our valued Crown corporation in the hands of the 
people of Saskatchewan. 

 
This particular batch of petitions is signed by individuals from 
Air Ronge, La Ronge, Stanley Mission. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 
again today to present a petition calling on the government to 
reverse the cuts to the Aboriginal court worker program. The 
Government of Saskatchewan cut the budget for the Aboriginal 
court worker program in the 2016-2017 provincial budget. 
 
Those on this side of the House know that Aboriginal court 
workers play an important role helping Aboriginal people in 
criminal and child apprehension cases. Aboriginal peoples are 
disproportionately represented in Saskatchewan’s correctional 
centres, and Aboriginal court workers successfully help to make 
our communities safer through reduced recidivism rates. I’d like 
to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan reverse its 
short-sighted and counterproductive cuts to the Aboriginal 
court worker program. 

 
Those individuals signing the petition I submit today, Mr. 
Speaker, come from Asquith, La Ronge, and Saskatoon. I do so 
submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 

Saskatoon Meewasin By-election 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Obviously I’m new 
here. I will try to say “Speaker” every time, though, instead of 
“speaky.” 
 
It’s an honour and a privilege to stand before you today as the 
representative for the constituency of Saskatoon Meewasin, and 
the newest member of the Saskatchewan NDP [New 
Democratic Party] caucus team. 
 
The Saskatoon Meewasin by-election was won with the hard 
work and dedication of many volunteers, a great campaign 
team, as well as with the love and support of my wife, Mahli, 
our son, Abraham, and my parents, Wally and Lea, who are 
with us here today. For all of their support, I’m extremely 
grateful. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during my time on the doorstep, I heard a lot from 
the people of Meewasin. I heard concern. I heard concern over 

cuts to health care and education, concern about the sell-off of 
our Crown corporations, and the government’s growing deficit. 
 
It’s clear, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Meewasin used this 
election to send a message. It’s a message of concern but also 
one of hope. They believe we can do better and so do I. 
 
I look forward to learning from my fellow NDP MLAs 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly] and joining them in the 
hard work ahead in service of the people of Meewasin and all of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I ask all members today to join me in extending thanks to the 
candidates of each party for running a respectful and decent 
campaign, and to everyone whose hard work contributed to 
making this by-election possible, and to the people of 
Saskatoon Meewasin for casting their votes in this important 
by-election. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Well that was the shortest maiden speech 
ever. I recognize the member from Saskatoon Westview. 
 

Telemiracle 41 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Like so many 
residents, over the weekend I spent much of my time glued to 
the television, watching the Telemiracle count raise higher and 
higher. This past weekend the Kinsmen Foundation’s 41st 
Telemiracle — and those ringing phones — did not disappoint. 
 
I am pleased to announce, Mr. Speaker, that this year’s 
fundraiser brought in a total of over $5 million into our 
province, all of which stays in Saskatchewan. Having a 
special-needs daughter, I understand how critical this funding 
can be for individuals and their families. As one volunteer put 
it, it is a true testament to our prairie pioneer spirit. 
 
I would like to take a moment to thank the countless volunteers 
as well, Mr. Speaker. Without their sleepless nights Telemiracle 
wouldn’t be half of the success that it is today. Host Beverly 
Mahood kept the crowd and volunteers going, and of course it 
didn’t hurt that the biggest telethon in Canada had some true 
stars performing. Those included Brad Johner and the Johner 
Boys, Donny Parenteau, the Hunter Brothers, and Sierra Noble. 
 
I would ask all members, Mr. Speaker, to join with me and 
thank all of the performers, the volunteers, and the crew of 
Telemiracle 41. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Black History Month Events 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, February marked Black 
History Month, and throughout the month events were held in 
Regina and all over Saskatchewan in recognition of the 
immense contributions of African-Canadians and the 
celebration of their strength, leadership, and perseverance in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
On February 1st I had the honour of bringing remarks, along 
with the minister, to the launch hosted by the Saskatchewan 
African Canadian Heritage Museum. The event’s keynote 



1540 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2017 

speaker was Dr. Barbara McNeil, a professor of education at the 
University of Regina who passionately discussed the 
opportunities, triumphs, challenges, and optimistic vision of 
African-Canadians in Saskatchewan. 
 
On February 28th the Saskatchewan Caribbean Canadian 
Association held their annual Black History Month gala. The 
MLA for Regina Lakeview brought remarks to this very 
important and special event. The gala was highlighted by the 
SCCA [Saskatchewan Caribbean Canadian Association] Award 
of Recognition which was received by the brilliant and talented 
Judy Cobsar. It couldn’t be more well deserved. 
 
This important month and all of its events wouldn’t be possible 
without the amazing contributions from people like Carol 
Lafayette-Boyd and so many more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we celebrate, reflect, and learn from the past, 
let us take heart the motto of our province, the province we all 
love: “from many peoples, strength.” Most importantly, let’s 
recommit to building together toward a future where we all 
fully and equally benefit from the true strength of 
Saskatchewan’s many peoples. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
North. 
 

Coldest Night of the Year Fundraiser Held in Moose Jaw 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to 
rise in the Assembly today to acknowledge another successful 
fundraising event in Moose Jaw, the Coldest Night of the Year 
fundraiser for Moose Jaw’s Riverside Mission. 
 
This is the second year that the mission has hosted this event. 
For passersby it might have been a strange sight to see dozens 
of yellow toques walking down Main Street in Moose Jaw on 
February the 25th, but it was for a good cause. Participants 
solicited sponsorship to walk either a 2-, a 5-, or a 10-kilometre 
route. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Coldest Night of the Year events are hosted 
across Canada and are meant to bring awareness for homeless 
and poverty in our communities. This year organizers saw about 
100 participants supported by about 30 volunteers. 
 
The event kicked off at a welcoming ceremony held at the First 
Baptist Church where I was joined by the member of Moose 
Jaw Wakamow, the mayor, and event leaders. It was a pleasant 
night for a walk to raise funds and to bring awareness. When 
the walk was completed, the participants were greeted with 
cheers and a bowl of warm chili. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 
congratulating the staff, the volunteers, and the walkers of the 
Coldest Night of the Year event on another successful event and 
thanking the Riverside Mission for the great work that they do. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Coronation Park. 

Waskimo Winter Festival Returns to Regina 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Family Day, I 
had the great pleasure of bringing greetings at the Waskimo 
Winter Festival. Mr. Speaker, the first Waskimo festival was 
held on Wascana Lake in 1975, and it quickly became an annual 
carnival on ice. Unfortunately the festival was put on hold due 
to the big dig at Wascana Lake, but after a 14-year hiatus the 
festival finally returned this year. 
 
For decades, attending Waskimo Winter Festival was a yearly 
tradition for many families. It was very exciting to be able to 
attend the festival with families from all over the city to start 
the tradition again. Bringing this winter festival back to the city 
of Regina and to our province makes a wonderful contribution 
to the strong quality of life we enjoy here in Saskatchewan. 
 
The outdoor festival included ice sailing, snow cricket, shinny, 
horse-drawn sleigh rides, and outhouse races. This year’s event 
also had indoor festivities such as a carnival, dog sports, drums, 
and gymnastics. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank all the organizers for all their 
hard work in getting this special event relaunched, and I’d also 
like to thank all the volunteers and sponsors for your time and 
generosity. This festival could not have happened without you. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Gardiner 
Park. 
 

Recognizing Long-Time Huskies Football Coach 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thanks a lot, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed my 
pleasure to stand in the House today to acknowledge Brian 
Towriss for his 33 years as head coach of the U of S [University 
of Saskatchewan] Huskies football program. 
 
B.T., as he is fondly known, is a native of Moose Jaw and 
attended the U of S from ’74 to ’77, where he played along the 
defensive line. He also got his commerce degree. He wasn’t 
away from the U of S for long, as he returned as assistant coach 
in 1980 and then became the head coach in ’84, succeeding Val 
Schneider. 
 
In his legendary career, B.T. led his team to nine Vanier Cups, 
winning three of them. He was nine-time Conference Coach of 
the Year and won the Frank Tindall Trophy in 1994 as the top 
coach in the nation. He has coached 315 games in total. Now 
keep in mind, Mr. Speaker, there’s only eight regular-season 
games in Canada West football. He won 196 of those games, 
and they are both CIS [Canadian Interuniversity Sport] records. 
He’s had 47 former players that went on to play pro football 
and was given the province’s highest honour, the Order of 
Merit, in 2007. 
 
Wins and awards are very important of course in competitive 
sports, but more importantly I think to B.T., he was always 
deferring praise. He was selfless, and he was always Huskies 
first. So those things weren’t as important to him, but I think, 
Mr. Speaker, more importantly B.T. mentored and led a 
generation of young athletes and coaches to grow into 
community leaders themselves within our province and all 



March 6, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1541 

across our country, and who continue to carry his great legacy 
and example with them every day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 
thanking Brian Towriss for many years of great football and 
dedication to the University of Saskatchewan and our province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 
 

Saskatchewan Number One for Mining Investment 
 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week the Fraser 
Institute released its annual report on the most attractive mining 
jurisdictions in the world, and it turns out it was good news for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, out of the 104 jurisdictions surveyed, 
Saskatchewan was named the number one jurisdiction in the 
world for mining companies to invest. When looking into the 
details of the report, we see that our province moved up from 
second place last year and ranks well in every category. 
 
Mining is an important industry for Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
stretching from Estevan to the furthest edges of the North, 
providing jobs for families. Mr. Speaker, we have committed to 
making Saskatchewan a great place to live, work, and invest, 
and this is proof that we have kept that promise. 
 
We will continue to reject those who impose ideology over 
practical solutions for our economy, whether that’s the federal 
carbon tax or the NDP Leap Manifesto. Instead, we will 
continue to support an innovative industry that works for our 
First Nations, our post-secondary institutions, and our 
communities. And we will continue to encourage investment in 
Saskatchewan’s mining industry to build a better province for 
everyone. Thank you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Auditor’s Report and Public Accounts 
Committee Meeting 

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we heard a pretty clear 
message from the people of Meewasin last week, and we’ve 
been hearing that from people all across our province. The 
people of Saskatchewan are sick and tired of the Sask Party’s 
mismanagement, their scandal, and their waste. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while the House hasn’t been sitting, the Sask 
Party hasn’t missed an opportunity at the Public Accounts 
Committee to avoid accountability, shut down debate, and hide 
the truth from Saskatchewan people with their GTH [Global 
Transportation Hub] land scandal. The two witnesses they did 
allow weren’t there at the beginning of the scandal and they 
were on vacation at the end of it. One didn’t sign the documents 
himself because he was apparently running around a beach 
looking for a fax machine.  
 
Mr. Speaker, why are they still blocking the witnesses that 
actually knew what went down in the GTH land scandal? What 
does the Premier have to hide? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much. Thanks very much, 
Mr. Speaker. I want to thank the interim leader of the NDP for 
the question. I want to welcome as well the brand new member 
for Saskatoon Meewasin, who may well be the future of that 
party and the future leader of the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would just say with respect to the questions that 
have been asked, the people that the member’s referring to in 
terms of potential witness to the committee were also available 
to the auditor to be interviewed, were interviewed, Mr. Speaker, 
by the auditor. The auditor has reported, Mr. Speaker. She’s 
noted that the government made some mistakes on the GTH. 
We’ve acknowledged that. We have accepted the 
recommendations and are moving on it. 
 
I would also note, Mr. Speaker, that according to press reports 
the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] are looking into 
this matter. Mr. Speaker, I want to be clear that we will 
co-operate with the RCMP on this matter. 
 
I note that the Provincial Auditor has said there wouldn’t be 
much of a need or much of a purpose, a construct for a forensic 
audit pending that review by the RCMP. So, Mr. Speaker, we 
want to see that work done. We’ll co-operate, Mr. Speaker, as I 
know members opposite would expect us to and, Mr. Speaker, 
we look forward frankly to the conclusion of that review. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, what a bunch of utter 
nonsense from that Premier, and the people of Saskatchewan 
just aren’t buying those lines. 
 
You know, the Sask Party still wants us all to believe that there 
is just some sort of miscommunication between ministries. 
Come on. We know that the DM [deputy minister] of Highways 
and the CEO [chief executive officer] of the GTH were 
communicating regularly. They met in person. They had 
emailed and they worked together on projects. And cabinet, 
cabinet itself sitting here today, met over and over again. But 
the Sask Party wants us to believe that no one spoke about this 
massive deal. It’s just not believable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I guess, to the Premier: remembering that the auditor herself 
said there were more questions that exist here, and knowing that 
millions of hard-earned dollars have been wasted, will he 
finally direct his caucus members to invite people who are 
actually responsible for the scandal to committee to testify? Or 
will he just keep hiding from the facts and hoping that it goes 
away? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, were the government hiding 
from anything, we wouldn’t have directed the Provincial 
Auditor to do a full review of the matter and then to make that 
review public and moreover, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that the 
auditor had access to any cabinet document that the auditor’s 
team felt they needed. 
 
I would also point out for members across the way, who 



1542 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2017 

conveniently forget to mention this important part of her 
investigation, is that she has noted there was someone with 
forensic auditing capacity on her team — expressly, I think, 
probably there for the purpose of determining whether 
something more forensic was required. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would also note that in July, Mr. Speaker, 
shortly after her report was tabled, on province-wide media, on 
province-wide media she indicated there were no red flags that 
her investigation determined that would require further action, 
Mr. Speaker. This is what’s happened in this case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also point out that since we last met here 
in this place, there has been a purchaser come forward with a 
further advance of dollars on land bought at the GTH. Mr. 
Speaker, we’re now at $3 million — well they’re murmuring — 
$3 million paid for land at a $7.6 million total purchase price of 
30 acres. So divide that out, Mr. Speaker. What does that mean 
that taxpayers got for that acreage, per acre of land? $256,000 
per acre for the taxpayers on the land. Mr. Speaker, even using 
the purchase price and the servicing cost, taxpayers are making 
money on GTH land sold to that proponent right now. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Government’s Fiscal Management 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, with spin like that, the 
deficit that’s growing makes a whole lot more sense. The 
actions of that Premier have been indefensible, Mr. Speaker, 
and the truth is that fewer and fewer Saskatchewan people are 
believing anything that they say. 
 
Just look at the budget. First, they hid their budget during the 
election. Then they said they’d balance the books. Then it was 
going to be $400 million of deficit, then $800 million, then $1.2 
billion. Then last week the Finance minister’s out contradicting 
the Premier and it’s even higher than that. 
 
You know, they do a lot of bragging about their record. But the 
fact is their record is deficit after deficit after deficit. In fact 
over three and a half billion dollars of new debt have been 
added by that Sask Party in just the past two years. 
 
You know, they hid the financial first quarter. Now they’re 
hiding the third quarter report, all while they’ve been attacking 
the most vulnerable in our society, threatening our families, 
threatening our workers, threatening our Crown corporations. 
Will the Premier come clean, reveal the true state of our 
finances to Saskatchewan people, take responsibility for his 
historic mismanagement of our finances instead of forcing 
Saskatchewan people to pay the price? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, may I just say to the 
interim leader of the NDP that the management of the 
province’s finances on this side of the House has resulted in the 
first-ever AAA credit rating this province has ever received. 
The financial management on this side of the House has 
resulted in a 30 per cent payoff of the operating debt inherited 
from members opposite. The financial management of this side 
of the House has led to $6 billion in cumulative tax relief for 

Saskatchewan families, farmers, and businesses, creating the 
Saskatchewan advantage. The financial management on this 
side of the House has resulted in $8 billion in more 
infrastructure investment in this province than in their last eight 
years in office, Mr. Speaker. That’s the record. 
 
The financial management on this side of the House has meant 
754 more teachers in the province, 3,000 more nurses of every 
designation, 650 more doctors . . . well 649 maybe, Mr. 
Speaker. That is the result, Mr. Speaker, of the financial 
management on this side of the House. Investments in public 
service; paying off of operating debt; low taxes, Mr. Speaker. 
That has led to strong economic growth over this last decade 
and, most importantly, Mr. Speaker, most importantly the 
largest population growth in the history of this province since 
its earliest days — 1.14 million people in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — It seems the Premier’s approach is just 
to crank up the volume as the red ink rolls in and the promises 
are broken, but Saskatchewan people are going to hold him to 
account. Instead of forcing Saskatchewan people to pay the 
price for the Sask Party mismanagement, scandal, and waste, 
instead of cutting in our hospitals and our kids’ classrooms, 
instead of desperately trying to sell off our Crowns, instead of 
attacking workers and ripping up their contracts, why won’t the 
Premier look at his own failures? 
 
We could start with a massive overrun, a billion-dollar-plus 
overrun with the Regina bypass contract. Will he look at that? 
Better yet, will he finally show it to Saskatchewan people? Or, 
Mr. Speaker, will he explain why he’d rather attack the 
contracts he has with Saskatchewan people than to go at the 
billion-dollar overrun with a French conglomerate and beyond? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
what’s interesting, what’s going to be interesting during this 
session as we get to the budget on March 22nd when we lay out 
our plan for dealing with the financial situation here in the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Well we’re going to find out on March 22nd. 
The member from Athabasca has never offered a plan in this 
House ever, Mr. Speaker, and now he sits here and criticizes the 
plan we haven’t even brought down yet. It’s going to be on 
March 22nd. We’re going to have plenty of opportunity, Mr. 
Speaker, after March 22nd, to debate the plan we’re going to 
put forward to deal with the financial situation in this province. 
 
What’s going to be interesting is what we’ll hear from the 
Leader of the Opposition and the Finance critic and the future 
leader of the opposition as to what their plan might be in 
dealing with the financial situation in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. Because what we’re going to hear during this session, 
I daresay . . . I’m going to go out on a limb here, Mr. Speaker. I 
daresay we’re going to hear from the Education critic and the 
Health critic and the Labour critic and the Finance critic. Every 
single day of this legislature, Mr. Speaker, they’re going to get 
up on their feet and say the government should be spending 
more money in virtually every area of the government. 



March 6, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1543 

Mr. Speaker, $1.2 billion in lost resource revenues and they 
want us to spend more money, Mr. Speaker. That’s not going to 
happen. 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask members to please listen to the 
questions and answers here today. I recognize the Opposition 
House Leader. 
 

Employment and Provincial Economy 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister can yell and 
point the finger all he wants but he should pay better attention 
to the four fingers pointing back at him. 
 
The Sask Party’s failures on the job creation front go far beyond 
their $2 billion bypass boondoggle. Last month’s job numbers 
showed that there were nearly 9,000 fewer people working than 
one year ago and the unemployment rate has increased by more 
than 16 per cent. But instead of real leadership and action to 
create good, mortgage-paying jobs, the Sask Party shifts the 
blame, stirs up fights and distraction, and refuses to take 
responsibility for their failures. 
 
When will the Sask Party stop with the games and get serious 
about getting Saskatchewan people back to work? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy, 
SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority], and the 
GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s review the 
facts. Saskatchewan has the fourth-lowest unemployment rate 
in the entire country despite the challenges that we know that 
we’re facing because of the downturn in the price of oil and 
other commodities. We have the third-lowest youth 
unemployment rate in the entire country. We’re below the 
national average by a significant component. 
 
And let’s look at just manufacturing sales last month: highest 
month-over-month growth in the entire country, 5.4 per cent 
month over month in December to $1.32 billion. The first time 
ever, Mr. Speaker, average weekly earnings topping $1,000 at 
over $1,010 in December 2016. Retail sales leading the country, 
Mr. Speaker, last month. 
 
The economy continues to move forward. The economy 
continues to show strength, and we’re going to continue to 
make sure that it does. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, after months of bad numbers on 
the job front, people are looking for answers from this 
government, but the only thing we’ve heard from the Sask 
Party’s plan for jobs is their plan for cuts. Teachers, nurses, and 
public servants all across our province are being threatened with 
layoffs and wage cuts. They’re even looking at firing the 
janitors at the Legislative Building, Mr. Speaker, in a move that 
wouldn’t save a dime. They’re asking people to pay the price 
for Sask Party mismanagement, scandal, and waste — callous 
cuts on top of job losses month after month. 

Doesn’t the Premier understand that you can’t create jobs by 
cutting them? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I find it pretty rich, Mr. Speaker, 
coming from the party opposite who, when they were in 
government, had the worst job creation record in the entire 
country, Mr. Speaker — dead last. From 2007 to 2015, on this 
side of the House, the best job creation record in the entirety of 
Canada, Mr. Speaker — 64,000 jobs created over that period of 
time. We continue to have one of the lowest unemployment 
rates in the country. We’re seeing Saskatchewan leading 
Canada in terms of wholesale trade, in terms of retail sales, Mr. 
Speaker. The economy is continuing to move forward. 
 
Even though they continue to talk down the economy, we’re 
going to continue to make sure the economy’s strong and 
growing. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

Ownership of SaskTel 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s cold comfort to the 40,000 
Saskatchewan people that are out of work on this government’s 
watch. The Sask Party’s callous cuts are putting thousands of 
jobs at risk, more jobs, Mr. Speaker. And their plan to sell off 
up to 49 per cent of our Crowns without a referendum puts even 
more jobs at risk along with hundreds of millions of dollars in 
dividends that help to pay for health care and education. 
 
The Sask Party’s plan to sell our Crowns to pay for their 
mismanagement was given a resounding no in the Meewasin 
by-election, Mr. Speaker, and the Sask Party should listen to 
that message. Will the Premier honour his promise from the last 
election? Will he stop the attempted sell-off? Will he scrap Bill 
40 today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — I want to thank the member for the 
question. By the way, the preamble for the earlier questions was 
about the economy and jobs in the province. It’s interesting 
coming from a party that’s just elected its future leader who 
supports the federally imposed carbon tax, which we know that 
will cost jobs here in the province. 
 
With respect to the Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker, let me 
say this: what we said in the wake of the MTS [Manitoba 
Telephone System] takeover, Mr. Speaker, is that were we, as 
the representatives of the shareholder, to get an offer with 
respect to SaskTel to buy SaskTel in its entirety, were we to get 
an offer that checked off a number of boxes including better 
coverage and jobs here in Regina and across the province and a 
good price, that we would take that deal to the people in a 
referendum. 
 
What has become abundantly clear to members on this side of 
the House, what has become abundantly clear to me — yes, and 
including what we heard in the Meewasin by-election but not 
limited to that — is that the people of the province aren’t 
interested in it. They’re not interested in a referendum. They 



1544 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2017 

oppose the sale of SaskTel, Mr. Speaker. That is what we 
campaigned on. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I will just confirm for members of the House 
that notwithstanding if there ever is an offer to purchase 
SaskTel, we’re not going to take it forward. It’s not for sale. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Release of Third Quarter Update 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, even 
considering, even considering selling off our service-providing, 
rate-reducing, job-creating, and money-making Crown 
corporations just shows how irresponsible and short-sighted 
those guys are. Sure they’ll get some fast cash, but the people of 
this province will pay the price for generations. 
 
Don’t they think they’ve done enough damage? Their projected 
deficit just keeps going higher and higher — 200, 400, 800, 
$1.2 billion — and it’s still rising. Every week, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s a new number. It’s a good thing the budget’s coming out 
soon or who knows how high the deficit would get. 
 
Since the Premier refused to give a straight answer, maybe the 
Finance minister will now just come clean with the state of the 
finance. He didn’t talk about Bill 40 at all, Mr. Speaker. He 
completely avoided the question. Will the Finance minister 
provide us, the people of Saskatchewan, with the update that we 
know he has and work with us to find solutions that invest in 
Saskatchewan people and our future? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the third quarter update is coming on March 22nd. It is not 
unusual for the third quarter update to be presented in this 
House in March since we went to summary financial statements 
two years ago. 
 
Matter of fact, two years ago when we went to full summary 
financial statements, Mr. Speaker, at the behest of the 
opposition — I’ll give them credit for that; they insisted upon it 
— we went to summary financial statements. The third quarter 
update was brought in on March 18th of that year, the same day 
as the budget. The former minister of Finance, Mr. Krawetz, 
announced that we were going to attempt to bring the third 
quarter financial update on the same day as the budget as long 
as the legislative calendar continued to be the same and the 
budget was always delivered in March, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What has changed since then: we now have over a 150-plus . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Well are you interested in the 
answer or chirping from your seat? What has changed since 
then, Mr. Speaker, is that we have 150-plus entities that report 
in the consolidated financial statements, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we changed last year was the end of the fiscal year for the 
Crown corporations in this province, that they now align with 
the executive side of government with their year-end of March 
31st, Mr. Speaker. We are gathering that information. 
 

As information becomes available to us, naturally Treasury 
Board and me as Finance minister would brief the Premier 
when there is some circumstances that show that the deficit 
could be higher, as was the case with crop insurance claims 
coming in after the Q2 [second quarter] update with still over 1 
million acres out there, Mr. Speaker, that’s not been harvested 
yet. We know that there’s a least a quarter billion dollars in 
additional crop insurance claims. The premier talked about that 
at the SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities] convention. I don’t know how much more clear 
he could be with respect to what’s happening with the deficit in 
this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the refusal to be straight in the 
scope of the financial mismanagement by the Sask Party is as 
inexcusable as it is hard to believe. For Saskatchewan families 
and workers, times are tough. But instead of providing straight 
answers and stability, the Sask Party is throwing around spin 
lines. How does that help Saskatchewan people losing good, 
mortgage-paying jobs month after month, or those being hurt by 
Sask Party cuts to health care and education, growing wait 
times and class sizes? 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will the Sask Party just admit that they were 
wrong, admit that they blew through the savings and wasted too 
many opportunities by helping their well-connected friends 
instead of Saskatchewan people? So, Mr. Speaker, again, when 
will that minister come clean and release the third quarter 
update? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — I just told her, Mr. Speaker, March 22nd 
we’ll be releasing the third quarter update. What I would 
remind the member . . . I hope we can acknowledge in this 
House, Mr. Speaker, the facts of what we’re dealing with in this 
province: $1.2 billion in resource revenues down from two 
years ago. I hope that we can acknowledge that. 
 
I hope we can also acknowledge, Mr. Speaker, that if we don’t 
control spending in this budget, if this is the new normal with 
respect to revenues, Mr. Speaker, if this is the new normal, we 
need to control spending in this province, Mr. Speaker. But 
what did we hear from the Finance critic just last June? On June 
1st that Finance critic stood in her place, and I quote, she said, 
“A minimum of 6 per cent annual increase is needed just to 
maintain the status quo programs like health care and 
education.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, a 6 per cent increase in health care and education 
would be five . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . It’s in Hansard. 
It’s in Hansard. Table it? That’s the quote from Hansard, Mr. 
Speaker. Maybe she needs to be reminded exactly what she said 
on budget day. I can send it over to you if you don’t remember 
what you said on budget day.  
 
You said a minimum of 6 per cent increases in health care and 
education are needed just to maintain the status quo. That’s an 
extra $500 million in spending, Mr. Speaker. Every single one 
of them over there, in this next session, every single day will 



March 6, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1545 

stand up and demand more spending, Mr. Speaker. Not going to 
happen. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 

Funding for Education Infrastructure 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, last week the people of Saskatoon 
Meewasin sent a message that they’ve had enough of the Sask 
Party’s failure to accomplish the most basic tasks. The schools 
that serve Saskatoon Meewasin urgently require nearly $3 
million in roof repairs and replacements alone. In fact, 
according to the Saskatchewan School Boards Association, 75 
per cent of the roofs in Saskatchewan schools will fail within 
the next five years. 
 
This government can talk all it wants about how much they’ve 
spent in education. But it doesn’t matter how much you study; 
it’s whether you pass the test. Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about 
kids’ classrooms. That’s foundational. Crumbling infrastructure 
makes it harder for students and teachers already trying to get 
by with growing class sizes and limited resources. So why, Mr. 
Speaker, does the Education minister think it’s acceptable for 
students and teachers to pay the price for this government’s 
mismanagement? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take 
this opportunity to welcome the new member to the Chamber. 
He is filling the shoes of Roger Parent, one of the finest MLAs 
we’ve had, and I’d like to remind him that they’re very big 
shoes to fill and would like to urge him to stay on task. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to encourage him and wish him all the best in 
his leadership aspirations. I’m not as presumptuous as some 
people to call him the future leader but the potential future 
leader, and want to wish him well at that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite raises issues with funding of 
schools. Mr. Speaker, I can tell you this: that under the NDP, 
the amount of money they provided for preventative 
maintenance and repairs: zero. Mr. Speaker, under this 
government over the last four years, $97 million which went for 
roofs and other such cares and repairs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they talk about things that are four, five, and six 
years out. We will look after things as they come along, and 
we’ve increased it each and every year from their zero. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Support for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, instead of pointing fingers and 
trying to distract, maybe they should pay attention to what’s 
going on with our children’s education: crumbling schools, 
increased crowding, and fewer and fewer resources in our 
classrooms — all of this, Mr. Speaker, despite years of record 
revenues. And instead of trying to find real solutions for these 
problems, they’re only making them worse by threatening to 
upend the system, getting rid of elected trustees. 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve travelled the province speaking with teachers, 
parents, community leaders, and I can tell you that support for 
keeping local voice in education is overwhelming. Even the 
Premier has admitted that there’s concern around an appointed 
board system. Concern. I’ll say. 
 
So will this minister commit to stopping the cuts, supporting 
local voice, and working with instead of against locally elected 
boards to ensure that our kids are getting the education that they 
deserve? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this is a government that 
has made a bigger commitment to education than any time in 
the history of the province. Mr. Speaker, capital for our students 
and our schools over the last nine years: $1.4 billion, 428 per 
cent more than the NDP. Forty new schools, 25 major 
renovations. 
 
We created preventative maintenance and renewal which is 
something that did not exist under the NDP. We created 
emergent funding — zero under the NDP. What’s the NDP 
record? They closed 176 schools and shipped those students to 
Alberta. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re committed to Saskatchewan. We’re 
committed to Saskatchewan students, and we are committed to 
Saskatchewan teachers. 
 
The Speaker: — Orders of the day. Written questions. I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — No, sorry, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have 
any written questions. I do have a motion though. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Government House Leader on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — To move a motion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I believe the Government House Leader’s 
asked leave to make said motion. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Leave of Absence 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move the 
following motion: 
 

That leave of absence be granted to the member of Regina 
Rochdale for Monday, March 6, 2017 to Thursday, 
March 9, 2017 to attend the Commonwealth Women 
Parliamentarians steering committee meeting and the Equal 
Voice daughters of the vote initiative 2017 in Ottawa, 
Ontario on behalf of this Assembly. 



1546 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2017 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 235 through 246. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 
to questions 235 to 246. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 44 — The Water Security Agency 
Amendment Act, 2016 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 
to speak to water management and amendments we propose to 
The Water Security Agency Act and, after these remarks, I will 
move second reading to The Water Security Agency Amendment 
Act, 2016. 
 
Mr. Speaker, water is very important for the future of our 
province. Water is essential for our continued growth and our 
quality of life. In 2012 our government, along with the Water 
Security Agency, began consulting widely on water 
management priorities and developed the 25-year Saskatchewan 
water security plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since 2012 we have made significant progress on 
the agricultural water management issues, and the 25-year water 
security plan continues to guide our work. Each year we publish 
a progress report on our work under the plan. This plan made 
commitments to areas no other government in the province’s 
history has done. One of those is agricultural water 
management. 
 
With respect to the agricultural water management strategy, the 
plan is committed to enhancing responsible and organized 
agricultural drainage. The Water Security Agency, with 
significant help from the Ministry of Agriculture, has made 
substantial progress in addressing drainage regulations and 
policy in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Following our extensive consultations, the Water Security 
Agency announced a new approach to drainage in 
Saskatchewan with the agricultural water management strategy 

in 2015. The strategy is based on two crucial points on which 
there was broad consensus during our consultations. The first is 
that agricultural drainage has many benefits and is an important 
and necessary tool for our Saskatchewan producers. The second 
is that drainage must be controlled and it must be organized. 
The agricultural water management strategy is therefore 
committed to proactive action on agricultural drainage, 
something that no government in the last 35 years has done. 
 
With regulations introduced in September of 2015, we have 
moved from a complaint-based system to a permit-based system 
where all drainage works need adjacent landowner permission 
and an approval to deliver that water into an adequate outlet. An 
adequate outlet is a stream or water body that can safely accept 
the water. Over time, the strategy will result in effective 
agricultural water management that allows and facilitates 
drainage and reduces the negative consequences. 
 
Under Saskatchewan’s agricultural water management strategy, 
controlled and organized drainage by our rural landowners 
ensures agricultural producers become part of our water 
management solutions. The previous complaint system was the 
subject of considerable criticism, including that of the 
Provincial Ombudsman. The Ombudsman issued a number of 
recommendations, along with the report on a file from a 
long-standing drainage complaint. 
 
I’m proud to say, Mr. Speaker, that all recommendations were 
effectively addressed with the creation of the agricultural water 
management strategy even prior to the Ombudsman’s report. 
The new approach to drainage effectively addresses the 
concerns raised in the report by either requiring a permit, with 
the possible installation of gates, or closure back to natural spill 
levels of some drainage works in a timely manner. 
 
The whole process has been streamlined and will mean quicker 
resolution for producers and better water management for all. A 
request for assistance replaces the previous formal complaint 
process, which could take up to two years or longer before a 
resolution could take place. Under the new changes, Water 
Security Agency estimates it can deal with a request for 
assistance within 90 days or less. 
 
The goal is to have permitted, controlled, and organized 
drainage across the province that mitigates impacts to other 
landowners and the environment. The online consultation which 
started our development of the agricultural water management 
strategy was the most comprehensive public consultation on 
drainage policy ever undertaken in the province of 
Saskatchewan. The online consultation took place from October 
2013 to April 2014 and attracted nearly 500 participants who 
discussed various options for managing drainage in the 
province. The majority of the participants were from the 
agricultural sector, but conservation groups, local government, 
and industry were also represented. 
 
In 2015, we then met with 15 agricultural and environmental 
and municipal groups, and they were as follows: the Western 
Barley Growers Association, the Sask Oat Development 
Commission, the Western Canadian Wheat Growers 
Association, SaskCanola, the Saskatchewan Farm Stewardship 
Association, the Agricultural Producers Association of 
Saskatchewan, Canadian Cattlemen’s Association, the 



March 6, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1547 

Saskatchewan Stock Growers Association, the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities, the Saskatchewan 
Association of Watersheds, Ducks Unlimited Canada, 
Saskatchewan Environmental Society, the Saskatchewan 
Conservation and Development Association, the Saskatchewan 
Wildlife Federation, and the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association. 
 
Key messages that we heard from many of these participants 
included this: broad agreement that drainage provides many 
benefits to agricultural producers but, if the negative impacts of 
drainage cannot be mitigated, drainage activities should not be 
allowed; broad support for implementing regulations that are 
risk based where drainage activities of a larger scale or those 
that pose a greater risk require more stringent oversight; general 
agreement for those who benefit from drainage projects should 
bear the costs for building and maintaining such projects; and 
general agreement from all that existing, non-approved projects 
need to be brought into the regulatory system; consistent 
support for increased compliance and enforcement including the 
use of increased fines and closure of drainage works in cases 
where the project has not received prior approval; mixed 
support for requiring the maintenance of some wetlands. Some 
producers feel that they should receive some sort of 
compensation to retain such wetlands. 
 
The advice has been incorporated into the agricultural water 
management strategy and informed development of regulations 
and projects. In September of 2015 we created new regulations 
governing drainage. This regulatory change was the first step in 
a new approach to drainage that we indicated would include 
policy changes as well as legislative changes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since the announcement in the fall of 2015, we 
have made significant progress in implementing the agricultural 
water management strategy, and we’ve started work in two pilot 
areas to test the application of this new approach and these new 
regulations. We developed the use of qualified persons to help 
prepare the applications. We now combine three separate 
approvals into one to simplify the process. We moved from 
asking for separate applications to seeking group applications 
from all of the landowners in one drainage works. 
 
The requirement of an approval is to ensure that the province 
and the producers organize projects to reduce negative 
consequences such as downstream flooding and degradation of 
water quality, while providing the opportunity for the 
landowner to safely move water now and the security for that 
landowner of knowing that they may into the future. This is 
how we will ensure that drainage achieves the benefits desired 
without creating costs and problems for those downstream. In 
short, Mr. Speaker, it’s how we will ensure that drainage in the 
province of Saskatchewan is responsible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this approach is working, and I recently 
announced that we issued an approval for the Dry Lake 
drainage project in the Gooseberry Lake watershed in 
southeastern Saskatchewan. This is a very large project that 
involves 73 landowners working together, covering 18,000 
acres. And, Mr. Speaker, the scale of this project shows how 
complex these drainage networks have become. The project 
includes future drainage and all existing drainage works and 
will create major benefits for producers by securing land control 

and approvals for their drainage works. Downstream 
landowners and the environment will also benefit through the 
inclusion of flow controls and the retention of wetlands. 
 
Under the old system, Mr. Speaker, each of those 73 
landowners would have needed to obtain three permits: an 
approval to construct, an approval to operate, and an aquatic 
habitat protection permit. And we were able to streamline the 
application system, requiring one permit for all 73 landowners. 
 
The project allows control of how much and when water can be 
released from these 18,000 acres by including 30 gated 
structures which will control releases of water to the equivalent 
of a 1 in 2 year flow rate. 
 
The 30 flow controls for existing drainage are intended to 
ensure that downstream landowners and communities will not 
experience increased flooding. These flow controls have already 
been constructed and are providing protection to those 
downstream landowners now. 
 
This project also restored 34 acres of wetlands on existing 
drainage and includes 21 acres of wetland retention on planned 
new drainage, retaining water on the landscape and benefiting 
wildlife. 
 
Landowners are now working, and need to continue to work 
co-operatively on drainage issues. This will ensure the mutual 
benefit from the security of having their works approved and 
moving water in a responsible fashion. 
 
It’s important to note that a project of this magnitude would not 
have been so successful without the use of local knowledge 
offered by landowners and others. The local Upper Souris 
Watershed did a lot of groundwork on this particular project, 
talking to landowners and explaining the benefits of the joint 
drainage project. 
 
Using the watershed association as their qualified person to 
assist with the application process, this group of landowners 
and agricultural producers were able to work together to the 
benefit of all. 
 
It’s imperative that local knowledge is utilized. Individuals that 
know the lay of the land and where and how the water flows 
will be a major part of the success of large drainage projects 
just such as this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Water Security Agency is currently working 
with hundreds of other landowners on an additional 12 
organized drainage projects making up more than 160,000 
acres. As these projects are completed, the Water Security 
Agency will move on to additional areas. Local groups will 
have the flexibility and tools that they need to solve together the 
needs of the community for drainage in a positive way through 
organizations such as joint applications, conservation and 
development authorities, and watershed associations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I provide this background on our initiative around 
drainage because the amendments proposed in Bill 44 are 
primarily designed to support and strengthen the agricultural 
water management strategy and those regulations from 2015. 
Most importantly, the amendment would replace the existing 



1548 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2017 

formal drainage complaint process with a new request for 
assistance process. 
 
[15:00] 
 
The formal drainage complaint process was developed in a 
period when the province did not enforce the requirement that 
drainage be approved and instead focused efforts on resolving 
complaints of damage between neighbours. It was a multi-step 
process which included a request for assistance, a formal 
complaint, an appeal to the Water Appeal Board, and then the 
Court of Queen’s Bench. And this process, Mr. Speaker, often 
took two to three years. 
 
The drainage complaint process required intensive and 
expensive investigations by the Water Security Agency to 
determine if damage was occurring, and efforts to mediate a 
settlement between neighbours. It was not based on a regulatory 
requirement that all drainage requires approval and did little, if 
anything, to advance the agricultural water management in the 
province. Under the old drainage complaint process, each 
complaint used large amounts of resources. This is a significant 
cost to taxpayers for very modest water management benefits. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s our goal to redirect the time of those very 
knowledgeable staff to working proactively with landowners to 
bring their drainage works into compliance by licensing their 
works and producing more approvals like the dry lake project, 
which has lasting benefits for the landowners as well as those 
that live downstream. 
 
To illustrate this point, Mr. Speaker, consider that during the 
fiscal year, Water Security Agency has been applying the new 
approach to requests for assistance and has completed 181 
requests for assistance. As of today there have been no formal 
complaints arising from these requests, which would have 
happened previously. 
 
While each situation is different, it can be assumed that the 
average requests, many of which would have led to a formal 
complaint and a possible appeal, could use four to five more 
days of staff time under the previous process than would be 
required under this new process. This means a savings of about 
1,100 days of staff time. Mr. Speaker, that time — the 
equivalent of five full-time employees — can be redirected to 
working with landowners to submit applications, and to get 
approvals that work with the long-term water management 
benefit. In addition to those 181 people requesting assistance, 
they would get resolution of their problem within a few months 
as opposed to two to three years. 
 
Under the new process, if there is a request for assistance, the 
Water Security Agency will determine if the alleged works are 
present and if they have an approval. If the works are present 
and do not have an approval, Water Security Agency will 
recommend the owner obtain an approval, or ultimately those 
works could be closed. 
 
To obtain an approval the drainer must have adequate land 
control to bring the water to an adequate outlet. And if that 
requires crossing their neighbour’s land, they will need to work 
together. Either way, the downstream complainant’s issue will 
be resolved, and it will be resolved in a few months rather than 

years, a very significant change in client service. 
 
The Water Appeal Board, Mr. Speaker, is made up of six 
members from different constituencies across Saskatchewan, 
appointed by the Minister of Environment. Since 2003 there 
have been 138 complaints to the Water Security Agency, 31 of 
which were appealed to the Water Appeal Board. Only two 
cases out of 138 have been overturned, and five have been 
altered in some minor manner. 
 
This means about 1.45 per cent of the cases that went to the 
board for an appeal were overturned and the rest were either 
affirmed or dismissed. This data shows that since 2003, 98.55 
per cent of the Water Security’s decisions were upheld or 
altered in some minor way by the Water Appeal Board. With 
the removal of the formal complaint process, the ability to 
appeal to the Water Appeal Board will not be necessary and it 
will be removed. 
 
Appeals to the Water Appeal Board dealt with the Water 
Security Agency’s assessment of damage and follow-up orders 
during the formal appeal process. The proposed new request for 
assistance process does not assess damages. The assessment is 
whether disputed works are present and whether they have 
approvals. It’s quite black and white. Once Bill 44 is passed, the 
Water Appeal Board will complete the appeals before it but no 
new appeals will come to it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s perhaps worth noting that historically, appeals 
create significant costs and they delay implementation of 
decisions intended to resolve local flood problems. A large 
portion of Water Security Agency’s regional staff time was 
being taken up with the formal complaint process and appeals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the changes in the complaint process will result in 
significant productivity gains for the Water Security Agency, 
allowing those agency staff to improve services to those citizens 
requesting assistance because they’re able to get some 
resolution of the issue much faster instead of having to endure a 
two- or a three-year process. This will allow Water Security 
Agency to use its resources to get its works organized and allow 
Water Security Agency to use its resources to get works 
approved. 
 
In place of an appeal board, we will develop two advisory 
boards to support this strategy. One will be comprised of 
stakeholders representing the various interest groups, which 
will be consulted on policy and development and refinement of 
the strategy as we move forward. The first advisory board will 
focus on providing advice to the Water Security Agency on 
policy development to further our water management strategy. 
 
An example would be to have this board look at principles 
around what constitutes an adequate outlet or the infill policy 
on small-acre sloughs and what requirements or permissions a 
landowner may need or may not need if they want to infill small 
sloughs. 
 
The other board will be a technical review body to act as an 
independent appeal of some of the decisions relating to 
approvals. For example, if a landowner disagrees with adequacy 
of an outlet, they would have the ability to bring the technical 
work to a review body and the technical review body would use 



March 6, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1549 

this information to determine if the outlet is adequate or not. 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments will provide a forum to 
landowners to review Water Security Agency decisions if 
they’re unsatisfied, without a great deal of cost and without a 
great deal of delay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, an amendment to section 88 would remove Water 
Security Agency’s power to act as a mediator in damage 
disputes. We want Water Security Agency to focus on the many 
aspects of water management, not on disputes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments I have discussed primarily deal 
with agricultural drainage. The final major change is important 
to all aspects of water management, not just drainage. I refer to 
the proposed amendment to increase the maximum fine 
applicable under the Act. The current maximum fine under The 
Water Security Agency Act is $10,000, and this level has been in 
place for 34 years. 
 
The proposed amendment would set the maximum fine at $1 
million, which is the same level as those under The 
Environmental Management and Protection Act, 2010. Fines 
under this Act could apply to drainage but also to other 
situations such as an industry using water without a permit and 
impacting the water supply for other users, or to someone 
constructing a dam or altering a stream course without a permit. 
Such actions could have significant public impacts and require a 
substantial deterrent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these same fine levels have been proposed 
because the management of water is a crucial part of the 
environmental management, essential to health, safety, 
economic growth, and the environment. Further, The 
Environmental Management and Protection Act regulates some 
aspects of water management such as waste water, industrial 
discharges, and aquatic habitat. Fines of up to $1 million 
already apply to that part of water management. And as you 
know, Mr. Speaker, actual fines would not be determined by the 
Water Security Agency, but they are set by a judge and depend 
on the seriousness of the infraction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments to The Water Security 
Agency Act will strengthen our approach to agricultural 
drainage in Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan’s ag water 
management strategy will provide the opportunity for 
agricultural producers to be considered as part of the 
downstream solution. The amendments support the regulatory 
reforms we introduced in 2015, which are showing positive 
impacts in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, thank you, and I now move second reading of The 
Water Security Agency Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation has moved second reading of Bill No. 44, 
The Water Security Agency Amendment Act, 2016. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to stand again in my place to give the initial comments 
as it relates to Bill No. 44, The Water Security Agency 
Amendment Act. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, obviously the work to begin to resolve the 
matters as it pertains to agricultural drainage has been going on 
for quite some time. There’s no question that the process that’s 
undertaken to address this issue has to be very complex. We 
also have to ensure that there are proper resources to address 
some of the challenges and some of the issues as it pertains to 
drainage on agricultural lands. There’s no question, Mr. 
Speaker, that this is a very complex and very daunting task 
ahead of the minister and certainly ahead of the Sask Party 
government. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, over the years we’ve been privy to a number 
of complaints as it relates to drainage of agricultural lands, and 
it is a fairly complex matter as I indicated a few seconds ago. 
And why is it complex, Mr. Speaker? Because when you look at 
the whole notion around drainage, we’re not simply talking one 
or two ditches. We’re talking major ditches. We’re simply not 
talking about using a backhoe to do a few areas of drainage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the drainage strategies and plan of 
landowners throughout the province has been very, very 
complex. It has been very grand, where you’re seeing large 
backhoes and Cats being used to drain land from various parts 
of the province. Now what that does, Mr. Speaker, is simply 
transfers the water problem from one particular landowner 
downstream to another landowner or perhaps to a water body or 
perhaps to a neighbouring community or neighbouring village, 
and even so far as to say, Mr. Speaker, that this may even affect 
your neighbouring provinces. 
 
And I was of course very honoured and pleased to attend with 
the current critic of the Environment, the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana, in which we toured various parts of our 
province looking at the various challenges as it pertains to 
flooding. And one particular area we visited, Mr. Speaker, was 
Yorkton. We had the opportunity to visit Yorkton, and not only 
did we visit the small villages around Yorkton but we actually 
travelled into the community and into the countryside to see the 
effects of the excess water at the time and all the impacts it was 
having on the various family farms and certainly the various 
communities and, Mr. Speaker, the individual landowners. 
 
Now when we looked to the province and to the government for 
resolution to this, we didn’t realize that it was going to take a 
full five years, from 2012 to 2017, to begin to implement and to 
begin to recognize that this problem was certainly occurring all 
throughout the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now as you look at the eastern part of Saskatchewan, the 
southeastern part, Mr. Speaker, they have had complex water 
management problems for years and years and years. And I can 
remember attending one particular farmhouse in which we were 
told to make sure we followed the pilot vehicle ahead of us 
because the landowner knew exactly where the road was, 
because if you veered a couple of feet off the road on either 
side, well guess what? You were into eight, nine feet of water. 
It was that complex and that dangerous. And while the road 
itself was maybe 100 yards long, there was a slough on either 
side of the road, and that was the family’s only access onto their 
property. So every day the homeowner, the landowner had to 
manoeuvre through this road that was hidden by water. And 
thank goodness we were able to follow him safely, because if 
we were out 2 feet on either side of this road covered with 



1550 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2017 

water, Mr. Speaker, we were into a slough, and that was a very 
deep slough. 
 
So this is not, by any stretch of the imagination, a minor 
problem. As I mentioned at the outset, the whole issue around 
agricultural drainage, illegal agricultural drainage, is creating a 
huge, massive problem all throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan. And it was with a lot of optimism that we 
looked at some of the efforts undertaken to try and consult with 
the various organizations and various people involved with the 
agricultural drainage matter. And, Mr. Speaker, to say the least, 
we were quite disappointed that the fact that this strategy wasn’t 
as grand and certainly wasn’t a finale to what the issues that 
many people spoke to us about, as to what the solutions might 
be to this very complex issue. 
 
Now we within the NDP circles know a couple of things when 
it comes to solutions. Number one is we’ve got to address the 
whole notion of the tripartite agreement between Alberta, 
Saskatchewan, and Manitoba. Now this goes much deeper than 
agricultural lands in terms of drainage, Mr. Speaker, because we 
. . . always you have to have a shared water strategy as Western 
provinces, and we do have that agreement in place. 
 
[15:15] 
 
The problem we have, Mr. Speaker, is that we need to make 
sure that the Saskatchewan Party government connect all the 
moving parts as it pertains to water management. Connect them 
all together to have the solution in place and not piecemeal the 
approach, not have a piecemeal approach that we’re seeing from 
time to time on this particular matter. Why, Mr. Speaker? 
Because it affects agriculture and agriculture’s a mainstay of 
Saskatchewan’s economy. And what is happening is if you 
don’t deal with the water issue to the extent that you should, 
then, Mr. Speaker, what it creates is it creates a lot of anger 
amongst neighbours. It creates a lot of anger amongst 
communities. It creates a lot of anger amongst even the partner 
provinces as it pertains to water quality and water sharing 
rights, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now as we toured the Yorkton area, we came across a number 
of examples of how if you do not resolve the matter, if you do 
not begin the process of connecting all the major parts of a 
water strategy, a comprehensive water strategy, Mr. Speaker, 
what is going to happen is you’re going to waste a lot of 
resources. 
 
I can tell you that we went down to one particular home which 
was flooded, and then the insurance companies come in there 
and they refixed the walls in the basement and everything was 
fine. And then the following spring, the same house flooded 
again. And again, Mr. Speaker, they had to get insurance back 
in there, and this time I think the province had to pay some of 
those dollars to rebuild that house when the solution from that 
small community was to build a proper drainage pipe about a 
kilometre down the road, which may have cost a couple of 
hundred thousand dollars. But, Mr. Speaker, that would have 
taken the water away. And that water that came back the second 
year not only displaced that family from their home but again 
wasted a lot of valuable resources. 
 
So some of these communities come forward with solutions, 

and that’s why consultation is the keyword that I always pick up 
when we hear from the Sask Party on some of these processes 
that are under way. When we look at some of the grievances 
and tour some of the family farms that are impacted by this on a 
continual basis, it’s not a one-year or two-year deal, Mr. 
Speaker. This happens every single year where there are 
problems with water drainage and how to resolve the matter. 
And we want to make sure that if there’s consultations under 
way, I think consultations should have the premise of 
agreement as well. 
 
And this is why it’s important to have organizations like SUMA 
[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association], like SARM, 
like the Agricultural Producers Association, and all the people 
involved with rural Saskatchewan that have a say, and certainly 
have a stake as it pertains to the management of our water, 
which as the minister alluded to is really important not only to 
human survival and health, but to the survival of our economy, 
and more in particular the survival and strengthening of the 
agricultural economy. 
 
So I think it is really quite straightforward in the sense of what 
we would like to see as the opposition. And one of the things 
that we want to see is that grand vision, a totally encompassing 
vision on how we deal with this matter once and for all. 
 
But unfortunately, as I mentioned at the outset, Mr. Speaker, the 
devil’s in the detail. The devil’s in the detail. If the minister is 
serious about dealing with the water management strategy that 
he’s alluded to in this particular bill, then it all comes down to 
resources. How many dollars and how much of their resources 
are they prepared to invest into this particular exercise? That 
remains the question, Mr. Speaker. And this is why it’s 
important that we have an opposition that says, okay fine, 
you’re taking baby steps on this challenge, but do you have the 
proper dollars in place to at least achieve those baby steps, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And this is where we have to be able to look at the budget and 
say to the people that may be impacted by this that no, they 
didn’t take the necessary large steps, but the baby steps that 
they’re prepared to take, they didn’t offer the proper resources 
to that. And this is where, Mr. Speaker, this is where it’s really 
important that people pay attention. 
 
Now from what I understand from my vantage point is this 
party is broke, Mr. Speaker. Their financial ship is sinking and 
the people of Saskatchewan see it. They know it. They see cuts 
all over the place. The minister has alluded to this from time to 
time. We’ve seen the deficit balloon from a $400 million 
fictional figure to now to 1.6, 1.8, and the price tag is going up. 
 
So just how important is the agricultural water security agency 
amendment Act, the finances necessary to put some of those 
issues to rest? How important is that against the ballooning $2 
billion deficit that this particular party has foisted onto the 
people of Saskatchewan? This is where, Mr. Speaker, I think 
it’s really important that we pay attention to the details in the 
budget as to how they’re wishing to finance the proper staff, the 
proper time, into achieving some of the objectives outlined in 
the minister’s bill. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, the water strategy that we’re 



March 6, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1551 

undertaking as a province to deal with drainage, a lot of people 
may not know this because a lot of the lay people don’t really 
. . . and are not privy, don’t have the research ability, don’t have 
the dollars to do all that research properly. And they don’t, of 
course, know all the issues around the three provinces’ water 
management agreement. 
 
But what happens in this case is that you look at southeastern 
Saskatchewan, in particular the Yorkton area. In our tour, we 
saw that a lot of the water being drained off this agricultural 
land was going into rivers and streams. And some had good 
ideas into how we could conserve that water. Yet the vast 
majority of the water that was simply being channelled into the 
river and streams basically flowed eastward and went into the 
province of Manitoba into the Winnipeg area and into the Red 
River area. Now that is simply transferring the problem to the 
province of Manitoba. 
 
So now Manitoba, of course, is not too happy about that 
particular problem. They understand what is happening on the 
Saskatchewan side. And then, of course, tensions build up and 
tempers flare and people often get angry with each other. And 
that’s kind of what my point is, Mr. Speaker, is that there are a 
lot of complex, large, massive agreements that must be 
incorporated into any water management plan that we have, in 
particular as it pertains to Bill No. 44. 
 
And this is why resources are important to be afforded to the 
Department of the Environment to make sure that the objectives 
outlined in this critical piece of environmental monitoring, and 
that’s of course around the water area . . . And, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s where I think people of Saskatchewan will be able to tell 
whether this government’s serious about dealing with this 
particular matter or not. It is a complex, large issue that needs a 
lot of attention and a lot of resources. And, unfortunately, from 
my perspective, Mr. Speaker, I don’t see the dollar figure 
attached to the intent behind this bill, and this is the part that’s 
really important to us as the opposition. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there was a number of changes in this 
particular bill that are supposed to streamline the process. And 
that’s why I go back to the resource matter I discussed earlier. 
And you have to be very careful here because people are 
naturally very protective of their land. They are very, very 
protective of their land, and throughout my tenure as the 
minister of the Environment, Mr. Speaker, we sensed that 
natural protection of your turf, of your home, of your land. And 
there’s no question about that, Mr. Speaker, that that is 
something that is ingrained in a lot of the people that own land 
throughout the province. And more important, it’s ingrained in 
the agricultural community. 
 
Now what happens, Mr. Speaker, is that the agricultural 
community or the landowner or the farmer, if you will, well 
they don’t like government coming there and giving a bunch of 
rules and regulations. They just don’t like that, Mr. Speaker. 
Now what happens now in this case? And that’s why I go back 
to the process of the proper resources, the proper consultation, 
and the proper agreements. 
 
Now what happens, Mr. Speaker, is that when you expand the 
Water Security Agency’s authority to do things on private 
lands, well that’s creating a whole different mixed bag of 

problems, Mr. Speaker, and you look at some of the decisions 
around this. There’s no question that when you look at 
expanding the Water Security Agency’s ability to recover cost, 
to enter lands with machinery, to enforce an order to the 
watershed security agency, Mr. Speaker, these are all 
confrontational language and wording that I think that ought not 
to be in there and should not be necessary if we have the word 
“agreement” replaced with “consultation.” 
 
If we sit down and deal with the issues in a very concise and 
clear, respectful process with the landowners, I think, Mr. 
Speaker, that that’s probably . . . What has better served the 
interests of the people of Saskatchewan if we have these kind of 
even regional agreements with the landowners to make sure that 
there isn’t confrontation because I can tell you that a lot of 
farmers in our province really are very protective of their lands. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve also had the pleasure of signing off 
on some lands, agricultural lands, that were donated to the 
Department of the Environment or to the province of 
Saskatchewan and her people. Some of the lands were donated 
by some of the families that owned the land, and what they also 
indicated to us at the time was that we will donate the land to 
the province but only for environmental purposes which means 
that they wanted this land for habitat purposes, or for wetlands 
conservation, or for flora or fauna conservation, wildlife 
ecosystems. The list goes on as to what some of these farm 
families really wanted their land to be used for. 
 
So it comes to the environmental integrity, Mr. Speaker. When 
it comes to protection of their land, these are values that are 
ingrained in many of our farm families in Saskatchewan. And 
that’s why it is better to have a co-operative, cohesive approach 
to dealing with some of these issues as opposed to the 
aggressive approach that sometimes are misinterpreted by 
landowners when the government comes along and starts 
enforcing some of the orders as identified under Bill. No. 44. 
 
So I would caution the minister. I would caution the Sask Party 
government that to my perspective, to my perspective, that we 
have to be very careful on this front. Because obviously, I think 
and we believe and I’ve been privy to a lot of discussions from 
many of the folks in our area that come from family farms, that 
were raised in rural Saskatchewan, and they speak of the value 
of the land. They speak about the value of the agricultural 
economy. They speak of the importance of protecting the 
environment. These are all values that the people of 
Saskatchewan have. And that’s why it’s important to use those 
values for all of our benefit to make sure we all are conserving 
water in a very cohesive and intelligent matter because it’s so 
important, as I mentioned, to life itself, but more important, just 
as important to wildlife and of course to the agricultural 
economy. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this whole motion on an agricultural water 
strategy is a vital piece on how we deal with this matter for 
years and years and years to come. It is not a single step in five 
years, Mr. Speaker. It is not a baby step in seven years. It is 
really, as I’ve said time and time again, time for a 
comprehensive strategy in Saskatchewan when it comes to 
illegal drainage of agricultural lands. It is a symptom of the 
problem of non-planning by governments, especially by the 
Saskatchewan Party government, because they have not 



1552 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2017 

resolved the issue as it should be. And, Mr. Speaker, that is 
something that needs to be addressed ASAP [as soon as 
possible]. 
 
Now some of the closing comments I have on this particular 
bill, Mr. Speaker, is if you look at the whole notion of, on one 
hand, we could get less water from Alberta in any given three- 
or four-year time frame, on the other hand we could be flooding 
Manitoba with a lot of excess water. On one hand, we can find 
certain areas of our province that are parched for water while 
other areas are not; they’re actually flooded. And you see these 
cycles repeat itself day after day and year after year. 
 
And yet the government, with their record revenues, refused to 
deal with this matter when they had the opportunity to. And 
here we are a full five years later, they’re finally starting to get 
some baby steps in place. But then again we go back to saying, 
okay, if the baby steps are what you want to undertake, where’s 
the resources for that? And that’s where you begin to get the 
devil in the detail as it pertains to whether they’re financing the 
resources properly from, what I think, the Finance minister’s 
poorly managed financial plan that the people of Saskatchewan 
entrusted them with. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re hearing each day that that debt and 
that deficit is climbing, continues to climb. And, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s a crying shame because at one time, Saskatchewan, not 
more than three or four years ago had record revenue, a 
booming economy, and somehow the Saskatchewan Party 
found a way in which it could mess all that up. And now 
they’ve compromised our future, and now, Mr. Speaker, they 
have — no question in my mind — compromised our children’s 
future. 
 
[15:30] 
 
And now they’re finally dealing with some of the issues around 
water security, and again they don’t have the resources to make 
sure that some of the objectives that have been outlined in this 
particular bill can be accomplished with a bit of progress. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve alluded a bit about the drainage issue. 
I’ve alluded a bit about the three provinces’ agreement. I spoke 
about the value of the farm family in rural Saskatchewan as it 
pertains to protection of the environment. I’ve spoke about the 
importance of water to the agricultural economy. I’ve spoken 
on the importance of consultation should be construed as 
agreement which is not the case. I’ve spoken about the time in 
which it took to get this bill into place and to make these baby 
steps. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is really, really important that the whole 
illegal drainage issue of agricultural lands need to be addressed. 
As an opposition we understand that. We have toured the 
communities, and we have saw the devastating effect not only 
on the lands and the economy of our agricultural component of 
the province, but it really creates bad neighbours. And we’ve 
seen that time and time again. 
 
We have got to provide solid leadership, visionary leadership, 
and a complex solution to a complex problem. I don’t see any 
evidence of that in this particular bill, Mr. Speaker, especially 
when we’re finding out that this government’s broke. So you 

can have all the good intentions in the world with bills of this 
sort, but if they don’t have the proper resources then we’re 
wasting our time and breath on bills of this nature. And this is 
where I think it’s important as an opposition we explain to 
people why we propose some of the ideas we have and why we 
think it’s important to argue and debate these bills as it pertains 
to illegal drainage of our agricultural lands. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know my colleagues have a lot more to say 
about this particular bill. I look forward to their comments but 
certainly from our perspective they can add a lot more than I 
certainly can. And I’m looking forward to those comments 
because it is a very, very important matter to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and more particular to the agricultural sector of 
our great province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So on that note I move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 44, 
The Water Security Agency Amendment Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has moved that 
Bill No. 44, The Water Security Agency Amendment Act, 2016 
be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 40 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 40 — The 
Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 
sur l’interprétation be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I’m honoured to stand 
here today and talk about Bill 40, The Interpretation 
Amendment Act. Mr. Speaker, this bill is a very small bill but it 
has a lot of possible implications. So I think it’s really 
important that we talk about all the potential complications or 
the issues that might happen if this bill is passed. 
 
And this bill in particular is a bill that is near and dear to my 
heart, Mr. Speaker, because I was a previous Crown employee 
and I always ensure that we use the services of our Crown 
corporations in our communities. And I think it’s important that 
we look into this bill, and again it’s important that we talk about 
how important our Crowns are. So if you don’t mind, I 
wouldn’t mind sharing a little bit of my personal experiences 
with regards to our Crown corporations. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I was fortunate to work for both SaskTel and 
SaskPower. I was a single mother and my employment 
provided me the ability to be financially independent, Mr. 
Speaker. Crown corporations, they provide good-paying jobs 
for people in the community, and this allowed me to have 



March 6, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1553 

medical benefits for my family. And I was always treated as a 
valuable, professional employee while working with these 
organizations. 
 
With my employment with the Crown corporations, it gave me 
the opportunity to own my own home, provide stability for my 
family, and be a contributing, strong member of my 
community. Working at these Crown corporations showed me 
how important our Crowns are to our province and to our 
communities. It showed me how important it is for the province 
to invest in good-paying jobs and ensuring that we have 
affordable services, and that how important province-owned 
businesses . . . how they invest back into our communities. 
 
And so I was just at an event the other day, Mr. Speaker, and 
there was an individual who is now a retired SaskTel worker. 
He worked there for 30-some years and he’s part of the SaskTel 
Pioneers, and he talked a little bit about what that organization 
is. And what they do, Mr. Speaker, is current employees, they 
donate a portion of their income to this Pioneers organization, 
and SaskTel matches their donations, and then they give that 
back to the communities. And this employee said that about 75 
per cent of SaskTel employees are part of this, so they’re giving 
their own money back to the communities. And whenever we 
have a fundraiser or an event going on, if we give a call to the 
SaskTel Pioneers, they get their workers out and they come and 
they volunteer. And so they’re very dedicated to their 
organizations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, through my employment with these Crown 
corporations I’ve seen first hand how employees will work hard 
for their community. I’ve seen SaskPower employees go out in 
ice storms and lightning storms to restore power for the 
members in the communities. And they work long hours 
alongside with the individuals in the office. And they do this 
because they know that the individuals in the communities are 
their neighbours, their family members, and that they need to 
have their power restored. So they work hard for that. 
 
I’ve seen SaskEnergy staff securing locations to ensure that the 
community is safe. And I’ve seen Liquor and Gaming staff act 
professionally towards individuals with addictions issues and 
ensuring that they get the support they need in the community. 
These are professional employees and they work hard with what 
they do and they’re dedicated. 
 
And after I was involved in a car accident, I really saw first 
hand. The SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] staff 
handled the situations professionally in a timely fashion. They 
ensured that I got my medical needs met. They ensured that all 
of my needs for my vehicle and everything were met as well. 
And they were really kind and compassionate and I really 
appreciate what they’ve done for me. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, Crown corporation employees, they go above 
and beyond because they’re invested in their communities. 
They know that the people they serve are their neighbours, their 
friends, and even their family, so they’re dedicated to provide 
the best service for them. 
 
So when I look at this bill, Mr. Speaker, and I see how with 
passing of this bill that we make it possible for the government 
to easily sell 49 per cent of our Crowns without regarding a 

mandate from the people of Saskatchewan, this troubles me 
because I don’t know exactly how many people in the province 
know that this bill is coming forward. And I know for a fact that 
the people that I’ve talked . . . Through the break that we’ve 
had, on the doorsteps in Meewasin during the by-election, we 
went to town halls and talked to different people across the 
province. People are concerned about this, and people care 
about their Crown corporations. And we heard that from our 
Premier, you know, just earlier on today, how he said that, you 
know, he’s also heard the concerns about this, you know. And 
so I don’t think it’s fair for us to be looking at potentially 
passing a bill of this magnitude that could change the definition 
of privatization, and just underhandedly pass this. So it’s 
changing the requirement. So if there wasn’t concerns about 
this, we wouldn’t be vocalizing them. 
 
So I think it’s also important, Mr. Speaker, to talk about the 
history of our Crowns and why they were created. And we 
know that in Saskatchewan we’ve got a large province, a large 
geographic area, and we have a small population compared to 
other provinces, you know. And so to provide those necessary 
services to different areas in the different communities, we went 
to creating our Crowns because we knew that we had to provide 
power and other services to our rural communities, our remote 
communities. And if government created those businesses that 
provided those services, we could provide them in a 
cost-effective way, that we would also create employment, 
stable employment within our province, and also provide these 
services to the people that need it throughout our province. So 
it’s important that we keep that in the forefront of our minds 
when we think about keeping our Crowns. 
 
And also I think it’s important, when we look at the history, that 
we look at some of the previous governments that wanted to 
maybe do some selling of our Crowns, you know, and 
privatizing of the services. And we know, and the previous 
government under Premier Devine, that they had a $1.2 billion 
deficit in 1986-87, sounding a little bit familiar. And it was a far 
cry from the deficit figure that they presented, and they actually 
presented that pre-election. We didn’t hear any of this 
information pre-election for us. The numbers started coming out 
after the election, but here when I do some research of 40 years 
ago or 30 years ago, they seem quite similar here. And so to try 
to recover from the deficit, they talked about cutbacks in 
services, cancellation of programs, and firing of employees. So 
we’re hearing the same kind of message going through again 
here. 
 
The privatization crusade started against the Crown 
corporations and we had different Crown corporations on the 
block. And we’ve been hearing different Crown corporations 
this time as well. We’ve been hearing SaskTel. We’ve been 
hearing SGI. We’ve been hearing a lot of the different Crowns 
being possibly on the block, you know. And so it seems like 
history is repeating itself here. 
 
Also we know, in that government they gave loans to private 
businesses, you know. And so the motive there was 
privatization. And we saw also that they reduced social 
assistance payments and they wanted to curb the power of the 
labour unions, you know. And so again, when we look back in 
history, we see we’re repeating ourselves a little bit. And you 
know, it’s not as dangerous as wearing bell-bottoms. Like this 



1554 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2017 

is serious stuff, you know, and this could potentially have 
long-term effects on our economy. 
 
So again we’ve got to remember the reasons why we invest 
with our Crowns. I know with SGI, the money that we get from 
SGI, they pay for our highways and it’s helped the province to 
diversify our economy, stabilize our economy, and it’s 
oftentimes gotten us out of financial debt. And so when we 
make sure that our utilities are a reasonable price, that’s 
important. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Our economy is basically made up of private, public, and 
co-operative services and, Mr. Speaker, when we eliminate one 
of those aspects it’s going to be a devastating effect on our 
economy. We’ve already started seeing some privatization of 
our Crowns since this government’s been elected, and so I want 
to talk a little bit about that. And again I don’t think a majority 
of the people in the public know about this. In fact, like I said 
before, I’m a huge Crown corporation supporter and I wasn’t 
fully aware of all of these areas that were privatized through the 
past 10 years, Mr. Speaker. And I just know that when I had my 
services upgraded in my own home that I was upset to see that 
the contractors were from out of province that were coming to 
install my services, where previously and normally it would be 
someone in my community that I knew was getting that work 
and those jobs. 
 
So in May of 2008, SaskTel was forced to contract some of its 
installation services for SaskTel Max and high-speed Internet, 
and again a lot of those installation services are from out of 
province. In July 2008 the provincial government sold 
Saskferco to a Norwegian company. Again, more money going 
out of our country which had provided the province with $209 
million since the original investment in dividends. That’s a lot 
of money that’s going outside of our province, outside of our 
country now. 
 
Then we saw big change in October 2008 when this provincial 
government announced its Saskatchewan-first policy for Crown 
corporations. And now, Mr. Speaker, that forced our Crowns to 
sell off and give away its out-of-province operations that had, 
until that point, generated money out of the province that we 
could use back in Saskatchewan. 
 
So that’s how you diversify your economy, Mr. Speaker, is you 
go outside. When you have a good service within your 
province, you reach out and you can provide it other places. 
And then you can get more money for the people of 
Saskatchewan. Good business owners would do that, and that’s 
why good business owners are coming and buying up our 
services. 
 
So this policy was meant to weaken our Crowns and make our 
Crowns look like they’re not providing the appropriate service 
that we wanted, so that there would be a reason to sell them. We 
saw SaskTel outsource email and conference call services. 
SaskTel had to sell Navigata. SaskEnergy had to sell its 50 per 
cent stake in the Nova Scotia natural gas distribution business, 
and SaskTel had to give up its holdings in DirectWest Canada. 
 
More and more I’m hearing, like people are asking, what about 

SaskTel International? SaskTel International was an incredible 
service and was nationwide known and even provided services 
in France, I believe, that SaskTel was first with fibre optics. 
And our employees are exceptional, you know. And so we were 
able to provide services outside and bring that revenue back to 
our own province so that we could use it for services that we 
appreciate here, like with health care and education. And that’s 
how you bring money back to your province . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . That’s good. And I hope that we can expand on 
the Crowns, look at expanding them instead of looking at 
reducing them. Let’s expand that, you know, and that’ll help 
with our economy. 
 
And all of these things that I was just talking about, those were 
all privatized in the first two years of the Sask Party 
government’s mandate. So there’s many other examples of this 
type of privatization where our Crowns are being hacked down 
and limit their capacity and ability to provide good returns. 
 
So we also privatized the Information Services Corporation. 
And I actually had someone phone my office not too long ago, 
and it was a non-profit organization that had to get some 
information from the Information Services Corporation. And 
they were really astonished at how much it cost to get the 
information. And this individual said that previously when we 
owned, when we owned the Information Services Corporation, 
that those fees weren’t that high. And you know, that’s what 
happens when things become privatized. It becomes more 
expensive for the people of our province. 
 
Also we had the Saskatchewan Communications Network 
pretty much given away, just given away like, and that was an 
important agency for our province. It provided information to 
everybody in our province. It was an effective network, and we 
really do miss that service. 
 
And more recently this government has given away nearly 40 
public liquor stores. Again, Mr. Speaker, given away these very 
profitable liquor stores — given away. Like what business, 
what organization just gives away very profitable 
organizations? And the funds from the profits from those liquor 
stores, they paid for our hospitals. They paid for our schools. 
They paid for our roads, and they kept our taxes lower. And, 
Mr. Speaker, like when they talk about, well where is the 
money coming from? Well quit getting rid of the 
money-making organizations in our province. That’s where the 
money was supposed to be coming from. 
 
So these revenues exist to pay for our expenses and if we give 
away a good chunk of these revenues by privatizing Crowns, 
then the expenses are still going to be there. They’re not 
leaving. So how are we going to pay for them? Well guess 
what? The people of Saskatchewan are going to have to start 
paying for them, and they’re going to have to start paying by 
having higher taxes. And that’s how we keep our taxes low is to 
have these organizations that’ll put money into our revenues. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s troubling when we know that there’s 
already been levels of privatization within our government and 
our province, and now we have this bill sitting here, staring us 
in the face, saying let’s do more. Let’s privatize more. 
 
So how are our Crowns a revenue for us? And this is right from 



March 6, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1555 

the Crown Investments Corporation annual report that, you 
know, almost $300 million in dividends was paid back to the 
people of Saskatchewan, and so that’s through all of our 
different Crowns. And yes, sometimes they have good years, 
sometimes they have bad years, but that’s why you have the 
different sectors so that they could balance each other out, you 
know, and still provide that dividend back to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And when I first started working with the Crown corporations, 
one of the staff told me, you are an employee to every person in 
this province and you keep yourself accountable to every person 
in this province. And I’ve held that true. And I believe that’s 
even more so true for each individual member that’s sitting 
here, and every person in this province is your boss. And I 
could tell you, the people of this province do not want to let go 
of our Crowns. And I encourage every person in this Assembly 
to go out and talk to people because I haven’t heard one person 
say, I think this is a good idea. They are saying that they’re 
worried about the potential sale of our Crowns, and even the 49 
per cent of it because then we lose even more of those 
dividends going back to us and how that’s going to impact our 
health, our education, and our roads, and everything we depend 
on. 
 
So I want to talk about some of the individual Crown 
corporations. And first I’m going to talk about SaskTel because 
we’ve heard a lot of rumblings about that possibly being the 
potential Crown that we might sell. So SaskTel’s low prices and 
outstanding coverage keeps competitors’ prices down. So if you 
look at a basic home phone package, SaskTel, among other 
comparators, is extremely low especially across the province, 
you know. And so they make other agencies in our province 
have to stay to that level. So privatization of SaskTel would 
reduce the competition and drive these prices up for everyone. 
 
Like I said before, SaskTel is well known of how much they 
provide in the community. In 2015-16, SaskTel donated 
$3,665,043 to 1,041 non-profit and charitable organizations. 
Again, Mr. Speaker, that’s over $3 million that was donated by 
SaskTel to our non-profit and charitable organizations in our 
province. That’s above the dividends, you know. So they 
provide that to non-profit and charitable organizations, 
community associations, venues, events, partnerships, and they 
reached out to 229 communities throughout this province. 
 
They support Aboriginal cultural traditions like community 
development. They’re committed to connecting with First 
Nations communities to the latest technology. So if we had 
private organizations, would they be as committed to ensuring 
that First Nations communities are receiving Internet and 
telephone services? I can’t see that being a real mandate for a 
business that’s relying on dollars. But when we have a business 
that’s relying on services, providing good quality services, they 
ensure that those services are available. 
 
And they’re a proud sponsor to a lot of the local First Nations 
initiatives. They have I Am Stronger campaign, which is 
offering grants of up to $1,000 for youth-led initiatives that 
address bullying, cyberbullying, and promote kindness. To date 
$23,735 has been awarded to this important cause. This is 
above and beyond all the other things I’ve been talking about. 
 

Phones for a Fresh Start, they properly recycle phones, and all 
the proceeds from the recycling process are used to support 
victims of domestic violence at the provincial association of 
transition homes and services of Saskatchewan. 
 
SaskTel Pioneers, like I was talking about before, this network 
of current and former employees has raised approximately 
200,000 annually for Saskatchewan communities and 
associations. They have telecare. Employees contribute to the 
fund through an automatic payroll deduction, and SaskTel 
donates an additional 50 cents for every dollar raised. So that’s 
$294,622 to 67 organizations in 2015-2016. And they’ve given 
out $37,000 in education scholarships. So these are things that 
we would lose if we go to privatizing these services. So we 
need to take that into consideration. 
 
Then we’ve got SGI. SGI is another major Crown corporation. 
This company achieved a profit of $84.5 million, generating a 
dividend of 47.3 million for the people of Saskatchewan. The 
2015 annual report says that the company employs more than 
2,000 people, and SGI Canada has 211 independent brokers 
throughout Saskatchewan as well as 219 brokers operating in 
Manitoba, Alberta, British Columbia, and Ontario. 
 
And my understanding is that having SGI Canada go across the 
provinces really helps alleviate any potential . . . Like if we had 
say a natural disaster in Saskatchewan and a lot of people 
needed to utilize our insurance rates, making the insurance go 
outside of the province into other provinces help mitigate that 
damage that could happen to the insurance company. So it’s 
really important to have this service provided, and I know a lot 
of people in other provinces that said that they’ve heard good 
things about SGI Canada and they’d like to see more of that. So 
that could potentially be something that we reach out a little bit 
further as well. 
 
There was a survey that SGI Canada had sent out and it said 
that 94 per cent are satisfied with their services. That’s an 
incredible amount, you know, like to have 94 per cent of people 
responding to the survey saying they are satisfied with that 
service. So they should be very proud of that. 
 
[16:00] 
 
And also the 2015 annual report says that SGI Canada 
continues to receive national recognition as the “Top 100 
Employer, one of Canada’s top diversity employers and one of 
Canada’s top employers for employees over 40.” So that’s 
really impressive I have to say. 
 
And with SaskEnergy, the residential customers pay the lowest 
cost for natural gas delivery in Canada, and SaskTel provides 
phone and Internet services to remote and rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company] provides 
reliable bus service that connects 253 Saskatchewan 
communities. And, Mr. Speaker, STC is utilized by many 
people who are in rural communities that need to access 
services in larger facilities. I know a lot of seniors rely on this 
transportation company and that if we lose this company, 
seniors will really struggle with finding ways to move around 
the province and get to the larger facilities for their health 
services. 



1556 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2017 

So we have got to really consider the potential issues if we 
privatize any of these services. So, Mr. Speaker, also like we’ve 
heard, like different things coming from this government, you 
know, and for the longest time they said that they wouldn’t 
privatize any of our Crown corporations. 
 
And so I want to refer back to some quotes that I’ve found. One 
will be from the 2011 election platform that the Saskatchewan 
Party had. And here it says that they’ll: 
 

Continue to support the Crown Corporations Public 
Ownership Act. 
 
Ensure Saskatchewan’s Crown utility corporations remain 
publicly owned and focused on delivering high quality 
service to Saskatchewan people at the lowest cost. 

 
So that was an election promise from 2011. And so even in 
March prior to this election, there was some quotes from the 
Premier that said . . . Like he was pressed on the issue of with 
regards to the privatization agenda and the Premier himself 
said: 
 

“There’s something we signed on to called the Crown 
Corporation Protection Act, or to that effect. Basically, it 
protects Crowns from being privatized.” . . . “If elected, we 
will make one change to that: that’s to the liquor retailing 
in the province. And we’ve already announced that.” 

 
“With respect to the major Crowns, we will not be 
changing it if we’re re-elected again.” 

 
So that in essence was an election promise that was given to the 
people of Saskatchewan, that they were upfront about the liquor 
store sales. And I’ll agree that was public. Like people knew 
that was a potential consequence of electing a Sask Party 
government. But the people of Saskatchewan did not realize 
that the rest of the Crown corporations could result in some 
privatization. 
 
And again like I said before, I think with the amendments to 
this bill that they need to consider that the people of the 
province don’t really understand truly what the consequences of 
passing a bill like this is, and they should have the respect of 
having what our Premier also said here, a provincial 
referendum. If it was something Saskatchewan people we 
thought really wanted to at least talk about, there is the idea of a 
provincial referendum. 
 
And so, you know, we need to take our elected officials’ word. 
And so when something has been said, they should be 
honoured, you know. And so I would like to see that maybe the 
Premier have second thoughts about this bill and the potential 
consequences of it and retract it and decide that this may be 
something that all the residents of Saskatchewan should be 
made aware of. 
 
So I also have from the previous minister responsible for 
SaskTel, or maybe he is the current one, I can’t remember . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Okay, the current Minister 
Responsible for SaskTel, he also indicated to a letter of a 
concerned citizen that if there was any potential sale of SaskTel 
— and even 49 per cent is a potential sale, 5 per cent is a 

potential sale, any percentage of that is a potential sale — that it 
would be done through a province-wide referendum. So we 
need for them to honour that. 
 
And when we look at this bill, and it says 49 per cent of any of 
the Crown corporations could be potentially privatized with the 
new definition of privatization, that if they do say that, there’s 
going to be a province-wide referendum, then let’s go for that. 
Let’s do it, and then put it to the people of Saskatchewan and let 
them have their voice. 
 
So according to a May 17 Leader-Post story, the Premier said 
there are no plans to privatize SaskTel because his party didn’t 
campaign on it and because of the current legislation. Maybe 
that’s a discussion Saskatchewan people want to have. If it was 
something Saskatchewan people, we thought, really wanted to 
at least talk about, there’s an idea of a provincial referendum. 
So yes, there’s a lot of talk here. And with changes to the 
current legislation, like you can say that, but do everybody in 
the province understand what that means? And again, I don’t 
think this is being upfront and honest. 
 
Consequences of privatization, there’s quite a few 
consequences. I could go on and on and on about it. So we’re 
always talking about, you know, repairing our roads and 
infrastructure costs and such and, over the past six years, the 
Ministry of Highways budget has increased a modest 12 per 
cent. So how has spending on private consultants over the same 
period skyrocketed by a whopping 404 per cent? 
 
So that’s the cost of privatizing our highways. And so the more 
that we turn to private companies to work for the Ministry of 
Highways, they charge hourly rates that are often two to four 
times higher than a public service worker would be paid to do 
that same job. You know, so the costs aren’t any cheaper, and 
we take away jobs from the people in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I’ve had, I’m sure, and I hope a lot of other members here 
have had a lot of concerns and calls to their office from 
members that are working for organizations and concerned 
about the fact that their jobs may be lost after March 22nd. So I 
feel really bad for a lot of families who are really concerned 
about what they might need to do for their families, you know, 
if potentially a lot of our government jobs are contracted out, 
and again like I said, which haven’t been proven to be cost 
effective. 
 
Also I’m going to read a little bit of a quote here: 
 

Public ownership is also preferable when delivering 
essential services. Writing in the context of power failures 
in . . . New Zealand following the privatization of 
electricity, journalist Will Hutton wrote: 
 

“Electricity is not a commodity like a designer dress 
where an interruption of supply poses no wider 
consequences; it is a precondition for successful modern 
life. If the owner of the power and distribution system 
fails to maintain supply and so loses revenue, this is not 
just an issue for the shareholders of the enterprise. It is 
an issue for everyone. In economic terms, electricity is a 
public good. This means electricity companies — like 
water, gas and rail companies — cannot be run on the 



March 6, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1557 

same commercial terms as firms in markets where there 
are many suppliers and the consequences of poor 
decision making are restricted to the firms themselves.” 

 
Public ownership also makes sense where large-scale 
capital investments in energy, transportation, or 
communication infrastructure are necessary. Because the 
government enjoys a better credit rating than private 
corporations, Crown corporations can borrow money at 
more favourable interest rates and can finance such 
projects more cheaply than the private sector. Public 
ownership also shares the risks and equalizes the costs of 
such important investments among all those who benefit 
from them. Citizens similarly share the benefits derived 
from such investments. Rather than seeking to maximize 
shareholder profits, Crown corporations try to guarantee 
access to their services at the lowest possible cost. For 
instance, Saskatchewan Government Insurance (SGI) 
provides the lowest auto insurance rates in the country, 
while SaskEnergy offers the lowest costs for natural gas in 
all of Canada. Moreover, when Crown corporations have 
particularly profitable years they may also provide rebates 
to customers or return revenue to the public purse, such as 
when Crown dividends have been used to balance the 
provincial budget. 
 
Because they are accountable to the public as a whole, 
Crown corporations’ economic focus is much broader than 
that of private corporations that must maximize short-term 
profitability. Crown corporations can consider the 
economic effects of their operations on local economies 
and the province as a whole when making strategic 
decisions. Crown policies such as local hiring preferences, 
local procurement practices or community investments are 
some examples. 

 
So it just makes financial sense to keep the Crown corporations 
that we have in the hands of the people of Saskatchewan for 
many reasons. And a lot were described in that section that I 
just quoted because it just makes more financial sense. We can 
have control of services that are a necessity for the people of the 
province. We provide good-paying, stable jobs for the people of 
this province. And we also can benefit from years that are very 
profitable, and we can use that to be invested in other areas of 
our province. So that’s one of the big things. 
 
We also learned that if we do sell even 10 per cent of our 
Crown corporation, that our federal taxes will be raised and 
then we’ll be sending more money to Ottawa. And I know that 
nobody here wants to send more money to Ottawa. So that also 
really doesn’t make much sense. 
 
And also when we’re sending jobs out of the province, we want 
to keep people employed here, keep people investing in other 
services here, and keep our communities strong. And also when 
we own these Crown corporations, they’re open and transparent 
and the people of Saskatchewan know exactly where their 
money is going. Because, like I said before, because they own, 
they own this company. They own the Crown corporations. 
 
So selling off our Crowns will not solve the Sask Party’s 
mismanagement. It won’t save us from their scandals, and it 
won’t bring an end to Sask Party waste. What it will do is take 

away, take our control away from our Crowns, and it’ll mean 
that we’ll lose our lower rates, the better service, and the jobs. 
We’re going to lose those mortgage-paying jobs, profits from 
the Crowns, and that will be devastating. 
 
[16:15] 
 
The dividends from our Crowns should go to the people of 
Saskatchewan and not private corporations. And I hear how, 
with the laundry services being privatized, how K-Bro’s CEO 
earns $1.2 million per year while the workers are making $11 
an hour. They’re not doing it out of the goodness of their heart 
— our laundry — and providing dirty laundry back into our 
hospitals. So we’re paying someone big bucks to run an 
organization that they don’t even provide their employees a 
living wage. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, again I really hope that all the members are 
paying attention to the possible consequences of the privatizing 
of our Crowns, the change of the definition of privatization with 
this bill, and especially a lot of the members who represent rural 
areas because the citizens in their constituencies are going to be 
greatly affected by the changes here. We know that a lot of 
times in smaller communities, the good, mortgage-paying jobs 
are from these Crown corporations, and they’ve been 
centralized and centralized. But we wanted to have those 
good-paying jobs in these communities, and if we start selling 
them, we’re going to lose that too. So they’re going to lose 
services that they pay for a reasonable price. They’re going to 
lose jobs. And again like I said, we’re going to send more 
money out of the province to Ottawa, you know. And so none 
of us want that. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know a lot of my other colleagues 
have a lot to say with regards to this bill. And at this point, I am 
going to cease my remarks and I am going to move to adjourn 
this debate. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert Northcote 
has moved adjourned debate on Bill No. 40, The Interpretation 
Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 

 
Bill No. 43 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 43 — The 
Pipelines Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to enter 
into debate on Bill No. 43, An Act to amend The Pipelines Act, 
1998. And it is a very timely, in fact extremely timely piece of 
legislation. We just have to think back to last summer in July 
with the Husky pipeline break along the North Saskatchewan 
and what that meant to all the people living along that river in 
The Battlefords, North Battleford, Prince Albert, Melfort, the 



1558 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2017 

First Nations along the river and what that meant, what that 
meant. 
 
And people clearly thought they had a much better handle on 
their pipeline. And of course while we’re still waiting for the 
complete and final report from Husky, one that we can all see, 
the situation it sounds like it was a buckling of one piece of 
pipeline. But you know, this is the problem that we have, all the 
unexpected things that can happen. And I know that the 
minister and we . . . And you know, especially around the 
riverbank and especially along the North and South 
Saskatchewan riverbank that we know of the unexpected things 
that can happen along there. 
 
We often think only rivers flood. But that’s not the only thing 
they do. They also slump, and that can cause just as much or a 
bigger problem. And you just have to talk to landowners or 
house . . . people who have beautiful homes along the river, and 
they think they’ve got a great place. And I know that’s 
happening in Saskatoon right now: they think that they’ve built 
on a very secure piece of land, but the danger of the river is a 
real, real problem. 
 
And so we had that issue just last summer and the damage that 
it caused. Apparently there’s some 225 000 litres of oil that 
leaked out. Where it all went is the big question. And that’s a 
serious, serious issue. 
 
But the bigger thing, Mr. Speaker, is when we look back, back 
to the auditor’s reports. And that’s where really the puck 
dropped in this whole thing and even before that, because we 
should have been paying much closer attention to the pipelines. 
We knew they were aging. We knew that there would be a 
problem, and we knew we had to have a solution. And so we’re 
supportive that this is coming forward, that we need to act on 
this. Of course there will be some questions we have about 
certain parts of the legislation, and we will raise those over the 
course of time. 
 
But it is one that we need to send a strong message to the 
public, to the people of Saskatchewan, and to the corporate 
sector that this is something that’s very, very important, that we 
need to expect innovation. We need to expect the very best 
because our economy, a big part of our economy is about 
energy and transporting it to markets. 
 
We have to do that in the very best way that meets what they 
call a triple bottom line, a triple bottom line — one about is the 
financial aspect of it and one is the environmental aspect of it 
and the other is the social aspect of it as well. We want to create 
jobs. We want to see jobs here in Saskatchewan. And we know 
this is an important part of our economy, and we want to make 
sure that people can make a decent return on their investment. 
But at the end of the day too, we cannot tolerate a major impact 
on our environment. 
 
The potential for what had happened was so extreme last 
summer, and clearly there were people who were doing their 
very best to minimize that. I have to send out a big recognition 
to some of the people along the way, particularly the . . . You 
know. And there are many more. I don’t know them all, but a 
couple, particularly the city managers. The city manager in 
Prince Albert did an outstanding job, because he had been 

through this with another water incident a few years prior to 
that with the issue in Battlefords. So he had a background in 
that. But right along . . . You talk about the First Nations. They 
were right there and they’re willing to help — the first 
responders, the city people — all along the way. And people 
had to get out right, right away. 
 
I don’t want to say Husky is . . . Well we haven’t seen the total 
bill yet. We’re waiting for it. And it’s important that they do 
step forward with that, and they’ve got to just deliver on that. 
And we’re really counting on them to do that. So, Mr. Speaker, 
there are some questions about this. 
 
But I do want to share, well I know I have the attention of some 
folks over there where they . . . I don’t know if you saw this on 
the news the other day — and I am being quite serious about 
this — about transporting bitumen by train. And it was very 
interesting. The new innovation of developing essentially like 
hockey pucks, yes, that float, that don’t break apart. They’re 
water. They will float to the top. If it’s on land, they just fall 
where they fall and that’s it. They get picked up. 
 
So this kind of thinking that I think needs to go, we need to 
encourage more and more of that. Now that’s with the heavy 
oil, I believe. And so they haven’t quite figured out what to do 
with the lighter oil, but of course we know there are additives 
that are put to the product all along the way so it moves along. 
So I just think that we need to keep track of that and keep 
encouraging innovation. And it’s interesting to see trains are 
saying, we can be safe too. 
 
But we know that in Saskatchewan we have many, many pipes 
that go under our soil and they need to be looked after. And in 
fact of course, as I said earlier, this is something that the auditor 
brought forward back in 2012. I know that we had questions in 
2013 about this and there were questions about . . . And it is 
very interesting when you think about the life of a pipeline and 
how it’s not just building them and getting them up and going 
and forgetting about them. That in fact you have to start 
thinking about, you have to make sure that the pipe is built well. 
And we know we have some good facilities in this province to 
do that, and I think that Evraz is a good example of that which 
really made their market claim on delivering good, good pipe. 
But we also have to make sure that we inspect during 
construction and we have to monitor along the way. That’s so, 
so critical. 
 
But also we have to think about decommissioning and what 
happens after the fact. And I think this is very, very important. I 
think about the situation out at the Great Sand Hills where, you 
know, they were very clear, the landowners out there and the 
lessees of the Crown land, about making sure before stuff got 
on their property that there was a plan. And you know, it was 
interesting because that drove the innovation. The company 
said, we can make it happen; we can still make it happen and 
we’ll meet the triple bottom line. And it was a bit of a 
challenge, but the people out there are sure proud of the fact 
that they forced the hand and said, we’re not going to have 
sloppy pipelines out here. We’re not going to do it in a bad way. 
We’re going to do it in a way that we can all feel really good 
about, you know. 
 
And so this is something that we want to make sure this 



March 6, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1559 

happens. And so there will be questions in the committee when 
this moves to that point, because this is a very important part, 
very important of our economy. Pipelines are hugely a 
significant part, and of course, as the minister talked about the 
fact that there is some 80,000 flow lines that are now added into 
this. They’re all over, and we need to make sure we keep track 
of them and what they’re doing. And if they’re not active, how 
are they being decommissioned and that type of thing. This is 
very, very important. 
 
I want to say too that we have some concerns about the fact that 
. . . The minister, when he made his opening comments, and this 
is something that he said, and I quote, and this was back on 
November 29th, 2016: “The proposed amendments will not 
automatically trigger new spending on pipeline regulations.” 
And he goes on to providing foundation . . . “Any incremental 
spending on these programs beyond the ministry’s ongoing 
appropriation will [have to] be approved.” 
 
But you know, I think this is very interesting. He goes on to 
say, “Ninety per cent of the ministry’s current spending on 
pipeline regulation programs is offset by the annual well levy.” 
So 90 per cent is funded by the industry themselves. 
 
So this is where you need to say, okay, this is an important 
issue. What we learned in the summer of 2016 means we are 
going to make sure we inspect our pipelines. That’s a very 
important issue. That’s a very important issue. We’re not going 
to say it’s up to, you know, committees who are counting their 
pennies. This is much more important than that. This is hugely, 
hugely important, because we are worried. 
 
And this goes back to our whole budget debate that we’ll be 
having. And in fact we had the minister say today that he’s 
going to hear us say every day about how we want to increase 
spending on this and this and this and this. Like to them, 
everything should be cut. And I’m wondering, this is why they 
lost the by-election in Meewasin. People are saying, don’t cut 
education. Don’t cut health care. I’m worried, as critic for 
Labour. And he even pointed me out and said, you know, I bet 
the critic for Labour will be asking for more. You bet. 
 
With our record in occupational health and safety, we should be 
doing more, not less. And I hope that isn’t the message from the 
Minister of Finance — all of you folks there should be doing a 
lot less because you’re going to get a lot less. No, we have to 
make sure this province is safe; people can go to work and 
make sure they’re going to come home at night, that’s it’s a safe 
workplace. And that the environment, we won’t see the same 
thing happen to another Husky pipeline crossing the North 
Saskatchewan River or the South Saskatchewan River. That is 
just not on. 
 
This is a very, very important message this government is 
sending if they’re not investing one more penny into pipeline 
inspections. And what is our record, Mr. Speaker, on pipeline 
inspections? What is our record? Here is what we did. Last year 
Saskatchewan inspectors did 78 inspections of pipelines. And 
do you know what they did in Alberta? What did they do in 
Alberta? They did 2,000 inspections. Two thousand. We did 78; 
they did 2,000. And the minister, and the Minister of Finance 
says, don’t be counting on any more. Don’t be counting on any 
more. We will have a fancy piece of legislation, so we’ll have 

talking points to say we did some good things. 
 
[16:30] 
 
And you know, we’re actually thinking this is not a bad piece of 
legislation. We’re kind of supporting it. There are some 
questions we’ll have in committee, but we think we need to 
move on this. But we need to make sure we have the resources 
to put our money where our mouth is. We’ve got to say what 
we mean and mean what we say. And when we say our 
pipelines in Saskatchewan are safe, they will be safe. They will 
be safe. 
 
But anybody can see from comparing those two numbers, 78 to 
2,000 . . . and is that under an NDP government in Alberta? 
Would that be the case? Would that be the case? And that same 
province is facing . . . dealing with the same price of oil. Why is 
that? How can that be? How can that be? How can that be? Is 
that a matter of priorities? Is that a matter of priorities? I think it 
may be a matter of priorities. And our priority in Saskatchewan 
should be, save pipelines. Save pipelines. We can make money 
at it. We can make sure there are jobs here. But we’ve got to 
make sure the environment’s safe, and you’ve got to send a 
clear, strong message that’s the case. That’s the case. 
 
So the Minister of Economy should lean over and talk to the 
Minister of Finance and say, you know, we’ve got to make a 
statement. This is way too much when you have the kind of bill 
that Husky is paying for their break. And that’s right, but it’s 
just got to be a huge hit. It’s going to be a huge hit on them. But 
the people of Prince Albert aren’t paying for it. The people of 
North Battleford aren’t paying for it. And the people in the First 
Nations aren’t going to pay for it. It’s got to be the company. 
 
But the company’s got to know, you do it right the first time 
and throughout the life of the pipeline, throughout the life of the 
pipeline. And we all know, we all know, as I said earlier, rivers 
flood, but they also slump. And that’s a well-known fact. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, you know, I don’t have much more 
to add to this, because we think this is a very important piece of 
legislation that needs to be dealt with. And we’ll be asking 
questions in committee quite forcefully, as we did a few years 
ago with the auditor’s report, making sure all of those things are 
accounted for, and that this means more than just adding at 
construction, but also through the lifetime of the pipeline. And 
by then we should have a strong signal from the minister that he 
really is going to step up the inspections, because as I said, 78 
to 2,000 — that’s an unbelievable number. 
 
When an NDP government can be doing 2,000, why can’t a 
Sask Party government do much more, better than that? So with 
that, Mr. Speaker, I would move the adjournment of Bill No. 
43. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 43, The Pipelines 
Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 



1560 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2017 

Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that this Assembly do now 
adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly now stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:34.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 46 — The Saskatoon Meewasin Constituency By-election Act 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1535 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 46 — The Saskatoon Meewasin Constituency By-election Act 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1535 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ON BILLS  
 Bill No. 46 — The Saskatoon Meewasin Constituency By-election Act .................................................................................... 1535 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 46 — The Saskatoon Meewasin Constituency By-election Act 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1536 
ROYAL ASSENT ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1536 
INTRODUCTION OF NEW MEMBER OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1537 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1537 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1537 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1537 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1537 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1537 
  Steele ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1537 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1537 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1538 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1538 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1538 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1538 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1539 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatoon Meewasin By-election 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1539 
 Telemiracle 41 
  Buckingham ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1539 
 Black History Month Events 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1539 
 Coldest Night of the Year Fundraiser Held in Moose Jaw 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1540 
 Waskimo Winter Festival Returns to Regina 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1540 
 Recognizing Long-Time Huskies Football Coach 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 1540 
 Saskatchewan Number One for Mining Investment 
  Carr .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1541 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Auditor’s Report and Public Accounts Committee Meeting 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1541 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1541 
 Government’s Fiscal Management 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1542 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1542 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1542 
 Employment and Provincial Economy 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1543 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1543 
 Ownership of SaskTel 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1543 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1543 
 Release of Third Quarter Update 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1544 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1544 
 Funding for Education Infrastructure 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1545 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1545 



 

 Support for Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1545 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1545 
MOTIONS 
 Leave of Absence 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1545 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1546 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 44 — The Water Security Agency Amendment Act, 2016 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1546 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1549 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 40 — The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’interprétation 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1552 
 Bill No. 43 — The Pipelines Amendment Act, 2016 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1557 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


