


















































December 6, 2017 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 24A  WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 6, 2017, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Nicole Sarauer 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Hon. Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Hon. Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 
Vacancies — Kindersley, Melfort 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 47; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 2 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3295 
 December 6, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
notice in the west gallery there are some distinguished citizens 
of the province of Saskatchewan, labour leaders in the province. 
And I’m sure they’ll be introduced more formally a little bit 
later on and that I might miss a few but, Mr. Speaker, I can 
certainly see Larry Hubich, Gunnar Passmore, Lori Johb, and 
Tom Graham have joined us. I assume they’re here for my 
farewell party, Mr. Speaker. I want them to know they’re here 
just one, they’re here one day early. But I appreciate the fact 
that they’re here. 
 
And more seriously, I appreciate the fact that they work every 
day together with their teams to represent their members and 
working families across the province. And notwithstanding 
disagreements we’ll have over policy and politics perhaps on 
occasion, their work is very important to the life of the province 
and something that we on this side of the House do appreciate. 
And so I just want to, on behalf of the government and 
members on this side, I want to welcome them to their 
Legislative Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will join with the 
Premier in welcoming these many labour leaders to their 
Legislative Assembly, the ones that the Premier mentioned. 
Welcome Tom Graham, Gunnar Passmore, Larry Hubich, also 
Dion Malakoff. Thank you for being here. And also Lori Johb 
from the SFL [Saskatchewan Federation of Labour] who’s been 
instrumental in the partnership that SFL has with Hillberg & 
Berk in their campaign to raise money for the Provincial 
Association of Transition Houses. Thank you so much for being 
here today. It’s always a pleasure to see all of you. I’d ask all 
members join me in welcoming them to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you and to all members of this Assembly, I’m honoured 
to introduce some guests today in your gallery. First of all we 
have Sandy Giesbrecht, she’s a good friend of my wife, and we 
have my beautiful bride, Marjorie Lawrence, here today. And as 
we all know, without our spouses and significant others we 
wouldn’t be able to do the job we’re able to do today. So I 
would ask all members to welcome them to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
just want to do a quick introduction to a couple of people that 
keep me on track up in Social Services, Jill Love and 

Ashley . . . Taylor Stenson. Sorry, Mr. Speaker. I thought 
Ashley was up there, but there’s Taylor up there. So I just want 
to welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to introduce some individuals from the Calling Lakes 
area today. I’ll be presenting a petition on their behalf very 
shortly. But in the gallery, in the west gallery today we have 
Ken and Marj Hutchinson and Aura Lee MacPherson. And I 
would like to, on behalf of the official opposition, welcome you 
to your Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all members of the Legislative Assembly here today, we 
have some folks here from Ituna who have brought me a 
petition to present, that I’ll be presenting shortly. 
 
I’d ask all members to welcome today, we’ve got Nancy 
Deleurme who’s an Ituna town councillor; Corinne Sopel who 
is an area representative with CUPE [Canadian Union of Public 
Employees] Local 4980 representing health care workers in 
Ituna and surrounding areas of the Sunrise Health Region. We 
have Tom Graham, the president of CUPE Saskatchewan, here 
today. CUPE represents over 30,000 CUPE members working 
to provide public services throughout the province, and it’s the 
largest health care union in the province. And we have Nathan 
Markwart, the executive staff with CUPE Saskatchewan. So I’d 
ask all members to join me in welcoming these guests to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, it’s my pleasure today to welcome a couple of guests to 
their Legislative Assembly. First, seated in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker, is a young man, a constituent, grade 12 student, Diego 
Ortman. Diego has a couple of passions in life. One of them is 
politics, and so I encourage everyone to continue to foster that 
love of politics in this young man. And also music: he has a list 
of instruments that he plays including the saxophone. He’s in 
the choir and the jazz band at Sheldon-Williams Collegiate. 
And I invite all members to welcome him to his Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I would also like to 
welcome Ms. Katie Emde. Katie is seated in the west gallery. 
Katie is a mom of two small children. Her and her husband live 
in Midale, Saskatchewan. And Katie has been just a passionate 
advocate on behalf of families and children living with autism, 
a fundraiser, and really has become a bit of a volunteer 
counsellor for many families and a really positive voice, a 
strong voice advocating for those families. And so I invite all 
members of this Assembly to welcome her to her Legislative 
Assembly. 



3296 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2017 

The Speaker: — I’ll take this opportunity to also welcome a 
special guest sitting in my gallery. Right now we have Sheila — 
give a wave — and more importantly, Cherisse is next to 
Sheila. And Cherisse was the summer student for the past 
Speaker, and we were lucky enough to keep her on in that role 
for this past year. And she’s been helping out when she can 
while she’s attending university. So please welcome her. And 
this is going to be unfortunately her last day working in our 
office, but I’d like to thank her for the many hours of hard work 
that she has done. Please welcome her to her Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition for the citizens who are opposed to 
the federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer reads as follows, respectfully request that 
the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a federal carbon tax on 
the province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of Porcupine 
Plain, Weekes, Carragana, Alida, Hudson Bay. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition from concerned residents of Ituna who have 
had their lab services reduced, effective in October of this year, 
from five days a week to only three days a week, and the 
possibility of further reductions in the near future. 
 
The reduction in lab services makes it more difficult for the 
elderly residents, long-term care residents, and those in 
supported living with intellectual disabilities in Ituna to access 
health care when the lab has a closed sign instead of an open 
sign. In the summer, the residents of Ituna gathered to take 
action about their lab services being cut and began a petition 
that today has collected over 500 signatures from town residents 
and surrounding area. Many windows in homes across the town 
now display a heart sign asking for Ituna lab services to be 
saved and restored. Their concerns have been ignored, and they 
have asked me to present a petition to the Legislative Assembly 
on their behalf. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan cause the 
Government of Saskatchewan to maintain and restore lab 
services in the town of Ituna including blood work, X-ray, 
ECG tests, and pacemaker tests to five days per week, 
Monday through Friday, at the Ituna health centre to serve 
the needs of the community of Ituna and surrounding area, 
and in doing so reverse any reduction to lab services in 
Ituna, Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions to save lab services in Ituna are 

signed by the residents of Ituna and the following communities 
throughout Saskatchewan: Balcarres, Balgonie, Canora, Duff, 
Esterhazy, Fenwood, Foam Lake, Fort Qu’Appelle, Goodeve, 
Hubbard, Kamsack, Kelliher, Melville, Prince Albert, Regina, 
Saskatoon, Unity, White City, Willowbrook, and Yorkton. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
proud to stand in my place today to present a petition as it 
relates to Orkambi. And I want to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We, the undersigned residents of the province of Saskatchewan 
wish to bring to the attention the following: whereas Orkambi 
was approved by Health Canada for use in cystic fibrosis 
patients with two copies of the F508del-CFTR mutation, aged 
12 years and older; whereas Orkambi is the first drug to treat 
the basic defect in the largest population of Canadians with 
cystic fibrosis, it can slow the disease progression, allow 
patients to live longer, healthier lives; whereas CF [cystic 
fibrosis] specialists have established clinical criteria for 
Orkambi, including the start and stop criteria, these specialists 
are best suited to manage access to medications in the treatment 
of CF patients. 
 
So the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Urge the Ministry of Health to negotiate a fair price for 
Orkambi and make it available through the Saskatchewan 
drug plan for those who meet the conditions set by Health 
Canada and the clinical criteria established by the 
Canadian CF clinicians. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this particular petition has hundreds if not 
thousands of names. And this particular page that I’m 
presenting today and will be presenting in future days, the 
people that have signed this petition are primarily from 
Meadow Lake. They’re from Hudson Bay. They’re from Flying 
Dust. They’re from Waterhen. They’re from Buffalo Narrows. 
They’re from Ile-a-la-Crosse. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition calling for critical supports for survivors of 
domestic violence. Those who have signed this petition wish to 
bring to our attention the following: Saskatchewan has the 
highest rate of domestic violence amongst the provinces in 
Canada. Employers should be obligated to reasonably 
accommodate survivors of domestic violence in the workplace. 
Employees who are survivors of domestic violence should be 
able to take a leave of absence from their employment without 
penalty. And Saskatchewan must do much more to protect 
survivors of domestic violence. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Legislative Assembly to pass legislation providing critical 
support for survivors of domestic violence. 

 



December 6, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3297 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing the pages of the petition I 
am tabling today come from Saskatoon and Regina. I do so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m rising 
today to present a petition to the Minister of Environment and 
the Minister Responsible for the Water Security Agency of 
Saskatchewan. The people who have signed this are wanting to 
bring to our attention important information. The Quill Lakes 
Watershed Association is proposing something called the 
Common Ground Drainage Diversion Project, and what that 
would do is redirect saline water from Kutawagan Lake and Pel 
Lake into Last Mountain Lake and thereby the rest of the 
Qu’Appelle River chain of lakes. 
 
The Minister of Saskatchewan Environment has reviewed the 
documents that were put forth by the proponent and determined 
that the project is not a development under The Environmental 
Assessment Act. 
 
The potential impacts to water quality are not fully known to 
the public, and a thorough analysis of the short- and long-term 
accumulative environmental impacts has not been completed. 
There is widespread concern regarding the proponent’s proposal 
due to a lack of transparency of the project, the public 
communication, and lack of consultation with Saskatchewan 
citizens and indigenous peoples. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Minister of Environment and the Minister 
Responsible for the Water Security Agency of 
Saskatchewan publicly release all documents used to make 
his determination under The Environmental Assessment 
Act including, but not limited to: 
 
The Quill Lakes flood mitigation assessment, January 
2015; Kutawagan diversion project environmental 
assessment, September 2015; Common Ground drainage 
diversion design report, May 2017, submitted on June 29, 
’17; Common Ground Drainage operational plan, 
submitted on June 29th, 2017; a document entitled 
“Wildlife Considerations for the Quill Lake Flood 
Mitigation,” submitted on July 12th, 2017; project 
discussions held between the Quill Lakes Watershed 
Association and the Government of Saskatchewan 
working group at meetings held in the rural municipality 
of Mount Hope council chambers, April to July 2017; a 
record of engagement activities and letters of support for 
the project provided by the Quill Lakes Watershed 
Association; and water quality monitoring data collected 
in 2017. 
 
Due to public concern and outcry into the potential 
impacts of the proposed project, that the Government of 
Saskatchewan determine that the Common Ground 
Drainage Diversion Project be deemed a development 
under The Environmental Assessment Act, and therefore 
conduct an impartial, full environmental impact 

assessment of the project, including public and indigenous 
consultations; and finally, 
 
Refuse to issue any permits or licences, nor fund any 
activities under the Common Ground Drainage Diversion 
Project proposal until a comprehensive, impartial 
environmental impact assessment and public and 
indigenous consultations are completed. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition . . . These people have been trying to 
get the government’s attention for a while. They just recently 
decided to do this petition. There’s over 1,050 signatures in just 
10 days, Mr. Speaker, in terms of this. And the people that have 
signed this come from the communities of Fort Qu’Appelle, 
Regina Beach, Dilke, Craven, Strasbourg, Pasqua Lake, 
Tisdale, Pilot Butte, Broadview, Indian Head, Regina, Emerald 
Park, Vibank, Rowatt, White City, Lumsden, Katepwa, 
Wolseley, Abernethy, Lebret, Melville, MacNutt, and 
Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, I so submit. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to stand 
today to present a petition for a second bridge for Prince Albert. 
And, Mr. Speaker, on a day like today, when there is 
maintenance being done on the bridge and an accident near the 
bridge, it’s a clear reminder that Prince Albert requires a second 
bridge. 
 
The individuals that signed this petition want to draw these 
following points to your attention: that the Diefenbaker bridge 
is Prince Albert’s primary link that connects the southern part 
of the province to the North; and that the need for a second 
bridge for Prince Albert has never been clearer than it is today. 
 
Prince Albert, communities north of Prince Albert, and 
businesses that send people and products through Prince Albert 
require a solution; that municipal governments have limited 
resources and require a second bridge to be funded through 
federal and provincial governments and not a P3 [public-private 
partnership] model; and that the Saskatchewan Party 
government refuses to stand up for Prince Albert and this 
critical infrastructure issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan ask that the 
Saskatchewan Party government stop stalling, hiding 
behind rhetoric and refusing to listen to the people calling 
for action, and begin immediately to plan and then quickly 
commence the construction of a second bridge for Prince 
Albert using federal and provincial dollars. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is an issue that’s near and dear to many 
people in Saskatchewan’s heart, and this individual petition has 
been signed by people from Regina, Coronach, and Buffalo 
Narrows. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 



3298 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2017 

Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition to reopen 
the Buffalo Narrows Correctional Centre. The residents of the 
northern village of Buffalo Narrows wish to bring our attention 
to the fact that the closure of the Buffalo Narrows Correctional 
Centre left 15 people out of work; that it hurt the families of 
inmates, and that it took the inmates far away from their 
families, making visitation difficult or non-existent; and it took 
away the opportunity for those inmates to get treatment and to 
obtain training while they were serving their sentence. So: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
immediately reopen the Buffalo Narrows Correctional 
Centre to better our community for future generations to 
come. 

 
The individuals signing this petition hail from Buffalo Narrows. 
I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present petitions on behalf of concerned residents across 
Saskatchewan and around Balgonie that are greatly concerned 
by the mismanaged bypass project, Mr. Speaker, and the 
closure of the emergency services access, leaving the 
community isolated and vulnerable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Government of Saskatchewan take the 
necessary steps and actions to leave the west-in, west-out 
driving access for vehicles into and out of Balgonie at the 
intersection of Highway 1 and Main Street. 
 
We also respectfully request that the Government of 
Saskatchewan put up a locked gate on the apron between 
the eastbound lanes and the westbound lanes of Highway 1 
and Balgonie’s Main Street intersection. This gate would 
allow emergency services access to the eastbound lanes of 
Highway 1 at the Main Street Balgonie intersection, but 
would not allow the public access to cross east- and 
westbound lanes. 

 
These petitions are signed by concerned residents from 
Balgonie and McLean. I so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

National Day of Remembrance and Action 
on Violence Against Women 

 
Ms. Mowat: — Geneviève Bergeron, Hélène Colgan, Nathalie 
Croteau, Barbara Daigneault, Anne-Marie Edward, Maud 
Haviernick, Maryse Laganière, Maryse Leclair, Anne-Marie 
Lemay, Sonia Pelletier, Michèle Richard, Annie St-Arneault, 

Annie Turcotte, and Barbara Klucznik-Widajewicz. Mr. 
Speaker, these 14 women were killed on this day in 1989 at 
École Polytechnique in Montreal. They were killed because 
they were women. 
 
Today on the National Day of Remembrance and Action on 
Violence Against Women, we stand to remember these 14 
women. And we stand to remember all women who have 
experienced violence simply because of who they are. Mr. 
Speaker, we stand to protest the hate that led to these horrific 
killings. We call for change and we commit every day to end 
violence against women. I ask that members now join me in a 
moment of silence. 
 
[The Assembly observed a moment of silence.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 
House today to acknowledge December 6th as the National Day 
of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women. In 
Canada, December 6th has been proclaimed to commemorate 
the deaths of 14 female engineering students in 1989 who were 
targeted and killed at Montreal’s l’École Polytechnique because 
they were women. Today is an opportunity for Canadians to 
remember all women and girls who have died as a result of 
violence, and to think about those who currently face violence 
in their lives. 
 
Our government is committed to finding solutions to reducing 
interpersonal violence and abuse. Programs such as victim and 
child protective services, mental health and addiction services, 
and domestic violence courts all offer support for those who 
experience gender violence in their lives. But more can still be 
done and we can all be part of the solution by working together 
to raise awareness by wearing white ribbons and by supporting 
violence prevention. 
 
I ask all members of the Legislative Assembly to join me in 
recognizing December 6 as the National Day of Remembrance 
and Action on Violence Against Women. Please wear their 
white ribbons as an example of their commitment to ending 
violence against women and girls in our society. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Moose Jaw Times-Herald Closing Its Doors 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 
Oscar Wilde once said, “There is only one thing in life worse 
than being talked about, and that is not being talked about.” 
Well for the residents of Moose Jaw, they are losing the ability 
to be talked about. The Moose Jaw Times-Herald will close 
tomorrow, December 7th, after a storied 125 years of serving 
the community. 
 
The paper was a staple in the lives of Moose Javians, providing 
a local perspective on issues affecting the province as well as 
stories closer to home. As a former journalist, I have such fond 
memories of the time I spent at the Times-Herald in the 1990s 
before moving to a publication in my hometown. 
 



December 6, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3299 

For many journalists across the country, papers like the 
Times-Herald provided a fertile training ground for them to 
learn how to cover local issues and how to place their finger on 
the pulse of the community. And perhaps most importantly it 
enshrined in them, myself included, a real understanding of why 
local coverage matters. 
 
In 2017 we find ourselves more connected than ever before. 
Word travels fast and we’re able to access information from 
across the globe in seconds. Unfortunately it seems many local 
papers aren’t able to stay afloat in this current environment. But 
when a community loses its paper, it means one less critical eye 
at a city council meeting. It means that no one is there to 
objectively assess the health of the community. It means that 
the stories of the community aren’t being told and in time we 
can lose that sense of community. 
 
On behalf of our caucus, our thoughts are with the 25 workers 
who will be out of work after the last edition of the 
Times-Herald hits the presses, and with the citizens of Moose 
Jaw who have lost an important voice in their community. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Martensville-Warman. 
 

Teen Challenge Women’s Centre Under Construction 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week I 
had the honour to meet with two organizers of Teen Challenge, 
Drew Byers and Cary Snyder. Teen Challenge is a faith-based 
addictions recovery program that offers one-year in-patient 
programs. Their focus is on healing the mental, physical, 
emotional, and spiritual aspects of their clients’ lives. And I 
realize their name can be confusing. While they accept clients 
starting at age 18, their oldest graduate is actually 66 years old, 
which shows that it’s never too late to make a change in your 
life. 
 
This organization has programming across Canada, but most 
notably for us is their men’s program that operates at Allan, 
Saskatchewan. Over their decade of helping men, over 100 men 
have graduated from this program. We know that addictions 
doesn’t discriminate based on gender, age, financial 
circumstances, where you live, how you were raised, and what 
your job is. People battling addictions don’t take drugs or 
alcohol to feel better; they take them to feel not as bad. And we 
know that addictions affects the whole family. I lost my own 
brother to his addictions just a few years ago. He was only 43 
years old. 
 
I met with these representatives to discuss an exciting new 
venture they have started in our province. They are planning to 
open a 24-bed in-patient facility for women called the Prairie 
Hope Women’s Centre, located near Hague. I am excited by 
their vision for helping women, not only from our province but 
those who come to this facility from across Canada as well. The 
building construction has begun, and they are hoping to have 
the doors open in the fall of 2018. They rely solely on donations 
for capital and operations. And, Mr. Speaker, if you’re 
interested in finding out more about Teen Challenge or their 
fundraising campaign, you can check out their website at 
teenchallenge.ca. Thank you. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 

Lumsden Devils Win Provincial Championship 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to 
rise in the House today and announce that the Lumsden Devils 
3A nine-man football team last month won their second 
consecutive provincial title. On November 11th they defeated 
the Kindersley Kobras in an impressive championship match, 
winning 68 to 20. Being able to take one provincial title is an 
incredible accomplishment, but being able to defend your title 
for a second year in a row truly speaks to the exceptional 
athletes and committed coaching staff from Lumsden. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Devils went undefeated this football season 
under the direction of head coach Luke Dunville. Facing 
adversity during their first touchdown attempt, the Devils were 
able to prove to themselves that they were the best team in the 
tournament. To celebrate the legacy of the grade 12 athletes, 
each graduating player had the opportunity to be captain during 
the final game. The coaching staff and returning athletes look 
forward to continuing their winning streak and plan to return 
next season with the same commitment, passion, and dedication 
to the football field. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite all members to please join me in 
congratulating the coaching staff and talented athletes from the 
3A Lumsden Devils nine-man football team on their second 
consecutive provincial title. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Northwest. 
 

Teacher and Coach Retires After 30-Year Career 
 
Mr. Wyant: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to acknowledge a local high school teacher and 
football coach, Mark Andrews, who recently announced his 
retirement from Marion Graham Collegiate in my constituency. 
Known for his fiery demeanour on the sidelines, Mr. Andrews 
has worked as a physical education teacher for 30 years and a 
football coach for 27. Over his time he coached at four different 
Saskatoon schools, guiding his teams to over 100 victories, 
capturing three city championships and two provincial titles. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he has interacted with thousands of students over 
his impressive career of 30 years. His students will attest to his 
enthusiasm, determination, and character, which have inspired 
so many. This was never more prevalent than almost 10 years 
ago when he suffered a massive heart attack. Students and 
teachers rallied to his side, and within weeks he was back on the 
sidelines and in the gym. 
 
Mr. Andrews made the decision to retire this summer, and he 
plans to spend more time with his family. Mr. Speaker, through 
the peaks and valleys of his career, Mr. Andrews’s perseverance 
and heart have been truly inspiring. So on behalf of this entire 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank Mr. Andrews for 
being such an extraordinary example throughout his teaching 
and coaching career and wish him all the best in his retirement. 
Thank you. 
 
[14:00] 



3300 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2017 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
University. 
 

Saskatoon’s Business Tax Climate Named  
Most Competitive 

 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, for the 
third straight year, Saskatoon has the most competitive tax rates 
for business investments of any major city in Canada. The C.D. 
Howe Institute released its annual report that compares 
marginal effective tax rates across the country, and Saskatoon 
had a rate of 42.4 per cent. This is 4 per cent lower than 
Calgary, Mr. Speaker, who before 2015 had the lowest rate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this rate was calculated by measuring different 
taxes that affect businesses, including retail sales taxes, 
corporate income taxes, property taxes, and land transfer taxes, 
among others. While this report ranks Saskatoon as its top city, 
the news also reflects positively on the tax competitiveness 
across the entire province. In fact the provincial tax burden in 
Alberta is referenced as a significant contributor to Calgary’s 
slide in the rankings. 
 
Since 2009 our government has provided residents, business 
owners, and farmers $1.2 billion in education property tax 
relief. 
 
Mr. Speaker, policy matters. Our province needs to fund 
important social investments while maintaining this 
competitiveness, and that’s why we’ve moved towards 
consumption taxes. But unlike the members opposite who voted 
against our last measures to support small businesses, we will 
continue to work toward maintaining investment and 
opportunity in our province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Global Transportation Hub 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I asked the Premier if 
he agreed with his deputy minister who took a leave to run to 
replace him. When asked about the Sask Party’s GTH [Global 
Transportation Hub] scandal, she said, “This would not happen 
under my leadership.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, since the Premier refused to answer my question 
yesterday, I’ll ask again. Does the Premier agree that better 
leadership could have prevented the Sask Party’s GTH scandal? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — You know, it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker. 
The question was answered yesterday, and it’s the same old 
questions from a new leader of the NDP [New Democratic 
Party], but fair enough. 
 
Mr. Speaker, first of all I disagree with her characterization of 
the matter as a scandal. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I would point out 
to all members in the House including my friend, the Leader of 
the Opposition, that in fact when challenges were obvious, this 
side of the House — at the request of that side, I would say — 

asked the Provincial Auditor to look into the matter. The 
Provincial Auditor and her team did a comprehensive review of 
the matter. The report’s been made public. 
 
The short answer to her question is, there were mistakes made. 
It’s something that we have admitted many times. There were 
mistakes made in the assembly of land in an environment where 
we had prices escalating rapidly, Mr. Speaker. There was 
challenges around communications between ministries in terms 
of that assembly. 
 
But the auditor went on to say . . . And remember, the 
Provincial Auditor now is an independent officer of the 
legislature, independent of this side, independent of that side. 
It’s an independent officer of the Legislative Assembly. And 
the same Provincial Auditor that made recommendations on 
better government policy, which we’re implementing, also said 
on the 4th of July of the year the report was presented — on the 
radio, in the media — that there were no red flags that would 
point to concerns around conflict of interest or fraud. Those are 
the auditor’s words. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, if the Leader of the Opposition knows 
something more than the Provincial Auditor, I hope she shares 
that with the House. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, we keep asking these questions 
because we keep getting the same tired lines from this 
government. It’s unfortunate the Premier disagrees with my 
characterization. It’s not just my characterization of what is 
going on; it’s every single one of those leadership candidates’ 
characterizations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me ask another question. The Premier’s deputy 
minister also said, “One step over the line is one step too far 
and there will be consequences.” Mr. Speaker, I think it’s fair to 
say that Bill Boyd took more than a few steps over the line, 
more than a few times. So does the Premier still stand by his 
decision to defend and stand by Bill Boyd and Mr. Pushor? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the government, as I have indicated on a number of 
occasions, as have other members on this side of the House, in 
this matter we have co-operated fully with the Provincial 
Auditor, an independent officer of the Legislative Assembly, 
including releasing cabinet information, cabinet documents.  
 
All that the Provincial Auditor’s office, the team that worked on 
this, any documents that they required for their review, that was 
made available, Mr. Speaker. Which I would remind the 
members opposite is in stark contrast to the way that members 
opposite dealt with concerning matters that were before their 
government, where in the case, in one particularly well-known 
case, the deputy minister to the premier, the hand-picked deputy 
minister to the premier was asked by the premier to do a review. 
There was no ability to access records, nothing of the sort by an 
independent officer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So again, Mr. Speaker, we want to work hard to ensure that the 



December 6, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3301 

Global Transportation Hub is a success moving forward. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 
deserve so much better than these same old tired lines. Mr. 
Speaker, was the Premier surprised when he heard that the 
person he had put in charge of the GTH, the current Deputy 
House Leader, had just been defending the “position of the 
government”? And was the Premier surprised when the Deputy 
House Leader also said he thought that the Premier had handled 
the scandal poorly and that both Bill Boyd and Mr. Pushor 
should have been fired? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I take it from the 
interim Leader of the Opposition’s interest in the leadership of 
the Saskatchewan Party, perhaps it means that she’s going to 
take out a membership in the Saskatchewan Party and cast a 
vote for the next leader or the next premier of Saskatchewan. 
Because certainly, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the 
Saskatchewan Party, that’s where she will find the next premier 
of the province. She’s not going to find it on that side of the 
House, Mr. Speaker, or subsequent premier as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to the Global Transportation Hub, 
obviously this is an organization that in just a short amount of 
years have generated, have attracted nearly half a billion dollars 
in private investment, have grown full-time employment in the 
Regina area to nearly 1,000 — over 800 people full-time 
employed and 1,800 construction jobs. Those are the kind of 
jobs that we need, Mr. Speaker. Those are the kind of jobs that 
we need to attract to the province. And so in its infancy, the 
Global Transportation Hub is creating jobs, creating private 
investment, and we need to see more of that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier only has today and 
tomorrow left in question period. And I have to say I agree with 
the member from Saskatoon Willowgrove when he said that 
they “. . . owe the people of Saskatchewan answers . . .” But if 
he won’t answer the questions as Premier, will he at least 
commit today to testifying and providing answers at committee 
if he is no longer an MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly]? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, again the government provided any information that 
the Provincial Auditor’s office, an independent officer of this 
legislature, required for the review that was conducted by the 
auditor’s office, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as the members 
opposite know, this matter is being reviewed by law 
enforcement as well. We await those results as well. And as the 
Premier has indicated, that won’t rule out further work done, 
Mr. Speaker, to provide the answers that the people of 
Saskatchewan are looking for in this matter. 
 
But in the meantime, Mr. Speaker, the Global Transportation 
Hub, its board of directors, its staff and management will 

continue to work hard to attract investment to this province. 
Already nearly half a billion dollars in private-sector 
investment, Mr. Speaker, 800 full-time jobs, Mr. Speaker, for 
an organization that is just in its infancy, Mr. Speaker. We want 
to work hard to ensure that this is a success for future 
generations of Saskatchewan to allow us to continue to provide 
the fuel, the food, and the fertilizer and other products that the 
world demands from Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 

Supports for Students With Autism 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, every day we hear stories 
from parents across Saskatchewan who are struggling because 
of the devastating impacts of the Sask Party’s cuts on their kids’ 
education. 
 
Katie Emde is a mom from Midale. Katie’s six-year-old son 
lives with autism. He needs speech and language services, 
occupational therapy, and extra support in the classroom. 
Unfortunately the Sask Party’s cuts have meant that speech and 
language services in the division are virtually non-existent. The 
occupational therapist has been cut, and her son has lost the 
support he needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Education minister refuses to acknowledge the 
harm their cuts are having on families like Katie’s. So I’ll 
remind the Premier that time and time again, he and his party 
have made promise after promise to parents raising children that 
are living with autism. So can he today tell Katie and the rest of 
us why these promises have turned into cuts, and will he 
commit to ensure that those commitments are honoured and 
delivered before he hits the road? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, first 
of all we would like to welcome Ms. Emde to her legislature 
and commend her on her amazing fundraising efforts and 
awareness-raising in the areas of autism. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a government, we have been committed to 
autism and autism funding. In terms of supports for high-needs 
students, I would point to the $1.6 billion we’ve provided to 
supports for learning since 2012, Mr. Speaker, which helps 
divisions allocate funding for special-needs students where it’s 
needed the most. This year over a quarter of a billion went to 
supports for learning in a challenging budget year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are also early childhood intervention programs, KidsFirst, 
for home visits, family transition and nutrition supports — 18 
million this year. Pre-K [pre-kindergarten] funding has gone 
from 7 million when we formed government to 27 million. In 
fact this government created the first early years plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also have some very good news coming very 
soon in terms of early years funding in partnership with the 
federal government for our youngest learners, Mr. Speaker, so 
that every student in the province can reach their fullest 
potential. 
 



3302 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2017 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, with due respect, the 
question was to the Premier of Saskatchewan. Katie is not here 
for patronizing words from a minister who’s so clearly out of 
touch with her file and the cuts, Mr. Speaker. And Katie’s not 
alone. Since she’s been speaking out, she’s had 10 other 
families that have reached out to her, that are experiencing the 
same sort of cuts for their children that are living with autism in 
four different school divisions. 
 
The government has repeatedly promised these supports, but the 
promises don’t mean anything when the government doesn’t 
deliver. Mr. Speaker, a specific promise was for individualized 
funding, but families don’t know when, if, or how that crucial 
support will ever be realized. And it hasn’t come yet. And as 
they wait, the Sask Party’s cuts mean the loss of occupational 
therapists, of speech-language therapists, of educational 
assistants, and entire programs that are serving children living 
with autism and with other intensive needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of these families are at a breaking point. 
Parents are being forced to consider pulling their students, their 
children, out of classrooms and are looking to other provinces 
that provide the supports that they need and deserve. How can 
the Premier, how can the Premier justify breaking his promise 
and failing these kids and their families? Why won’t he step up 
and make the investment these children need and that these 
children deserve? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — The hon. member raises a very important 
issue. And we welcome Katie here to the Assembly today. 
She’s representing parents and families from across the 
province. 
 
The whole issue of support for kids with autism has been 
something, Mr. Speaker, that has been important to me 
personally and to members on this side of the House. What we 
took over 10 years ago, which is really not that long ago, what 
we took over was a situation where the total funding from the 
then government — the members opposite, their government — 
the total funding envelope for supports for autism was a half a 
million dollars a year. That’s it. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we have made some changes. The funding 
today is seven point . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well the 
Deputy Leader wants to heckle on this issue, heckle on this 
issue especially when their last few budgets they left, they left 
by their own admission, huge amounts in the rainy day fund, by 
their own claim. So they . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well 
here he’s continuing on, Mr. Speaker. They had a choice. He sat 
in the cabinet. They sat on $700 million plus in their last 
budgets. And they only had $500,000 for families with kids 
with autism, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have worked hard to make a change in that. We’ve worked 
hard to commit to $7.9 million in this budget. Is that enough? 
No. We’ll hear that later today. That’s why, Mr. Speaker, we 
heard in subsequent campaigns, we need to do more around 
individualized funding. And that promise will be kept. That 

promise will be kept this year. It’ll be a $2.9 million investment 
for individualized funding. And we’ve also highlighted, for that 
member and for all the families who need more support, that 
this is going to be a continuing effort on the part of members on 
this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, as it has been since the 
moment we’ve had the honour to serve. 
 
Have we been able to do as much as we would want in these 10 
years? No, Mr. Speaker, but 500,000 under members opposite 
versus $8 million today and another 2.9 coming next year — 
Mr. Speaker, these are steps in the right direction with our 
admission that more needs to be done. 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Control of Drainage Projects 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, despite it being a major part of 
their so-called resilience strategy, the Sask Party is refusing to 
take real action to address illegal drainage. Today we have a 
group of citizens who live downstream from the Quill lakes 
joining us. For years they have been raising concerns about 
flooding and drainage that are also causing problems 
downstream. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’ve been speaking out about this issue of 
flooding for years, and still unapproved drainage ditches 
haven’t been closed in the Quill lakes area. In fact they are 
increasing despite a provincial moratorium. When will the 
minister finally move from words and paperwork to actual 
on-the-ground action and finally, instead of ignoring the 
problem, implement a strategy to stop illegal drainage in the 
Quill lakes and across Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, first of all I would say that this government has taken 
action, frankly, where little action had taken place on drainage 
for about 30 years, Mr. Speaker. So there were regulations that 
were passed in 2015. New legislation was adopted by this 
legislature this past spring, really the first meaningful action in 
about three decades on this file, Mr. Speaker. This has resulted 
for instance in the largest drainage approval in the province’s 
history, the Dry Lake project. This included 73 landowners and 
18,000 acres, Mr. Speaker. Under the former system, the 
number of permits, the number of processes that would have 
had to take place wouldn’t have even allowed this type of 
project to go forward. 
 
With respect to drainage in the Quill lakes, Mr. Speaker, this is 
something that the ministry, the Water Security Agency is 
working on. It’s not just a matter of closing one or two legs of 
drainage. We need to take a network approach, Mr. Speaker, 
and that’s what we’re doing as a government. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the minister knows darn well that 



December 6, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3303 

the Saskatchewan Party’s so-called solution for this flooding 
problem doesn’t stop illegal drainage. In fact it’s causing more 
problems than it’s solving. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people living downstream are concerned about the 
government’s plans to divert salinized water into Last Mountain 
Lake. They’re worried about the impacts on the water, on the 
shoreline, on the wildlife, on the fish, and their own properties. 
They want to know why the Sask Party is plowing ahead with 
this project without completing an environmental impact 
assessment of the project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister refuses to enforce his own laws and 
take real steps to combat illegal drainage in the Quill lakes, so 
will he at very least complete an environmental impact 
assessment before plowing ahead with this project? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
First of all, we are not plowing ahead. The member opposite, in 
a previous question several weeks ago, said that we gave the 
green light, Mr. Speaker. There has not been a project been 
approved by the Government of Saskatchewan. We are not the 
proponent of any projects, Mr. Speaker. There is a proponent; 
we are awaiting their project, the full project to come forward 
before making a determination. What has been determined 
though is that it does not meet a project under the . . . As a 
ministerial assessment, as a development, it doesn’t reach the 
standard of a development. 
 
But the member knows that that doesn’t mean that there 
wouldn’t be conditions attached if a project was approved. In 
fact, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of projects that are 
significant projects that go forward that don’t require 
environmental assessments, Mr. Speaker, but they still do 
require conditions. 
 
There are two former Environment ministers across the way. 
They would know about projects that go forward without 
environmental assessments including, in 1997, nine gas wells 
were drilled in the Great Sandhills without an environmental 
assessment, Mr. Speaker. But that doesn’t mean that they’re 
done without ensuring that there are conditions and that the 
environment is protected. We can protect the environment; it 
doesn’t always need an environmental assessment to do so. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Provision of Health Services to Rural Communities 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party’s cuts to health 
care are being felt more and more, and in many cases some of 
the hardest hit are those who live in rural Saskatchewan. 
Essential services like rural health centres are being forced to 
claw back hours and services or shut down altogether. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a group of people from Ituna and the 
surrounding area here with us today because they want the Sask 
Party to reverse the cuts that have cost them lab services in their 
community. The reduced lab hours have made it harder for 
people in long-term care and community living to access health 

services, and even more people are now having to travel to get 
access to basic care. Of course that’s an even bigger problem 
now that the Sask Party has shut down and is selling off STC 
[Saskatchewan Transportation Company].  
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister consider the harmful impact of 
these cuts, listen to community members, and reverse the cuts 
to lab services in Ituna? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the 
member pointed out, lab services in Ituna were reduced from 
five days a week down to three days a week, based purely on 
utilization, Mr. Speaker. In ’15-16 the numbers of utilization at 
that facility were 215, so less than one per day, Mr. Speaker. 
There’s been no change to the diagnostic services available. 
And as we’ve always committed to, if the utilization rates do 
increase, we’re open to adding some days and some hours to 
that facility, Mr. Speaker. As is often the case, the opposition 
will portray a situation where there’s a possible closure of 
facility, Mr. Speaker. We’re committed to Ituna Pioneer not 
closing. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — That’s why they’re here, Mr. Speaker. They 
have very real concerns about losing their lab tech and their 
physician. Mr. Speaker, this is not the first time the community 
has tried to save . . . or tried to have their voice heard. 
Community members, health workers, patients, the mayor, and 
members of town council have all expressed concerns, but have 
felt ignored by their local Sask Party MLA and the minister. 
They want the cuts that are threatening their town to be 
reversed, but they say this government just isn’t listening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is about more than just lab services. If there 
isn’t consistent access to blood work, X-ray, and other testing, 
Ituna and other communities could lose their lab technologist or 
even their doctor. Mr. Speaker, how will the minister ensure 
that the people of this community have proper access to the 
medical treatment and services they need? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, as I committed to earlier 
that . . . This decision is based purely on utilization rates, and 
less than one visit to the lab per day, 215 in 2015-16, Mr. 
Speaker, warrants a slight reduction in the facility hours and 
days, Mr. Speaker. And as I said, we’re committed to, fully 
committed to increasing the days and the hours of service if the 
utilization does increase, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the member touched, I think, on STC earlier as well. I want 
to point out, Mr. Speaker, that moving of products around the 
province by STC was only happening for about nine months for 
the most part. This government actually trying to invigorate 
STC, was directing health regions to utilize STC for moving 
products around instead of using couriers like they did 
previously, Mr. Speaker. So after nine months, those services 



3304 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2017 

are back in the hands of couriers and for the most part 
happening very efficiently. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Government Meetings With Municipalities 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, annual advocacy days between 
SUMA and the Saskatchewan government have been a 
long-standing tradition in this province. This process allows 
representatives from across the province to come together and 
present their shared and unique concerns to members of cabinet. 
 
In a year where the Sask Party raised the PST [provincial sales 
tax], cut grants-in-lieu, and dropped a number of costs onto the 
backs of municipalities, Mr. Speaker, this is a time when 
cabinet should stand and face the music. Instead, the Sask Party 
cancelled the meetings. They gave little warning and reason.  
 
Mr. Speaker, municipalities have a lot of questions for this 
government. So will the Sask Party commit to rescheduling 
these cancelled meetings and listen to the concerns of the 
leaders in the Saskatchewan cities and municipalities? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
member for the question. I would say that I was unaware of the 
meeting being cancelled. We are committed to our 
municipalities in the province, and we will be in contact with 
them to reschedule. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Taxation of Properties in Provincial Parks 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the minister for 
committing to that. And I hope to hear that he continues to 
commit to that because municipalities have serious concerns 
and they want to know that their voices are being heard by their 
government. The Sask Party’s cuts have left many 
municipalities searching for ways to make ends meet without 
cutting vital services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some municipalities surrounding provincial parks 
are under additional pressure. There are more and more 
permanent park residents, but the province is actually doing less 
and less to help the municipalities near many of these parks 
who are serving these homes while the province keeps the tax 
revenue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people who live in the parks use municipal 
services but pay only park lease fees and not municipal taxes. 
Mr. Speaker, does the minister not agree that the fees these 
homeowners are paying should go to the level of government 
that is actually providing them services? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 

Hon. Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know, as 
the member mentioned, there are cabins within provincial parks 
that don’t currently pay education property tax. That’s part of 
being in the park, part of the legislation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I will certainly look at that as we go forward, that situation 
where people outside of municipalities, in cabins, do pay for 
those, those municipal . . . pay municipalities for services. Mr. 
Speaker, as I mentioned, we’ll continue to look at that through 
the . . . We’ll look at that as the budget process unfolds, Mr. 
Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

Changes to Federal Employment Insurance Legislation 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the last 
federal budget brought forward changes to the employment 
insurance which would allow new parents to continue to receive 
benefits for up to 18 months after the birth of a child. These 
changes come at no cost to the businesses employing the 
parents in the province, but the amount provided does not 
change. But the crucial time available to the parents does. Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
These changes, while not perfect, allow for more flexibility for 
the working families that might choose to use them. But they 
can’t go forward in Saskatchewan until this government amends 
the employment Act. Mr. Speaker, the federal program began 
earlier this week. Will this government follow the governments 
of Ontario and Alberta and commit to making the changes 
necessary to accommodate hard-working families here in the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for the 
question. During the last year we’ve added a number of leaves 
to allow for people that are dealing with a seriously ill child, a 
seriously ill family member. And as a general practice, Mr. 
Speaker, we have looked to create leaves that dovetail with the 
federal government when there is changes to the employment 
insurance legislation. We are aware that there has recently been 
changes made to some of the family benefits, and the ministry 
officials are looking at that and will be undertaking consultation 
on that as well as some other issues in the near future. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 116 — The Saskatchewan Employment 
(Interpersonal Violence Leave) Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to 
introduce and consider all stages of Bill No. 116, The 
Saskatchewan Employment (Interpersonal Violence Leave) 
Amendment Act, 2017, immediately. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 



December 6, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3305 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 116, 
The Saskatchewan Employment (Interpersonal Violence Leave) 
Amendment Act, 2017 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
and Attorney General that Bill No. 116, The Saskatchewan 
Employment (Interpersonal Violence Leave) Amendment Act, 
2017 be now introduced and read the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
may proceed to move second reading of the bill. I recognize the 
minister. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 116 — The Saskatchewan Employment 
(Interpersonal Violence Leave) Amendment Act, 2017 

 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 
and I will be moving, at the end of my remarks, second reading 
of The Saskatchewan Employment (Interpersonal Violence 
Leave) Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
This bill provides survivors of interpersonal violence with 10 
days of unpaid leave to access services or to relocate. Mr. 
Speaker, in February of this year, Stats Canada released a report 
that shows Saskatchewan has one of the highest rates of 
police-reported interpersonal violence across Canada. As 
government and other agencies work towards long-term 
solutions, we know that victims need immediate supports to 
escape dangerous situations. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the ministries of Justice, Social Services, and 
Labour Relations and Workplace Safety have engaged in 
consultation to determine what supports are needed. As a result, 
one of the changes we are introducing is a job-protected leave.  
 
To be eligible, an employee, employee’s child, or a person for 
whom an employee is the caregiver must be the victim of 
interpersonal violence and the employee requires time off work 
to — a number of things, Mr. Speaker — seek medical 
attention; obtain services from a victim services organization; 
obtain psychological or other professional services; relocate, 
either temporarily or permanently; or to seek legal or law 
enforcement assistance and attend court appearances. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to qualify for this leave, an employee must have 
worked for an employer for a minimum of 13 weeks. The 
employee will be required to provide evidence of the services 

being provided if the employer requests it. This is consistent 
with other leaves. I would note, Mr. Speaker, that the 10 days of 
leave can be taken in shorter blocks with a few hours or a few 
days as needed. As a result, only the time away from work 
would be considered leave time. The amendment also requires 
employers to keep personal information confidential. This is 
part of a larger effort by government following our 
consultations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we recognize that interpersonal violence is a 
heartbreaking problem for Saskatchewan families. We need to 
see a shift in attitudes and develop measures to identify and 
prevent abusive relationships to address this. Government will 
work with our partners in the communities to develop long-term 
solutions. As a first step, the province will be working with 
other jurisdictions to seek agreement from the federal 
government to extend employment insurance benefits for 
victims of interpersonal violence. In the meantime, Mr. 
Speaker, we must support the individuals who are impacted. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to move second 
reading of Bill No. 116, The Saskatchewan Employment 
(Interpersonal Violence Leave) Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
has moved second reading of Bill No. 116, The Saskatchewan 
Employment (Interpersonal Violence Leave) Amendment Act, 
2017. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to first thank 
the minister for this bill, this piece of legislation, and I’d also 
like to thank caucus members on the government side. I know 
that there are advocates for this issue on both sides of the floor, 
so thank you so much for advocating for this. 
 
As I’ve said many times in this House, Mr. Speaker, this is an 
incredibly important issue. Saskatchewan has the very dubious 
distinction of having the highest rates of intimate partner 
violence amongst provinces in Canada. And as I’ve also said 
before, we will not be capable of solving the entire problem, but 
as legislators we can and should feel obligated to do everything 
we can legislatively to address this issue and provide the 
supports that we can. 
 
I’m very happy and proud that my caucus members recognize 
this as an issue and have supported making this issue as a 
priority, which has shown through the private member’s bills 
that we have been tabling throughout the past year and a half or 
so. The provisions that are in the government’s legislation were 
in our original private member’s bill about a year ago, I think it 
was tabled. This is the third private member’s bill that has 
contained these provisions. I’m very happy to see the 
government take this piece of my private member’s bill, our 
private member’s bill, and pass it into law. People need these 
supports — yesterday. So we are very grateful and we are very 
happy to see that this is happening. 
 
There are pieces that are missing in this legislation though, that 
were in our private member’s bill, and we are hearing are 
needed, and we are hearing that are needed directly from those 
who are on the front lines of addressing this crisis. The pieces 
that are missing, and I do want to make sure that they are in the 



3306 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2017 

record, Mr. Speaker, are the bill doesn’t include the five paid 
days that we have asked for, and that would have brought us in 
line up to what other provinces have been providing, Manitoba 
in particular. So it would catch us up, Mr. Speaker, with other 
jurisdictions, and this bill does not have that. 
 
It also doesn’t include the 17 weeks unpaid, Mr. Speaker. And 
I’m happy to hear the minister is advocating with the federal 
government to have that in place, but we would like to see a 
provincial commitment to do so, if the federal government will 
not step up to the plate. 
 
It also doesn’t include the duty to accommodate that we have 
been calling for a few times, or in our bill, which is also an 
important piece of the puzzle, and a fairly straightforward piece, 
I think, for us to be able to provide as legislators. 
 
It also doesn’t include . . . Mr. Speaker, the definition of 
“victim” fails to include those who are suffering from PTSD 
[post-traumatic stress disorder] as a result of their experience of 
domestic violence, Mr. Speaker, and we feel from what we’ve 
heard that it is important that that be included as well. 
 
Despite saying all of that, Mr. Speaker, this is still a step 
forward. It’s a small step forward but it’s progress and we’re 
very happy to see that. We’re going to continue to advocate for 
these provisions and whatever provisions we hear are necessary 
because this is such an important issue for us to address, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on a day like today, December 6th, the National 
Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women, 
I call on all of us to continue to strive to do all we can to tackle 
gender-based violence. This is an important step for us but it’s 
not by any means the end of the work that we should be doing 
in this House to address this issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So in saying that, as I know is procedure, I will be withdrawing 
my bill, but please don’t take that as an indication of us not 
advocating for these issues, both what we’ve already been 
advocating for and as needed, more if necessary, Mr. Speaker, 
in the future. So again, thank you to the minister. Thank you to 
the Sask Party caucus for bringing this forward, for allowing us 
all to work together to do what we can and to pass this with 
consent today so we can get these measures in place as soon as 
possible. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
that Bill No. 116, The Saskatchewan Employment 
(Interpersonal Violence Leave) Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the minister. 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I designate that Bill No. 116, The 
Saskatchewan Employment (Interpersonal Violence Leave) 
Amendment Act, be committed to the Committee of the Whole 
on Bills and that the bill be considered in the Committee of the 
Whole on Bills immediately. 
 
The Speaker: — The bill stands committed to the Committee 
of the Whole on Bills. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Committee of the 
Whole. 
 
The Speaker: — I will now leave the Chair for the Assembly 
to go into Committee of the Whole on Bills. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ON BILLS 
 

Bill No. 116 — The Saskatchewan Employment 
(Interpersonal Violence Leave) Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Deputy Chair: — The item of business before the 
committee is Bill No. 116, The Saskatchewan Employment 
(Interpersonal Violence Leave) Amendment Act, 2017. Clause 
1, short title, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Carried. 
 
[Clauses 1 to 7 inclusive agreed to.] 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Her Majesty, by and with the advice 
and consent of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 
enacts as follows: Bill No. 116, The Saskatchewan Employment 
(Interpersonal Violence Leave) Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
I recognize the Minister of Justice and Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that the committee report the bill 
without amendment. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — It has been moved that the committee 
report Bill No. 116, The Saskatchewan Employment 
(Interpersonal Violence Leave) Amendment Act, 2017 without 
amendment. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Carried.  
 
I recognize the Minister of Justice and Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Chair, I move that the committee 
rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Justice and Attorney General that the committee rise, report 
progress, and ask for leave to sit again. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Carried. 
 



December 6, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3307 

[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 
 
The Speaker: — I call this Assembly back to order. I recognize 
the Deputy Chair of Committees. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the committee 
to report Bill No. 116, The Saskatchewan Employment 
(Interpersonal Violence Leave) Amendment Act, 2017 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
may proceed to move third reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 116 — The Saskatchewan Employment 
(Interpersonal Violence Leave) Amendment Act, 2017 

 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this bill be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that Bill No. 116, The 
Saskatchewan Employment (Interpersonal Violence Leave) 
Amendment Act, 2017 be now read the third time and passed 
under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave to 
withdraw Bill No. 605, The Saskatchewan Employment 
(Support for Survivors of Domestic Violence) Amendment Act, 
2017 from the order paper. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has requested leave to withdraw 
Bill No. 605, The Saskatchewan Employment (Support for 
Survivors of Domestic Violence) Amendment Act, 2017 from the 
order paper. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The member may proceed to move 
her motion.  
 
I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

BILL WITHDRAWN 
 

Bill No. 605 — The Saskatchewan Employment (Support for 
Survivors of Domestic Violence) Amendment Act, 2017 

 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Pursuant to rule 
15(3), I move to withdraw Bill No. 605, The Saskatchewan 
Employment (Support for Survivors of Domestic Violence) 
Amendment Act, 2017 from the order paper. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved to withdraw Bill No. 
605, The Saskatchewan Employment (Support for Survivors of 
Domestic Violence) Amendment Act, 2017 from the order paper. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Pursuant to rule 15(3), it is ordered 
that Bill No. 605, The Saskatchewan Employment (Support for 
Survivors of Domestic Violence) Amendment Act, 2017 is 
withdrawn from the order paper. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
(continued) 

 
Bill No. 608 — The Residential Schools and  
Sixties Scoop Survivors Memorial Day Act 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
move that Bill No. 608, An Act to Recognize the Survivors of 
Residential Schools and Sixties Scoop be now introduced and 
read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has moved first 
reading of Bill 608. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When will we read the bill the second time? I 
recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
[14:45] 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING  
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 



3308 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2017 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report 
that it has considered certain supplementary estimates and to 
present its fourth report. I move: 
 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on 
Crown and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — The member from Lloydminster has made the 
following motion: 
 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on 
Crown and Central Services be now concurred in. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Opposition House 
Leader. 
 

Standing Committee on House Services 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
instructed by the Standing Committee on House Services to 
report that it has considered certain estimates and to present its 
eighth report. I move: 
 

That the eighth report of the Standing Committee on House 
Services be now concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
has made the following motion: 
 

That the eighth report of the Standing Committee on House 
Services be concurred in. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from 
Cannington. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Human Services to report it has 
considered certain supplementary estimates and to present its 
fifth report. I move: 
 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on Human 
Services now be concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — The member from Cannington has moved the 
following motion: 
 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on Human 
Services now be concurred in. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 83 through 97. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 
to questions 83 to 97. I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answers for questions 98 through 105. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered responses 
to questions 98 to 105. 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 

Support for a Made-in-Saskatchewan  
Climate Change Plan 

 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, as members will know, earlier this week we unveiled 
our made-in-Saskatchewan climate change plan entitled Prairie 
Resilience: A Made-in-Saskatchewan Climate Change Strategy. 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to be, at the end of my remarks move a 
motion, but I want to begin by setting a bit of the stage of why 
we’re where we’re at today. 
 
On March 3rd of 2016, upon the completion of meetings 
between the first ministers of Canada, there was a communiqué 
that was issued. And as a part of that communiqué in dealing 
with clean growth and climate change, it outlined four areas in 
which the provinces were going to work in collaboration to 
develop climate change strategies for the provinces and 
territories and for the nation. And as a part of that there were 
four working groups that were established: working groups on 
clean technology, innovation, and jobs; a second on carbon 
pricing mechanisms “adapted to each province’s and territory’s 



December 6, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3309 

specific circumstances;” a third working group on specific 
mitigation opportunities; and a fourth on adaptation and climate 
resilience. 
 
So those four working groups were tasked to develop policy 
options around those four different groups. Ministers were 
going to then review and make recommendation to the first 
ministers in October of 2016, and those recommendations 
would form the development of a pan-Canadian framework. 
Instead what happened, Mr. Speaker, is on the beginning of 
October 2016, while environment ministers were meeting, I 
believe, in Montreal, the Prime Minister stood in his place in 
the House of Commons and announced that a carbon tax would 
be imposed on provinces that didn’t have their own plan, Mr. 
Speaker. I think so far everybody is with me on this point. 
Nobody has left. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so the entire national discussion so far has focused 
on these two options: a carbon tax or a cap-and-trade system. 
The desired outcome is to get individuals to make low-carbon 
choices. However, Mr. Speaker, carbon taxes are at a rate being 
discussed by the federal government we know will not modify 
behaviour. Even their own documents, heavily redacted 
documents that I don’t believe they have formally released, 
have indicated that the price that they’re talking is far too low to 
actually modify individuals’ behaviours. So raising them even 
higher might modify behaviour but it would have minimal 
impact on worldwide GHG [greenhouse gas] levels when 
compared to significant harm impact it would have on the 
economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would argue and we would argue that the real 
problem with focusing on a carbon tax is the fact that it is 
proven to not actually reduce emissions. Moreover it puts our 
industries at a competitive disadvantage compared to other parts 
of the world. The proof can be seen just a couple of provinces 
away in British Columbia where they’ve had a carbon tax for a 
number of years and where their emissions have actually gone 
up, Mr. Speaker, and where the governments have 
acknowledged that the money is actually not going back to the 
people who are paying it, Mr. Speaker. It’s not revenue neutral 
for their citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we oppose the imposition of an economy-wide 
carbon tax for two simple reasons: it’s an ineffective way of 
reducing carbon consumption, and the negative consequences 
of a carbon tax for Saskatchewan employment and the 
provincial economy would be significant. In industry, firms will 
reduce emissions until it is simply cheaper to pay a tax, at 
which point a carbon tax is achieving zero emission reductions. 
 
The carbon tax does not provide emission certainty. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, it begs the question: why didn’t the federal 
government announce how much greenhouse gas emission 
reductions would be the result of the federal backstop? Either 
they don’t know or the number isn’t that great. But it comes at a 
great cost to our economy. 
 
A cap-and-trade system does increase emissions, certainly, by 
giving a target for emissions. However we know, Mr. Speaker, 
that it does not work for a province with a trade-exposed 
economy like Saskatchewan. We don’t believe that this is the 
right choice for Saskatchewan. And I believe that our strategy 

that we released this week is innovative, it’s broader and bolder 
than any other strategy in Canada, and it certainly looks at 
actually reducing emissions rather than simply putting a cost on 
carbon.  
 
It’s no secret that the province of Saskatchewan relies on 
emission-intensive, trade-exposed industries as a major pillar of 
our economy. Our commodities rely heavily on free and open 
competitive trade. So a carbon tax at $50 per tonne by 2022, 
which the federal government’s own documents indicate, won’t 
actually change behaviour, but it would impact our economy in 
this province by $2 billion a year. In agriculture, and industries 
such as oil and gas, mining and manufacturing, a carbon tax 
will create a less competitive industry as we compete in a global 
market. Being forced to absorb the cost will make these 
industries less competitive than other areas of the world.  
 
Our made-in-Saskatchewan climate change strategy sets a 
focus, sets forward a different path, a path that focuses not on 
penalizing industry but one that works with industries to make 
positive changes that result in real reduction in carbon 
emissions. We know that industries, roads, buildings, vehicles, 
and daily needs such as electricity are being and will be affected 
by climate change. A responsible climate change strategy needs 
to protect our industries, keep our buildings and roads operating 
efficiently, and keep the lights on in our homes and to keep heat 
on in our homes, in our places of work, especially on days like 
today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll give you one case in point for industry that 
would be affected by these wrong-headed approaches. As a 
country, we export 30 million tonnes of coal: 24 per cent of that 
is to Japan, 20 per cent is to South Korea, 16 per cent of that is 
to China, and 3 per cent is to the United States. Mr. Speaker, 
most of that coal exporting is going on by the provinces of 
mainly British Columbia and Alberta. And most of that, or a 
portion of that, is for coking coal and some is for thermal coal 
for electricity. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, while we are putting in place regulations that 
the federal government have indicated they want to see an end 
to the use of coal, we will still continue to export, in this case 
30 million tonnes of coal per year, to countries that are using it 
to do what? One of two things: create electricity, and they’re 
not cleaning it up, and certainly that’s where technology has to 
come into place; but also for coking coal. So we know that there 
is pipelines, for example, being produced, steel products being 
produced in places like China that are using blast-furnace 
technology which produces 80 per cent more greenhouse gas 
emissions than arc furnace steel production that’s used at Evraz, 
for example, here in the city of Regina. And 55 per cent more 
energy is expended in producing that steel. 
 
So as a country we are continuing to export coal to places that 
will continue to use it for electricity and to make steel to make 
pipeline and that do it in a way that is much more detrimental to 
the environment, Mr. Speaker. And so we need to not put our 
industry, particularly Evraz here in the city of Regina, at a 
competitive disadvantage. And I think that’s a story we need to 
continue to tell the federal government. 
 
We are world leaders in providing fuel, food, and fertilizer to a 
growing world population. And this is something that we don’t 



3310 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2017 

take for granted. We’ve said many times, we’re 10 per cent of 
Canada’s 1.6 per cent global emissions. So our strategy 
recognizes that we need to be ready and resilient to the effects 
of climate change. Resilience is a stronger indicator of effective 
climate action rather than simply measuring reductions in 
greenhouse gas emissions. And this is something that the 
Vancouver declaration clearly stated. 
 
Our strategy needs to be innovative and flexible, again what the 
Vancouver declaration clearly stated. These standards will 
include multiple options for facilities, Mr. Speaker. I’ve said it 
before in the House — 250 000 tonnes per year and over; 
flexible options for those heavy emitters; a provincial 
technology fund; engaging in market mechanisms such as 
internationally transferred mitigation outcomes, so that we can 
get value for what we actually provide for the world in terms of 
the ability to sequester carbon, for our ability to continue to 
produce uranium, which then allows the world to burn less coal 
and use more nuclear power. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan already has a great story to tell 
when it comes to taking action on climate change. With 
technology and innovation, we are already halfway to our goal 
of moving to 50 per cent renewable power by 2030. That’s 25 
per cent of our electrical generation through renewable 
resources. To put that number in perspective, Alberta’s target is 
only 30 per cent. Through investment in research and crop 
varieties at the Crop Development Centre and the Global 
Institute for Food Security at the U of S [University of 
Saskatchewan], we are encouraging our agricultural producers 
to continue innovating when it comes to seeding. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Agriculture carbon intensity has been reduced just by the 
increase in yield from genetics, agronomy, fertility, and zero 
till. And we know that zero till drills are manufactured here in 
Saskatchewan and exported around the world where they help 
to reduce emissions in Russia, Kazakhstan, all throughout 
Europe, and the United States. In fact agriculture emissions are 
approximately 12.7 million tonnes. Mr. Speaker, from zero or 
minimum till agricultural practices, we sequester, and we’re 
working to firm these numbers up, but the latest number was 
11.9 million tonnes. 
 
And this is an incredible story. In 1990 our soils actually 
emitted 600 000 tonnes of carbon. And today because of zero 
and minimal till, we sequester nearly 12 million tonnes on ag 
land. 
 
Pulse crops have helped to offset 2 million tonnes. This means 
that agriculture is essentially carbon neutral, and this doesn’t 
even include our grasslands that store millions of tonnes of CO2 
— 17 million acres of grasslands in this province. And recent 
studies show that grassland under intensive grazing 
management sequester 11 tonnes of carbon per acre annually. 
This is over 187 million tonnes of carbon that is sequestered 
annually. 
 
Our beef producers have reduced their GHG footprint by 15 per 
cent from 1981 to 2011 through technology and management 
practices. So our farmers and our ranchers are doing their part, 
and the federal government want to tax them for their efforts. 

Agricultural producers in Saskatchewan are feeding the world, 
and they’re doing so in a growing, sustainable manner. 
Saskatchewan companies export enough uranium to offset 350 
million tonnes of emissions. We’ve enhanced and utilized 
technology that allows us to clean up transition fuel sources 
such as coal. And keep in mind, again, 30 million tonnes of coal 
are being exported by this country and half of that is going to 
thermal electrical production, Mr. Speaker, in countries that are 
not using clean coal technology yet. 
 
This new strategy builds on the positive story Saskatchewan has 
already told. We believe this strategy meets the needs, meets 
the desired outcomes of actually reducing emissions and should 
negate the need for a federal backstop. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday the member from Nutana asked if we 
checked with the federal government on our plan. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, no, we didn’t. Until they are prepared to back away 
from an either-or proposition and remember what the 
Vancouver declaration actually declared, I’m just not sure at 
this point what the point is. So no, we did not check our plan 
with the federal government. This is our plan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But here’s a sample of who we did check with. Jessica 
Theriault, the director of environmental affairs for Mosaic, had 
this to say: 
 

Mosaic is supportive of a made-in-Saskatchewan planned 
attack on climate change. What the province is proposing 
is an all-encompassing approach to ensuring the 
sustainability of our communities. 

 
Or John Hopkins — we checked with him — the CEO [chief 
executive officer] of Regina & District Chamber of Commerce: 
 

We are supportive of the government’s strategy which 
balances the need to keep our economy growing, reward 
sound stewardship practices, encourages stronger GHG 
mitigation processes, and positions us to adapt, innovate, 
and thrive in a low-carbon economy. 

 
Or Todd Lewis, president of APAS [Agricultural Producers 
Association of Saskatchewan], who said, and I quote: 
 

Our members strongly believe that agriculture is key to 
providing solutions to managing carbon emissions. We 
also strongly reject the imposition of a carbon tax on our 
sector because it will only raise our costs without tackling 
the urgent problem of climate change. 

 
Or Pam Schwann, president of the Saskatchewan Mining 
Association, who said, and I quote: 
 

Ensuring the mining sector remains globally competitive is 
vitally important to Saskatchewan, particularly in this 
period of low commodity prices. We need to be mindful 
that, as we work to reduce GHG emissions, mining 
investments and jobs are not to be exported to other 
international jurisdiction that don’t have the robust 
environment and safety regulatory framework that exists in 
Saskatchewan and Canada. 

 
And finally Andrew Dahlin, senior VP [vice-president] of 



December 6, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3311 

Husky, who had this to say, and I quote: 
 

This framework strikes the right balance to drive improved 
emissions performance while ensuring Saskatchewan 
continues to compete for investment. Saskatchewan is core 
to Husky’s operation and is a primary area for new 
investment over our five-year plan. 

 
And I think we heard a member’s statement from the member 
from Meadow Lake just, I think yesterday or two days ago, 
about the increased investment in his constituency. 
 
So the member said, “So before rolling out this new plan, why 
not check with the feds to make sure that it will protect 
Saskatchewan people from having a carbon tax imposed on 
us?” 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me make this very clear. On this side of the 
House we don’t work for Prime Minister Trudeau. We work for 
the people of Saskatchewan. And we did check with the people 
of Saskatchewan. They have made it very clear that they do not 
want a carbon tax. No to a carbon tax. No to cap and trade. But 
yes to a made-in-Saskatchewan approach that speaks to 
resilience, that regulates industry, that reduces emissions, and 
that values our ag land, our grasslands, and our forestry, and 
that allows us to continue to grow as a province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have mentioned on many 
occasions that we need a made-in-Saskatchewan approach. This 
is exactly what this does — a made-in-Saskatchewan approach 
that takes a more fulsome conversation to lead us to real results 
in reducing carbon emissions. And I believe that it’s important 
for the members opposite to answer today where they stand on 
this issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they can talk about the past all they want — what 
has been done, what has not been done perhaps. Fair enough. 
But here’s where we are at today. Do they support a 
made-in-Saskatchewan plan? Will they stand with companies 
like Mosaic, with the chamber of commerce, with our 
agricultural groups across Saskatchewan? Or do they reject this 
plan and agree with the federal government that a carbon tax is 
okay? 
 
I believe that it’s important for Saskatchewan to have a solid 
stance from this entire Assembly, to stand together and support 
our made-in-Saskatchewan plan, and show the federal 
government that this is what is best for Saskatchewan, that this 
is what will work for Saskatchewan, and that this is what will 
have real results for the people of Saskatchewan while 
protecting our economy. So I would urge the members opposite 
to join with us and support this. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That this Assembly support the made-in-Saskatchewan 
climate change plan, entitled Prairie Resilience: A 
Made-in-Saskatchewan Climate Change Strategy; and 
 
That this Assembly affirms that the strategy recognizes the 
importance of our resource-based economy, will reduce 
emissions, and help Saskatchewan communities mitigate 
and adapt to climate change. 

I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of the Environment has moved 
the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly support the made-in-Saskatchewan 
climate change plan, titled Prairie Resilience: A 
Made-in-Saskatchewan Climate Change Strategy; and 
 
That this Assembly affirms that the strategy recognizes the 
importance of our resource-based economy, will reduce 
emissions, and help Saskatchewan communities mitigate 
and adapt to climate change. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
from Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Good afternoon, Mr. Speaker. And I’m 
pleased to be able to rise in the House today to speak to this 
particular motion that the Minister of the Environment has 
brought forward. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, I know he’s calling 
for solidarity. I think we have a amendment that would be much 
preferable and would call on solidarity indeed with the 
Assembly. So I’ll just read the amendment out now and then 
speak to it a little bit before I table it with the Clerks.  
 
But I think what we really need is a much more robust motion 
here today. So I’m just going to share with members opposite 
what the suggested amendment would be. And I think they will 
very quickly realize that it’s a much stronger motion and one 
that they would be happy to support. So the motion, we’re 
going to suggest the following: 
 

That all words in the motion after Assembly be struck out 
and replaced with the following: 
 
Recognizes that we all borrow our future from our 
grandchildren; 
 
That this Assembly recognizes the importance of 
strengthening a diverse energy sector while reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions; 
 
That any plan supported by this Assembly must include 
targets, clear supports for Saskatchewan families, 
producers, and businesses, and assurances that 
Saskatchewan will be protected from a federally-imposed 
carbon tax, and further; 
 
That this Assembly show leadership in reducing carbon 
emissions and gain credibility for our province when it 
comes to protecting the air we breathe, the water we drink, 
and the land we grow our food on. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, that is, I think, a much preferred wording for 
the motion that we’re discussing here today and I think it’s one 
that members opposite will be very happy to support, and we’re 
calling on them to support this amendment. 
 
I just want to start with making a few comments about . . . 
global comments, so to speak, Mr. Speaker. And this is about 
the issue that’s facing the entire planet at this point in time 
when it comes to greenhouse gas and global warming. I’m just 



3312 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2017 

going to share with the Assembly a few comments from the 
Union of Concerned Scientists and describe the situation that 
we’re actually talking about here today: global warming 
impacts. Now they’re saying here, the consequences of climate 
change are already here and:  
 

Global warming is already having significant and costly 
effects on our communities, our health, and our climate. 
Unless we take immediate action to reduce global 
warming emissions, these impacts will continue to 
intensify, grow ever more costly and damaging, and 
increasingly affect the entire planet — including you, your 
community, and your family. 

 
So the first thing they identify is one of the . . . already impacts 
that are here is rising seas and increased coastal flooding. Now 
that isn’t an issue that’s affecting Saskatchewan directly, but it 
certainly is affecting people in our country and of course in our 
planet. So that’s something that’s happening already. 
 
Longer and more damaging wildfire seasons. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve clearly seen that here in our province. And of course this 
is not just in the forested areas, but we also have wildfires in 
our Prairies. And those are expensive. They’re costly. And 
those are direct impacts that are now connected to global 
warming. 
 
More destructive hurricanes. We see more frequent and intense 
heat waves, Mr. Speaker. You know, those could have a direct 
impact on agriculture here in Saskatchewan. And drought is 
certainly impacting all different parts of the world. 
 
They talk about widespread forest death in the Rocky 
Mountains. Now we’ve seen the serious impact of tree-killing 
insects and wildfires and stress from heat and drought. Anyone 
who’s driven in interior BC [British Columbia] in the last few 
years knows how significant the damages and how that is 
threatening our forests. 
 
Now we also see there’s costly and growing health impacts. So 
even on human health, climate change has significant 
implications: increased air pollution, more intense allergy 
seasons, insect-borne diseases. And for example, Mr. Speaker, 
we have Lyme disease here in Saskatchewan when we know 
that years ago that would never even have been considered. In 
fact my colleague from Meewasin told us last night that in 
medical school they were told it could never happen in 
Saskatchewan. But a short few years later we know that it is 
happening, and it’s affected families here in our communities. 
 
As we all know, global warming will cause an increase in 
extreme weather events. And certainly the extreme events that 
we’ve seen across the world, we’ve seen mostly the ones 
reported in North America, but there are those across the world: 
heavier precipitation and flooding; more severe drought; 
increased pressure on groundwater supplies, and I think that’s 
being borne out here in Saskatchewan; growing risks to our 
electricity supply; melting ice, and we see a lot about that in the 
news, Mr. Speaker; disruptions to food supplies; destructions to 
coral reefs; plant and animal range shifts; and the potential for 
abrupt climate change. 
 
And that’s one of the last things they talk about: “Scientists 

know that the earth’s climate has changed abruptly in the past. 
Even though it is unlikely to occur in the near future, global 
warming may increase the risk of such events.”  
 
And then they talk about the ocean circulation pattern, which 
would be catastrophic. So that’s sort of the global . . . some of 
the highlights, or lowlights I guess, of what will happen if we 
don’t stop global warming and greenhouse gas emissions.  
 
I just want to share now with the Assembly just a few 
comments about greenhouse gas emissions. According to the 
international panel on climate change, and this comes from the 
Environment Canada website: 
 

According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change, human-driven releases of GHG emissions disrupt 
the natural processes occurring in the atmosphere and are 
extremely likely to be the dominant cause of the observed 
warming that has occurred since the mid-20th century. 
Globally, almost 80% of GHG emissions from human 
sources come from the burning of fossil fuels and 
industrial processes. Specific activities include: driving 
vehicles, electricity production, heating and cooling of 
buildings, operation of appliances and equipment, 
production and transportation of goods, and provision of 
services and transportation for communities. In 2015, 
about 26% of Canada’s total GHG emissions came from 
the oil and gas sector, 24% from transportation, 11% from 
electricity generation and 12% from buildings. 

 
And one other statistic: 
 

Global GHG emissions grew approximately 51% between 
1990 and 2012 with the bulk of the growth occurring in 
developing countries. 

 
What are some of the key impacts of greenhouse gas emissions? 
Environmental impacts, I’ve talked about a few of those 
already. Human health impacts, I’ve also talked about a few of 
those. There are also serious economic impacts to greenhouse 
gas and global warming: 
 

Agriculture, forestry, and tourism and recreation . . . [will] 
be affected by changing weather patterns. 
 
Human health impacts are expected to place additional 
economic stress on health and social support systems. 
 
Damage to infrastructure (e.g., roads and bridges) caused 
by extreme weather events, thawing permafrost and rising 
sea levels is expected to increase . . . 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, you don’t have to look very far to see that 
damage to our infrastructure if you look at the flooding in the 
Quill lakes area, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[15:15] 
 
“Ways to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.” That’s what we’re 
really talking about here today is our global obligation as 
citizens of the planet to reduce our greenhouse gas emissions. 
“Addressing climate change requires action from everyone 
across all nations.” This is an international commitment, Mr. 



December 6, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3313 

Speaker. “Governments, businesses and individuals need to take 
significant steps to reduce emissions . . .” And I’ve said 
repeatedly, Mr. Speaker, that is the goal, is to reduce emissions. 
 
Now we’ve talked about this before, but the Conference Board 
of Canada spoke about, produced a report card last year in April 
of 2016. And how are we performing on our GHG emissions? 
Well, Mr. Speaker, not very well. One of the statistics they 
provided in terms of our rank relative to international peers, 
Saskatchewan got a D grade. Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, 
Alberta, and Saskatchewan are the lowest ranking provinces in 
terms of a grade on GHG emissions. And we’re among the 
worst ranked of all the countries that were surveyed. So that’s 
not a good place to be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Then they go on to compare us in Canada: “The emissions of 
most of Canada’s provinces fall within 10-20 tonnes of carbon 
dioxide [emitted] per capita.” And Quebec is top-ranked: “On 
the opposite side of the spectrum are Alberta and Saskatchewan 
with emission rates of nearly 70 tonnes of carbon dioxide 
[emitted] per capita.” So we are emitting a large amount of 
greenhouse gases here in Saskatchewan. And it goes on to tell 
us that: 
 

Most provincial and territorial emission rates were lower in 
2013 than in 1990. The only exceptions were 
Saskatchewan and the Northwest Territories, both of which 
had much higher per capita GHG emissions . . . 

 
So our record is not good at this point, Mr. Speaker. Much 
needs to be done, and there’s a lot of other things 
 
So I just want to talk for a couple minutes now about the Paris 
Agreement that was signed in 2015. There are a number of 
agreements. On the first page of the agreement — and I think I 
won’t read them all, Mr. Speaker, because it’s quite a long list 
— but it says we recognize “. . . the need for an effective and 
progressive response to the urgent threat of climate change on 
the basis of the best available scientific knowledge.” 
 
And it goes on to have a whole bunch of them, but 
acknowledging . . . Here’s an important one: 
 

Acknowledging that climate change is a common concern 
of humankind, Parties should, when taking action to 
address climate change, respect, promote and consider 
their respective obligations on human rights, the right to 
health, the rights of indigenous peoples, local communities, 
migrants, children, persons with disabilities and people in 
vulnerable situations and the right to development, as well 
as gender equality, empowerment of women and 
intergenerational equity. 

 
And there are several more very, very valuable statements of 
principle that are part of the Paris Agreement, Mr. Speaker. And 
I’ll talk to one clause here in a few minutes once I get into my 
further comments. 
 
So the essential elements of the Paris Agreement brings all 
nations into a common cause to undertake ambitious efforts to 
combat climate change. So this is about combatting climate 
change, Mr. Speaker. It’s about reducing emissions, greenhouse 
gas emissions. There are nationally determined contributions. 

They’re called NDCs. Canada has made a number of nationally 
determined contributions to the agreement, and we have agreed 
as a nation to put forward our best efforts through these 
nationally determined contributions and to strengthen these 
efforts in the years ahead. And this includes requirements of 
reporting on their emissions and on their implementation 
efforts. 
 
And so I just want to share one commentary from the 
NewClimate Institute about what the Paris Agreement means 
for global climate change mitigation: 
 

The language of the text regarding the purpose of the 
convention and the long term goal, has been a subject of 
. . . importance for Parties and observers in recent years, 
and was a major . . . point of the negotiations in Paris. 
 
. . . Significantly, [I’m skipping down a little bit] the final 
text includes reference to both of these key elements. The 
Paris Agreement recognises the 1.5oC goal without 
formalising this as the main objective of the Convention. 
The text changed from limiting temperature increase to a 
maximum of 2 . . . [per cent Celsius], to: “holding the 
increase in the global average temperature to well below 
2oC above pre-industrial levels and to pursue efforts to 
limit the temperature increase to 1.5oC.” The Paris 
Agreement also became the first international climate 
agreement to refer to the need for net-zero emissions by 
stating: “. . . to achieve a balance between anthropogenic 
emissions by sources and removals by sinks of greenhouse 
gases in the second half of this century.” 

 
The combination of 2oC, 1.5oC and the aim to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions to zero is a strong signal from 
the global community that will shift the benchmark against 
which countries and investors are expected to assess their 
development strategies and business plans. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, we know that investors and people who 
develop new businesses are looking carefully at this and that 
they’re looking forward to moving our economy into a 
post-climate change economy where we will see innovation and 
efforts being made to reduce emissions but also create jobs, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
There’s more I wanted to say on the Paris Agreement, Mr. 
Speaker, but I think the point is, is that as a member nation of 
the United Nations, as a member of the . . . a signatory to the 
Paris Agreement, we have an obligation as citizens of the 
world, as citizens of Canada, as citizens of Saskatchewan to do 
our part. We need to do our part, Mr. Speaker. And so what we 
see tabled recently by this government, I say is sadly lacking. It 
doesn’t meet the needs that we have agreed to and that this 
global climate change crisis is calling upon us to do. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in 1971 the influential environmental 
activist Wendell Berry published a book titled The Unforeseen 
Wilderness: An Essay on Kentucky’s Red River Gorge. Berry 
emphasized the desirability of preserving natural areas and 
adapting a long-range perspective about the environment. And 
here’s what he said: 
 

We can learn about it . . . from exceptional people of our 



3314 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2017 

own culture, and from other cultures less destructive than 
ours. I am speaking of the life of a man who knows that the 
world is not given by his fathers, but borrowed from his 
children; who has undertaken to cherish it and do it no 
damage, not because he is duty-bound, but because he 
loves the world and loves his children . . . 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think about my brand new grandson who 
was born in September, and I’m thinking about how his 
generation will judge us in terms of whether we acted or not. 
And I’m worried, Mr. Speaker, that we will be roundly 
condemned by his generation for not doing what we needed to 
do. And that, I think, is the beginning place for any discussion 
on reducing greenhouse gas emissions here in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re borrowing the land. We’re borrowing the 
water. We’re borrowing the air we breathe from our children 
and from future generations. And this is fundamental to the 
discussion we’re having today. And this is why we must 
address climate change, why we must reduce greenhouse gas 
emission, and why Saskatchewan needs a plan, a real plan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And it was with bated breath we waited for the government to 
finally lay out their plan to address carbon pollution. And we all 
know that we as a province need to take steps forward to 
address climate change, and we have been calling on the Sask 
Party to do this for years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every other province has a plan to protect 
themselves from the federal government’s carbon pricing 
scheme, but until now the Sask Party has refused to present a 
plan of their own. So it was good to hear the minister finally 
take to the microphone the other day. But what was really 
strange, Mr. Speaker, is that almost all of what we see in this 
plan is either very similar or exactly the same as the plan the 
Sask Party put out in 2009. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the minister used words like “broad” and 
“bold” and “innovative.” That’s not what we have. We have a 
rehash of what was tabled almost 10 years ago, Mr. Speaker, in 
2009. And unfortunately they passed the legislation through the 
House but it was never, ever, ever implemented and passed into 
law. 
 
Now it’s well documented that we have been calling on the 
government to take that first step and implement their own 
green tech fund, and we’re happy to see the green tech fund 
there in the new plan, Mr. Speaker. We’ll be looking forward to 
the legislation when it comes in and ensure that it actually 
meets targets. Oh wait a minute — they don’t have any targets 
anymore, Mr. Speaker. One of the things they had in 2009 was 
an actual target. Of course they reduced their target from their 
original proclamation when they came into government, but 
they actually had a target in 2009. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been critic for the 
Environment now for six years. I’ve been through a few 
Environment ministers and I’ve asked each one of them, I’ve 
asked each one of them whether or not they were going to meet 
that target. And we had the member from Willowgrove, the 
member from North Battleford, and a couple times the member 
from Weyburn, and a couple times the member from 

Shellbrook, and they were all saying, yes of course we’re going 
to meet those targets. We’re going to meet that target. They 
reduced it to 20 per cent of, I think, 2006 levels by 2020. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it hasn’t been reduced at all. There’s been 
absolutely no reduction in the amount of greenhouse gases that 
are being emitted. We’re still the highest in Canada. So, Mr. 
Speaker, what was that all about? And why isn’t there a target 
in this so-called plan? 
 
Now if we would have implemented the green tech fund back 
then which we wanted to see, the Conference Board of Canada, 
the Conference Board of Canada said that . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Oh, the minister from Martensville, I think, is 
getting all excited again, Mr. Speaker. It’s kind of funny when 
she gets wound up. She’s so worried about what the members 
of the opposition did. She should be more worried about her 
own government, Mr. Speaker. She should be worried about 
their ability to enact the laws that they brought in nine years 
ago, or eight years ago, Mr. Speaker. She’s certainly excited 
about it though. I can tell just by hearing her voice, Mr. 
Speaker, agitated I think, a little wound up. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, if that fund had been implemented, the 
Conference Board of Canada said it would have created 8,500 
jobs — new, green, progressive, modern jobs. And even if the 
opposition voted against it . . . She seems to be so concerned 
about that. Why didn’t she put it into law, Mr. Speaker? That’s 
the big question. As she knows, it’s kind of normal for 
opposition members to oppose, as is the role of opposition. But 
the role of government is to lead. The role of government is to 
lead, and somehow she thinks that because we may have 
opposed it, that she can’t actually put it into law is one of the 
most ridiculous positions I’ve ever heard any minister of this 
government put forward on the floor of this Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And so I don’t know why she’s so excited about it. But I do 
know why she’s no longer the Environment minister, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s because her cabinet didn’t support her in that bill. 
She signed a memorandum of agreement with Jim Prentice in 
2009 saying we’re going to move forward with a carbon pricing 
scheme. But her cabinet turned her down. Her backbenchers 
turned her down. And now we have no commitment whatsoever 
from this government and this cabinet, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That fund would have made the biggest polluters pay for the 
pollution they caused. I’m happy to see it’s being reduced to 25 
000 tonnes. That’s definitely a positive aspect of the plan. But, 
Mr. Speaker, we know . . . And there actually are a couple of 
other things, I think, that are positive in that plan, and I do want 
to get that on the record, Mr. Speaker.  
 
The intention to deal with the methane emissions is critical and 
important, and I applaud that in the plan, Mr. Speaker. That’s an 
important point. Of course there’s no deadlines and no actual 
targets, but we are happy to see the 40 to 45 per cent reduction. 
But we’re not sure exactly when and how. So I think the 
minister has promised more of the plan as we go along, but 
right now we don’t have enough to know whether it’s going to 
be successful or not, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The other thing I think that’s really positive, and I think we’ve 



December 6, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3315 

been calling upon, is adopting national building standards and 
energy building standards. That’s critical in a particular 
province like ours where I know that there are houses in 
Saskatchewan — two in Saskatoon that I’ve been inside, Mr. 
Speaker — that don’t use any natural gas for heating or 
electricity. They have a heat exchange system, that there would 
be some electricity going into the heat exchanger, but they’re 
not using natural gas or any fossil fuels beyond running the 
pump. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s an incredible technology, passive house. 
And I think the energy building standards are positive steps. 
And we look forward to those changes that will bring those 
types of technologies to the building of our houses and our 
office buildings and all the construction here in Saskatchewan 
— long overdue but glad to see it coming. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Now we were pretty clear in our response to this the other day, 
Mr. Speaker, but the plan lacks substance. It lacks detail. It 
lacks a strong commitment to lowering emissions. And this is 
basically just a plan to plan, which is why I think, Mr. Speaker, 
our amendment is much stronger than supporting this plan right 
now. Because it’s not a plan; it’s a plan to plan. And there’s a 
big difference, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Too much is left undefined. There’s very little assurance. And I 
guess this is one of our biggest concerns: there’s very little 
assurance that this plan will protect us from a federal carbon 
tax, Mr. Speaker. We might end up with two forms of taxation; 
we’ll have this plan plus the federal carbon tax. And that’s 
concerning to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. Why would we 
double down on this? Why would we end up with a double 
taxation system because of their inability to come forward with 
one that’s going to keep us protected from a federal carbon tax, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
We’ve been clear all along. We don’t want a federal carbon tax. 
We don’t it imposed. We want a made-in-Saskatchewan 
solution, but we want a made-in-Saskatchewan solution that’s 
going to actually hold the federal government off, Mr. Speaker. 
And that’s the problem, Mr. Speaker. We don’t know whether 
we’re going to end up with double taxation here, and that’s a 
concern. That’s an absolute concern. 
 
I think the best way to help out is to go back to the drawing 
board, accept our amendment which is a much better motion 
than the motion that’s been tabled. And I think that’s definitely 
what we need to do, is ask everyone to support the amendment 
which is much stronger and much better. Already the member 
from Meadow Lake is saying, it’s not going to happen. I’m 
disappointed, Mr. Speaker. I’m disappointed. But we’ll see 
what happens when the actual vote happens. 
 
There’s a lack of detail in the plan. And there’s no or little 
evidence of successful action on climate change from this 
government. Mr. Speaker, in 2009, Premier Wall . . . oh, the 
Premier of this province, excuse me, set a target to achieve a 20 
per cent reduction in greenhouse gas emissions below 2006 
levels by 2020. Not only has this target not been achieved, but 
provincial emissions have actually gone up during the time he’s 
been in office. 

And we have to talk about the Go Green Fund. The $60 million 
in the Go Green Fund spending that the plan references was all 
money set aside by Premier Lorne Calvert in 2007. He had 
originally committed 320 million, but when the Sask Party were 
elected, they renamed the fund and reduced it to 60 million. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as I said the other day, for years on this side of 
the House on this issue . . . on that side of the House, I’m sorry. 
On this issue, their rhetoric has been incredibly forceful, but 
their plan has been non-existent. And despite their fancy 
announcements and their bluster in the House, I’m not sure that 
a whole lot has changed. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to urge all members of the 
Assembly to not vote in favour of the motion which is weak. 
And the plan is not a plan; it’s a plan to plan. Take the time 
today to think seriously about this. And I encourage you to 
support the motion that I propose right now, and I’m going to 
read it again into the record, Mr. Speaker. So I move the 
following amendment: 
 

That all words in the motion after “Assembly” be struck 
out and replaced with the following: 
 
Recognizes that we all borrow our future from our 
grandchildren; 
 
That this Assembly recognizes the importance of 
strengthening a diverse energy sector while reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions; 
 
That any plan supported by this Assembly must include 
targets; clear supports for Saskatchewan families, 
producers, and businesses; and assurances that 
Saskatchewan will be protected from a federally imposed 
carbon tax; and further, 
 
That this Assembly show leadership in reducing carbon 
emissions and gain credibility for our province when it 
comes to protecting the air we breathe, the water we drink, 
and the land we grow our food on. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana has 
forwarded a motion. We’ll take the motion as read. All those in 
favour of the amended motion say yea. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Yea. 
 
The Speaker: — All those opposed say nay. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 
 
The Speaker: — I think the nays have it. 
 
Now back to the main motion. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 



3316 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2017 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Call in the members. 
 
[The division bells rang from 15:35 until 15:37.] 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is: 
 

That this Assembly support the made-in-Saskatchewan 
climate change plan, entitled Prairie Resilience: A 
Made-in-Saskatchewan Climate Change Strategy; and 
 
That this Assembly affirms that the strategy recognizes the 
importance of our resource-based economy, will reduce 
emissions, and help Saskatchewan communities mitigate 
and adapt to climate change. 

 
All those in favour of the motion please stand. 
 

[Yeas — 42] 
 
Wall Heppner Makowsky 
Stewart Reiter Morgan 
Harpauer Duncan Cox 
Marit Hargrave D’Autremont 
Docherty Merriman Doke 
Bonk Tell Eyre 
Brkich Harrison Ottenbreit 
Ross Weekes Kirsch 
Steinley Nerlien Carr 
Lawrence Wilson Young 
Michelson Doherty Lambert 
Beaudry-Mellor Moe Wyant 
Dennis Kaeding Steele 
Fiaz Cheveldayoff Olauson 
 
 
The Speaker: — All those opposed to the motion please stand. 
 

[Nays — 11] 
 

Sarauer Chartier Belanger 
Sproule Forbes Rancourt 
Mowat McCall Beck 
Meili Wotherspoon  
 
Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 42; those 
opposed, 11. 
 
The Speaker: — With resilience, I declare the motion carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Committee of 
Finance. 
 
The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Supply 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’d ask now for the Committee of 

Finance to come to order. The business before the committee is 
a resolution. I call the minister to move her resolution. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I move the following resolution: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31st, 
2018, the sum of $117,580,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 
 

The Deputy Chair: — The Minister of Finance has moved 
resolution no. 1: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31st, 
2018, the sum of $117,580,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the committee to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of 
Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I move that the committee rise and 
that the Chair report that the committee has agreed to the 
resolution, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Finance that the committee rise and that the Chair report that 
the committee has agreed to a resolution, and ask for leave to sit 
again. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Carried. 
 
[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, the Committee of Finance has 
agreed to a certain resolution, has instructed me to report the 
same, and to ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the resolution be read the first 
time? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I move that the resolution be now read 
the first and second time. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 



December 6, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3317 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 
reading of the resolutions. 
 
[15:45] 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. I recognize the Minister of 
Finance. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 

Bill No. 117 — The Appropriation Act, 2017 (No. 2) 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I move that Bill No. 117, The 
Appropriation Act, 2017 (No. 2) be now introduced and read the 
first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved Bill No. 
117 be now introduced and read the first time. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I request leave, and pursuant to rule 
32(1)(e) I request that Bill No. 117, The Appropriation Act, 
2017 (No. 2) be now read a second and third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has asked for leave 
to move second and third reading on Bill 117. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I move that Bill No. 117, The 
Appropriation Act, 2017 (No. 2) be now read a second and third 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is Bill No. 
117 be now read a second and third time. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second and third 
reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you. And, Mr. Speaker, I move 

this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that this Assembly do now 
adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly now stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 15:46.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3295 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3295 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3295 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3295 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3295 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3295 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3295 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Dennis ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3296 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3296 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3296 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3296 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3297 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3297 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3298 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3298 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3298 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3298 
 Moose Jaw Times-Herald Closing Its Doors 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3298 
 Teen Challenge Women’s Centre Under Construction 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3299 
 Lumsden Devils Win Provincial Championship 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3299 
 Teacher and Coach Retires After 30-Year Career 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3299 
 Saskatoon’s Business Tax Climate Named Most Competitive 
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3300 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Global Transportation Hub 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3300 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3300 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3300 
 Supports for Students With Autism 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3301 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3301 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3302 
 Control of Drainage Projects 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3302 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3302 
 Provision of Health Services to Rural Communities 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3303 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3303 
 Government Meetings With Municipalities 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3304 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3304 
 Taxation of Properties in Provincial Parks 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3304 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 3304 
 Changes to Federal Employment Insurance Legislation 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3304 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3304 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 116 — The Saskatchewan Employment (Interpersonal Violence Leave) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3304 
 Bill No. 608 — The Residential Schools and Sixties Scoop Survivors Memorial Day Act 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3307 
 
 



 

SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 116 — The Saskatchewan Employment (Interpersonal Violence Leave) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3305 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3305 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ON BILLS 
 Bill No. 116 — The Saskatchewan Employment (Interpersonal Violence Leave) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3306 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 116 — The Saskatchewan Employment (Interpersonal Violence Leave) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3307 
BILL WITHDRAWN 
 Bill No. 605 — The Saskatchewan Employment (Support for Survivors of Domestic Violence) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3307 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3308 
 Standing Committee on House Services 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3308 
 Standing Committee on Human Services 
  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3308 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 Lawrence ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3308 
GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 Support for a Made-in-Saskatchewan Climate Change Plan 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3308 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3311 
 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 3316 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 Motions for Supply 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3316 
FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF RESOLUTIONS 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3316 
APPROPRIATION BILL 
 Bill No. 117 — The Appropriation Act, 2017 (No. 2) 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3317 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

 
Hon. Steven Bonk 

Minister of the Economy 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 
Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Larry Doke 
Minister of Government Relations  

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 
Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Nancy Heppner 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Gene Makowsky 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  
and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 


