


















































November 29, 2017 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 20A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 29, 2017, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Nicole Sarauer 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Hon. Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Hon. Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 
Vacancies — Kindersley, Melfort 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 47; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 2 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3177 
 November 29, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
in your gallery today, and I introduce to you and through you to 
all members, seated in your gallery Ms. Gayleen Creelman. 
Gayleen is the program director for the Electronic Products 
Recycling Association of Saskatchewan, or EPRA. EPRA’s 
helped support the province’s goal of keeping electronic 
devices from our landfills, ensuring the devices are responsibly 
recycled, and returning the valuable resources such as plastics, 
metals, and glass to the manufacturing supply chain to be made 
into new products. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year marks the 10th year that EPRA has 
operated the electronic recycling program in this province. We 
look forward to continuing to work with EPRA as we introduce 
regulations to expand the electronic product recycling program. 
And I would ask all members to join with me in welcoming Ms. 
Creelman to her Legislative Assembly and congratulate EPRA 
on 10 years of operation in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition, I would like to rise and join the minister in 
welcoming Gayleen to her Legislative Assembly. And again 
congratulations to EPRA for the fantastic work over the last 10 
years. We know this is a growing industry, Mr. Speaker, and 
there’s a growing need to divert from our landfills, so this is 
important work for the people of Saskatchewan. And on behalf 
of the official opposition, I would like to ask all members to 
welcome Gayleen to her Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, I would like to 
introduce Doug Page and BJ Arnold. They’re way up at the top 
of the west gallery. They are from TransCanada, and I would 
like to thank them for their dedication and hard work trying to 
get pipelines built. I know that there is ongoing opposition to 
that cause, but as all members in this House will know, on this 
side of the House we are incredibly supportive of pipelines to 
help get our oil and gas to market, Mr. Speaker. So I’d ask all of 
my colleagues on both sides of the House to welcome them 
here. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join 

with the minister opposite to welcome these gentlemen with as 
much enthusiasm for the work that you do . . . [inaudible] . . . 
how important pipelines are for getting our products to 
tidewater. And so on behalf of the official opposition, we’re 
very happy to join with the government in welcoming these two 
gentlemen to our Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Bonk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Seated in your 
gallery today, I’d like to introduce Dauren Matakbayev. He’s 
the CEO [chief executive officer] of the Kazakhstan Hereford 
Association, and I’d like to thank him for bringing a delegation 
of Kazakh farmers to Agribition to see some of the top 
world-class genetics that we have here.  
 
I’ve known Dauren for quite a few years. We worked together 
in Kazakhstan exporting Saskatchewan cattle to that country. I 
would like to say Dobro Poźhalavat and welcome to 
Saskatchewan, and I’d like to have all members join me in 
helping to welcome him to Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave for an 
extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with the 
minister in welcoming Mr. Matakbayev to our Legislative 
Assembly here, on behalf of the official opposition. My Kazakh 
is not quite as good as the minister’s, but I do wish to extend a 
hearty welcome to him. And I wish that his time at Agribition, I 
hope that it was a valuable experience for him and for his 
delegation. 
 
So on behalf of the opposition, I would like to invite this 
important guest and the CEO of the Hereford Association to our 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, Ralph Katzman who’s sitting at the rear on this side. 
Mr. Katzman was the MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] for Rosthern between 1982 and 1986. 
 
The current member for Rosthern came up to me and said, I 
hope you don’t draw any comparisons. I am working to try and 
get re-elected. So to both of them, I wish them well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Katzman is very active in Saskatoon: a 
member of the Jewish community, and does a great deal of 
volunteer work for cemeteries, been a volunteer for the Blades. 
And not wanting to compare ages or anything else, he was a 



3178 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2017 

friend of my father’s who passed away some years ago. 
 
He is in Regina today for the Saskatchewan Order of Merit 
proceedings this evening where his sister will be recognized, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For the second half of 
my introduction, I’d like to welcome a number of guests seated 
in your gallery. Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, some 
guests who I will be referencing later in a member’s statement, 
but I wanted to take the opportunity to welcome each of them 
individually. In the gallery today with us, we have Bill and Bev 
O’Shea. They are the driving force behind North Central Kids 
Music, an after-school program for children, an opportunity to 
engage with music and to share their gifts. And thank you for 
sharing your gifts with so many children. 
 
Also seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, is Mr. Errol Kinistino. 
Some of you may recognize him from roles on television, a 
celebrated actor and singer, instructor, and volunteer in our 
community. And I want to welcome him and thank him for his 
work. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Gary Robins, someone who is 
well known in the Cathedral area, a photographer, instructor, 
and one of the driving forces behind Playing for Change. And I 
invite all members today to welcome these important guests to 
your gallery. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the current member from 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Moe: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I want 
to join the Attorney General in welcoming Mr. Ralph Katzman 
to his Legislative Assembly. We were just chatting here, Mr. 
Speaker, with respect to what we agree on being the very best 
constituency in Saskatchewan, being that of Rosthern and now 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. And I think the late father of the current 
member of Martensville may agree with Ralph and I. 
 
And we were chatting about, Mr. Speaker, we didn’t think that 
it had ever been represented, that community had ever been 
represented by a New Democrat. But we think through 
redistribution, possibly at one time for a short period of time 
there was a New Democrat representing the community, but the 
members there quickly changed that when they had the 
opportunity to go to the polls, Mr. Speaker. So I would like to 
join with the Attorney General in welcoming Mr. Katzman to 
his Legislative Assembly and ask all members to do so. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you and all 
members of the Assembly, I would like to welcome 34 very 
bright and enthusiastic grade 10 students from Melville 
Comprehensive. They are accompanied today by their teacher, 
Andy Rondeau, who was here two weeks ago as a member of 
the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Institute. He’s also a Melville city 
councillor. 

And accompanying him today is the intern, Ms. Jordyn Leib, 
who is from Balcarres, the member from Touchwood Last 
Mountain’s constituency. And I would encourage all members 
to welcome Melville Comp and Andy Rondeau and Jordyn Leib 
to their Legislative Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition to end the unfair tax hike, the Sask 
Party tax hikes for Saskatchewan families and businesses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that the Sask Party has 
hiked taxes on Saskatchewan families and businesses to the 
tune of a billion dollars a year, Mr. Speaker. They point out that 
the Sask Party increased PST [provincial sales tax] to 6 per cent 
and applied it everything from groceries and children’s clothes 
to a case of beer and even insurance premiums. The insurance 
premiums, I’ve heard loud and clear in my office actually, as 
the Health critic. I’ve had many people, particularly seniors, 
come into my office and talk about the concerns they have with 
paying the 6 per cent on health insurance, Mr. Speaker, to try to 
ensure that they have coverage for ambulance or prescriptions 
or needed services like physiotherapy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This PST hike has real . . . not just the hike, but adding it to 
insurance premiums has real costs for families, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ve become the only province — because of this Sask Party 
— in the country where people are charged PST on life and 
health insurance premiums. 
 
The petitioners also point out that many small and 
medium-sized businesses, including those in the restaurant, 
tourism, and construction industries, have been hit hard by the 
Sask Party tax hikes, and these businesses will be forced to pass 
these rising costs on to their customers. I’d like to read the 
prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Sask Party to immediately stop their unfair tax hikes on 
Saskatchewan families and businesses. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Pilot Butte. I 
so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I do like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. 

 



November 29, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3179 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Osage. Thank 
you. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
proud to stand in my place to present a petition to ask the 
question of who is in charge of our provincial highways. And, 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is on the permanent closure of Main 
Street access to Highway No. 1 in the town of Balgonie. And 
the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Take the necessary steps and actions to leave the west-in 
and west-out driving access for vehicles into and out of 
Balgonie at the intersection of Highway No. 1 and Main 
Street. 
 
They also respectfully request that the Government of 
Saskatchewan put up a locked gate on the apron between 
the eastbound lanes and westbound lanes of Highway 
No. 1 and Balgonie’s Main Street intersection. This gate 
obviously would allow emergency services access to the 
eastbound lanes of Highway No. 1 at the Main Street, 
Balgonie intersection, but would not allow public access to 
cross east- and westbound lanes, [Mr. Speaker]. 

 
And the people that have signed this petition as we stand day 
after day presenting page after page after page of petition, and 
not just from Balgonie, Mr. Speaker, but from all throughout 
the area, and the people that have signed this particular petition 
are from Pilot Butte; they’re from Regina; of course they’re 
from Balgonie; they’re from Craven. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition calling for critical supports for survivors of 
domestic violence. Those individuals who signed this petition 
today wish to bring to our attention Saskatchewan has the 
highest rate of domestic violence amongst provinces.  
 
Employers should be obligated to reasonably accommodate 
survivors of domestic violence in the workplace. Employees 
who are survivors of domestic violence should be able to take a 
leave of absence from their employment without penalty, and 
Saskatchewan must do much more to protect survivors of 
domestic violence. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Legislative Assembly to pass legislation providing critical 
support for survivors of domestic violence. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is what we’ve called for in our private 
member’s bill, Bill No. 605. We’re hopeful that the Minister of 
Justice and his entire caucus will take on that bill and pass it 
into law or table a similar government bill. We don’t care how 
it gets passed into law as long as it gets passed into law, Mr. 
Speaker, and preferably within the next few days here as we 
only have a few number of sitting days left before the new year. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition today 
come from Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I’m rising today to present a 
petition to the Minister of the Environment and the Minister 
Responsible for the Water Security Agency of Saskatchewan. 
The people who have signed this petition would like to bring to 
our attention the following: to reduce inflows in the Quill lakes, 
the Quill lakes water association is proposing the phrase 1 
Common Ground Drainage Diversion Project that would drain 
saline water from Kutawagan and Pel Lakes into Last Mountain 
Lake and thereby the rest of the Qu’Appelle Valley river chain 
of lakes. 
 
The Water Security Agency, despite their commitment to do so, 
has yet to close a single illegal drain flowing into the Quill 
lakes watershed as promised. The Minister of the Environment 
has reviewed the documents put forth by the proponent and 
determined that the project is not a “development” under The 
Environmental Assessment Act. There is, however, widespread 
public concern regarding this drainage diversion because the 
potential environmental changes then have an effect on unique, 
rare, and endangered feature of the environment. 
 
[13:45] 
 
So I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Minister of Environment and the Minister 
Responsible for the Water Security Agency of 
Saskatchewan publicly release all documents used to make 
the determination under The Environmental Assessment 
Act; deem the Common Ground Drainage Diversion 
Project a development and therefore initiate a full 
environmental assessment of the project, including public 
and First Nations consultations; and refuse to issue any 
permits or licences nor fund any activities under the 
Common Ground Drainage Diversion Project proposal 
until a comprehensive, impartial environmental impact 
assessment and public and indigenous consultations are 
completed. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals who have signed this particular 
petition are from the city of Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition calling on the government to stop the cuts to our kids’ 
classrooms. And we know that the Sask Party has cut at least 
$674 in government funding for every student across 
Saskatchewan. And as well, the Sask Party has hiked education 
taxes by $67 million, but cut government funding for education 
by $121 million; and even though the Sask Party is making us 
all pay more, our kids are actually getting far less. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 



3180 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2017 

We, the undersigned, call upon the government to reverse 
the senseless cuts to our kids’ classrooms and to stop 
making families, teachers, and everyone who works to 
support our education pay the price for the Sask Party’s 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste. 

 
I do so present. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to stand 
in my place today to present a petition for a second bridge for 
Prince Albert. The individuals that signed this petition wish to 
bring to your attention the following: that the Diefenbaker 
bridge in Prince Albert is the primary link that connects the 
southern part of the province to the North; and that the need for 
a second bridge for Prince Albert has never been clearer than it 
is today. 
 
Prince Albert, communities north of Prince Albert, and 
businesses that send people and products through Prince Albert 
require a solution; that local municipal governments have 
limited resources and require a second bridge to be funded 
through federal and provincial governments and not a P3 
[public-private partnership] model; and that the Saskatchewan 
Party government refuses to stand up for Prince Albert and this 
critical infrastructure issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan ask that the 
Saskatchewan Party government stop stalling, hiding 
behind rhetoric, and refusing to listen to the people calling 
for action, and begin immediately to plan and then quickly 
commence the construction of a second bridge for Prince 
Albert using federal and provincial dollars. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing this particular petition 
come from Prince Albert. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition calling for the reopening of the Buffalo 
Narrows Correctional Centre. 
 
In the prayer that reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan immediately reopen the 
Buffalo Narrows Correctional Centre to better our 
community for generations to come. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by citizens from 
the good community of Buffalo Narrows. I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Regina Group Raises Funds for Music Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past September, 
Saskatchewan musicians, dancers, and music lovers joined 
together for the sixth straight year in Regina to make a 
difference in the lives of young people in Saskatchewan and 
around the world. 
 
I want to acknowledge the commitment of the Regina 
non-profit Blue Sky Cultural Connections which partners with 
the international Playing for Change Foundation to raise funds 
for music education for youth across Saskatchewan and around 
the globe. Blue Sky Cultural Connections is a remarkable 
partnership that brings together dozens and dozens of local 
performers, artists, businesses, and other organizations. In 
addition to the annual 10-hour concert on Playing for Change 
Day, the group has recently joined with the Regina Public 
Library on the annual film festival and showcased local 
performers in the big tent at the Cathedral Village Arts Festival. 
 
Over the past six years, Blue Sky has distributed over $26,000 
for music education projects — half to Saskatchewan 
organizations, and half to support Playing for Change’s 15 
music schools in Asia, Africa, South America, and Mexico. 
 
In Saskatchewan we pride ourselves on our sense of community 
and community building, and on our willingness to engage 
culturally with people around the world. Music education plays 
an integral role in the social-intellectual development of young 
people, enhancing teamwork, collaboration, self-confidence, 
and the joy of creativity. 
 
Playing for Change Saskatchewan, as part of a unique 
grassroots cultural organization, is proud to facilitate the links 
and partnerships that showcase the power of music on both a 
regional and international level. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
recognize the positive cultural role that Playing for Change and 
Blue Sky Cultural Connections brings to our province and to 
our communities, and thank our special guests for joining us 
today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Recycling Association Celebrates 10th Anniversary 
in Saskatchewan 

 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. 2017 marks 
the 10th anniversary of operations for Electronic Products 
Recycling Association in Saskatchewan. As a recognized 
industry-led, not-for-profit organization, Electronic Products 
Recycling Association Saskatchewan provides environmental 
compliance programs for manufacturers, distributors, and 
retailers of electronics. 
 
Last year, more than 2500 tonnes of electronics and 
approximately 38,000 devices were diverted from 
Saskatchewan’s landfill through the program. The program 
manages the collection by way of 88 drop-off locations 
throughout the province. 
 
Saskatchewan has played a key role in electronics recycling. In 
fact, we started North America’s first industry-led extended 



November 29, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3181 

producer responsibility program for recycling electronic devices 
in 2007. 
 
We are pleased to celebrate the 10th year of the program in 
2017, with more than 27 000 metric tonnes of electronic devices 
diverted from our landfills during that time. Today we are 
announcing the expanded list of electronic products that will be 
accepted for recycling in our province, starting in May of 2018. 
Thanks to consultations with stakeholders across the province 
and to the commitment and support from Electronic Products 
Recycling Association, our government amended regulations to 
offer more recycling options to the people of Saskatchewan, 
who are already among the most dedicated recyclers in Canada, 
Mr. Speaker.  
 
I’d like to thank the Electronic Products Recycling Association 
and retailers and all recyclers for their support. Congratulations 
to EPRA on 10 years of operations in our province. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Code of Silence Award 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to say I’m very proud to rise in the House today to 
recognize an award given this week to the Government of 
Saskatchewan. No drum roll? However, this might be an award 
that the Saskatchewan Party government probably won’t want 
to be patting themselves on the back for. And I’m afraid that the 
wine and cheese reception may have to wait. 
 
The Canadian Association of Journalists have chosen the 
Saskatchewan Ministry of Highways and Infrastructure as their 
2017 recipient of the Code of Silence Award for outstanding 
achievement in government secrecy in the category of 
provincial government ministries. In their rationale for 
presenting Saskatchewan Highways and Infrastructure with this 
prestigious award, CAJ [Canadian Association of Journalists] 
cited repeated attempts by the CBC [Canadian Broadcast 
Corporation] in Saskatchewan to shed light on the Sask Party’s 
GTH [Global Transportation Hub] scandal. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we know that the scandal is bad enough on 
its own, but the Sask Party used every means possible to 
prevent the information from emerging, blocking frequent 
attempts to access for information. And, Mr. Speaker, if the 
Sask Party does want to celebrate this honour, then I might 
suggest a reception at the Balgonie Diner so long as they don’t 
get stuck in the roundabout on their way there. 
 
In the end, perhaps the Saskatchewan Information and Privacy 
Commissioner said it best: “I have no choice but to conclude 
that Highways is not able to manage its freedom of information 
process properly.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of all members and concerned citizens 
and journalists across this country, I’d like to congratulate the 
Sask Party for this award, and sincerely hope that they can take 
steps to never . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Next statement. I recognize the member from 
Regina Northeast. 
 

Partnerships Support Housing Initiatives  
 
Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to rise and inform members of this House that as of 
November 27th, 10 more Habitat for Humanity partner families 
can call Haultain Crossing in Regina their home. 
 
Since 2009 our government has invested $9.85 million with 
Habitat for Humanity to develop 172 units in 14 communities 
across Saskatchewan. In Regina alone, Mr. Speaker, our 
investment with Habitat for Humanity is $4.04 million to 
develop more than 67 homes. Province-wide, our government 
has invested over $770 million to develop 11,641 homeowner 
and rental units and repair 4,330 units across the province.  
 
Mr. Speaker, through this funding, we are enabling 
Saskatchewan families to focus on their future. I am proud that 
our government, together with our federal partner, Canada 
Mortgage and Housing Corporation, contributed $550,000 to 
help complete this portion of Haultain Crossing. 
 
I want to thank the federal government for supporting housing 
initiatives throughout the province, and the city of Regina for 
their contribution in making these homes a reality. I’d also like 
to acknowledge, Mr. Speaker, the support of Mountie House, 
Farm Credit Canada, CJME, Doors, Habitat ReStore, Women’s 
Build, Men’s Build, the Square Foot campaign, and the Trades 
and Skills Construction Apprenticeship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these partnerships are vital to these projects, and 
we appreciate all those who help us continue to work towards 
improving the lives of our fellow citizens. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Saskatchewan Roughriders and Football Saskatchewan 
Honour Principal 

 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, earlier 
this fall the Saskatchewan Roughriders football club and 
Football Saskatchewan recognized the contributions made to 
amateur football by individuals in their communities. 
 
This year they honoured three individuals who have contributed 
many years of service to amateur football in Saskatchewan. One 
of these individuals is a constituent of mine, Reg Leidl from 
Esterhazy. Mr. Leidl is the principal and physical education 
teacher at Macdonald School in Stockholm. Mr. Leidl has 
taught for over 36 years and has served as principal for 25 
years, mainly in Esterhazy and now in Stockholm. 
 
During this time Mr. Leidl was also the head coach of the 
football team at Esterhazy High School from 2000 to 2016. For 
three years, my son Matthew was part of his senior football 
program and claims that he was made a better person for it. In 
this role, he was able to create a successful football program for 
all interested in football throughout the Esterhazy area. He had 
many players coming from communities around Churchbridge, 
Langenburg, Saltcoats, Wapella, and Whitewood, as well as 
Esterhazy. Mr. Speaker, Reg’s motto was that no kid would be 
left behind. Mr. Speaker, he also founded the junior football 



3182 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2017 

program in Esterhazy, giving an opportunity for younger 
players to develop their skills. He has created a football legacy 
that has now been carried on by many of his football alumni. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of everyone in this Assembly, I would 
like to congratulate Mr. Leidl on being celebrated by the 
Saskatchewan Roughriders and Football Saskatchewan, and for 
all his contributions to football in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 

Opening of Housing Units for Families  
With Complex Needs 

 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On November 17th I had 
the great opportunity to celebrate the opening of Silver Sage 
Holdings Ltd. opening of 14 units for families. Mr. Speaker, 
these units will improve the quality of life for those living in 
them. I would like to thank Foxvalley Counselling and Silver 
Sage Holdings for their vision and commitment to these units. 
Creating homes that work for families with complex needs with 
access to support will assist these families to a bright future in a 
safe environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, along 
with their federal housing partners, contributed $1.3 million to 
help fund this project. I would like to thank the city of Regina 
for being a key partner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government believes that housing is 
fundamental to keep Saskatchewan strong, and housing projects 
such as this will help achieve that goal, leading families along 
the path to success. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is the province 
for all, and I am encouraged to see so many people come 
together along with our government to help make a difference.  
 
Mr. Speaker, I now ask all members to join me in celebrating 
the opening of 14 units for families with complex needs. Thank 
you very much. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 
Resources. 
 

New Elementary Schools Open in Warman 
 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 
to rise yet again to talk about even more schools that are new in 
my constituency. Two new elementary schools are now open in 
Warman. Traditions Elementary School and Holy Trinity 
Catholic School are well into their new school year and a part 
of this government’s joint-use school projects. I’d like to 
congratulate the school divisions for coming together to make 
these schools a reality. The P3 model, which continues to be 
criticized by the members opposite, has in fact saved millions of 
dollars and saw these schools being built on time and on 
budget. 
 
I want to thank parents and community members for coming 
together to establish Catholic education in both Warman and 
Martensville. Having diverse education options will benefit 
these communities, and I’m sure students are excited to have 

these new learning spaces in their neighbourhoods. Between the 
two schools, there are 28 classrooms; three gymnasiums, 
including a large shared gym and stage; two band rooms; 
libraries; a community resource space; and, Mr. Speaker, a 
90-space childcare centre. 
 
Our track record speaks for itself. Since 2007 this government 
has worked tirelessly to open more doors in education, 
committing $1.5 billion towards 67 major capital projects, as 
well as various smaller projects. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now ask all members to please join me in 
thanking the builders, educators, and communities that came 
together to get these schools built. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Access to Reproductive Health Services  
and Members’ Views on Abortion 

 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, before we get into the issues of 
the day, there is some clarity that the people of Saskatchewan 
need because the Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote 
Health has refused to answer direct questions from us or the 
media. 
 
That is a minister who, this year, attended an anti-choice rally 
and encouraged those in attendance to keep protesting his own 
government’s position. He said that the protestors were 
“changing hearts and minds.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, we understand and respect that members hold 
personal views on this and many issues. That is not what this is 
about. As elected representatives, we are called upon to put 
those personal feelings aside and do what is best for the 
province, and at a minimum, what is required by the Supreme 
Court. That is all we are asking of the minister. 
 
So again, can the Minister of Rural and Remote Health assure 
all Saskatchewan people that he is committed to working to 
improve equitable access to health care throughout 
Saskatchewan, including women’s reproductive health services 
across the province? 
 
The Speaker: — I’d like to thank the members for respectfully 
listening to the question. Now let’s be respectful and listen to 
the answer. I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I absolutely went out 
and talked to members at that rally back in May because we 
represent all people, Mr. Speaker. We’re here to represent all. 
Probably half or more of my constituency is pro-life, and 
probably half or around that number is not pro-life. I represent 
everybody equally, Mr. Speaker. As a pro-life member, as a 
pro-life person, I have my own views. But as an MLA and a 
minister, I’m here to represent the government. I’m here to 
represent the laws of the land. I totally recognize the 1988 
Supreme Court decision. I totally recognize the Canada Health 
Act. We’re here to uphold that, and I feel I can do that, Mr. 
Speaker. 



November 29, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3183 

And you know, just by the nature of the questions that I’ve been 
getting across the floor . . . I’m happy to answer these 
questions. I’m happy to talk about these issues anytime. But by 
the insinuations of the members opposite, by their insinuations 
against me, by their own questions, they would think that their 
own leadership candidate, as a doctor, wouldn’t be qualified to 
be the premier, would-be premier, or maybe not even their own 
Health minister, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

State of Provincial Finances 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank 
the minister for finally getting on his feet and answering that 
question. 
 
I will move on to the province’s finances now. The Sask Party 
are busy trying to put some lipstick on this pig of a budget and 
they’re saying they’re on track, but let me remind you that 
means $650 million in the hole. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
contingency fund is all gone. But the Minister of Finance 
doesn’t seem to care that they’re adding even more debt to 
future generations. She said, and I quote, “Keeping the finances 
more stable is a discussion for another day.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the Premier agree with the Finance minister’s 
comments, or would he agree with me and us that managing our 
finances responsibly should be the focus of every single day 
and should not hang in the balance based on the Sask Party’s 
own leadership race? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I think anybody following 
politics in the last couple of years would be shocked at the 
thought that the NDP’s [New Democratic Party] approach to 
budgeting is anything but reasonable and responsible. Because 
every single day in this session, they’ll get up and ask for more 
money to be spent or ask for some tax adjustment to be 
changed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m happy, Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to report to the House, to 
confirm the report that our three-year plan to balance is on 
track, that the deficit target for this year is on track, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m happy to report that the economic forecast for the 
province of Saskatchewan is strong for next year. 
 
It’s true we’ve taken a different approach than their cousins in 
Alberta, Mr. Speaker. Interesting that she would ask this 
question on this day when the Dominion Bond Rating agency 
has weighed in on the NDP’s approach to a similar problem in 
the province next door. Mr. Speaker, DBRS [Dominion Bond 
Rating Service Ltd.] has maintained the negative trend. In fact 
their headline of the press release was called, for Alberta’s 
NDP, “All trends negative.” They say that they “maintained the 
negative trend because the province has yet [the Alberta NDP 
has yet] to demonstrate any real willingness to address the 
weakest budget outlook among all the provinces . . .” Mr. 
Speaker, they point out that there is not a plan next door 
because they’re following . . . By the way, the NDP in Alberta 
are following the same approach as these folks over here. 
There’s no plan to get to balance, Mr. Speaker, notwithstanding 

resource revenue changes. 
 
We’ve taken a different approach. We have a AAA credit rating 
in the province of Saskatchewan and our plan’s on track. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I get a kick hearing from 
the Premier here, the Premier that couldn’t balance the budget 
during the best days, making noise about next door. And of 
course the Premier, you know, he spins well but, you know, that 
doesn’t take away anything from his reckless and damaging 
record as Premier when it comes to the finances or what his 
Finance minister said today. She said that she’ll worry about 
stable finances another day, another day, Mr. Speaker. Well it’s 
been the story of this Premier, year after year after year. Mr. 
Speaker, while they hide the financial mess that they’ve created, 
they’re making things worse. 
 
Despite the Sask Party constantly putting their future into 
question and holding secret meetings to sell them off, our 
Crowns are making hundreds of millions of dollars this year, 
millions more than budgeted by the Sask Party. So will the 
Premier finally be true to his word and protect our Crowns? 
Will he scrap Bill 82 and take SaskEnergy off the auction 
block? And will he scrap all of Bill 40 to protect SaskTel and 
all of our other Crowns? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I find it 
interesting that they’re going to take one part of a sentence in an 
answer to obviously a reporter’s question. They’re going to use 
it to their advantage. And it probably had to do with a question 
that will be, you know, looked at into next year’s budget, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So it’s very typical of the NDP to torque their questions by 
using a few, a clip of words, inappropriately. That’s quite what 
we can expect from the NDP. The other thing that we can 
expect from the NDP is not to recognize when a budget’s on 
track. Another thing that we can expect from the NDP is not to 
understand when there is a plan. Why? Because they don’t have 
one now. They didn’t have one when they were in government. 
Their plan was to close schools. It was to close health care 
facilities, Mr. Speaker. Their plan was not to worry about 
finances, quite frankly, and right now their plan is just to 
continue to spend. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, either they don’t get it or 
they don’t care. And I think if you ask the folks, who are 
hard-working folks, at our Crown corporations and the public 
sector, they’ll give you an answer to that. They’re pretty clear 
which one it is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party tried to cut $250 million out of the 
hard-earned pay of Saskatchewan workers. They finally 
accepted that they can’t get away with this. The Premier says 
there’s no mandate, that it’s just a goal. This is no way to run a 



3184 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2017 

province. It’s no way to treat the hard-working people of this 
province. 
 
To the Premier: will he finally scrap his attack on the 
hard-working people who run this province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the resource revenues 
within our province, as that member well knows, is down $1.2 
billion. This has been a trend that’s now in its third year, Mr. 
Speaker. The previous Finance minister has spoken to this and 
said that we’re going to have to do things differently within this 
province, that we have to be less reliant on resource revenue, 
Mr. Speaker, unlike the NDP Alberta who are still hanging their 
hat on resource revenues. 
 
And it’s not faring well for them, Mr. Speaker. Over 7 billion of 
our budget is on compensation for our workers. They’re very 
valuable workers, Mr. Speaker. We want to work with them, 
and there’ll be collective bargaining that will take place at the 
table. But we have to look at, you know, savings within every 
part of our budget, Mr. Speaker, because we are going to 
balance within three years. 
 
We have a plan. That’s why we have the second-highest rating 
within our country and that’s why we have the second-lowest 
debt-to-GDP [gross domestic product] ratio. 
 
The Speaker: — Now I’ll recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Apologies to my colleague for standing up 
early, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this is the problem with that 
government. It’s their own mismanagement, scandal, and waste 
that put our whole province in this massive deficit. And it’s the 
Sask Party, not our natural resources, not the Saskatchewan 
people, who are doubling our entire debt in just five years. And 
yet they think it’s the rest of us who should be paying the price. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was $300 million in the contingency fund. 
It’s only November, and they’re finally admitting it’s already 
gone. This is the government that blew through record resource 
revenues. They blew through the rainy day fund, and they blew 
through the surpluses that were left for them. Now they’ve 
blown through their own contingency fund. 
 
The Finance minister has said, “Keeping the finances more 
sustainable is a discussion for another day.” Mr. Speaker, my 
question for her is: when will that day come for this 
government? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, again they’re using 
something totally out of context. Some of the questions had to 
do with the future budget in a press conference that was on the 
second quarter of this budget. So yes, there are discussions 
that’s going to go into the next budget. There should be, quite 
frankly. 
 
We have a three-year plan. It doesn’t end at this budget. And 
the interesting thing is, we have a three-year plan that has given 

this province a very good credit rating, Mr. Speaker. That fares 
well when we have to borrow money, Mr. Speaker. It fares well 
when there is industry and corporations looking for where to 
invest, Mr. Speaker. That fares well, Mr. Speaker, when people 
are moving to this province instead of leaving the province as 
they did in the past. Mr. Speaker, the member opposite should 
take a look at the three-year plan and then talk to her cousins 
next door and see what their plan looks like. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, governing was easy when the 
money was flowing in. But now that times are tough, they’re 
digging the hole deeper. The former Finance minister delivered 
the government’s budget, but that whole caucus is responsible 
for it. They spoke in favour of it and they all voted for it. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, before his colleagues threw him under the bus 
and started undoing what he dutifully presented, the former 
Finance minister was asked to justify some of his generous tax 
giveaways. And he said that he knew that some of his “caucus 
colleagues would benefit.” Last night I asked the current 
Finance minister which experts they had consulted and she said, 
and I quote, “. . . well I guess my answer would be people.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, how can the Finance minister still stand by a 
budget that hurt so many across the province when their 
justification for it is that they said they’d consulted with caucus 
colleagues and people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Wow. Mr. Speaker, that’s awesome. 
She just asked a question, she was asking questions to do with a 
bill concerning small business, change to the small-business 
threshold, and then is suggesting that that was a conversation 
about the second quarter. Mr. Speaker, that is how they distort 
their questions, the comments that are made. It is ridiculous. It’s 
irresponsible on their part to distort things in such a manner. 
 
However, I don’t apologize for consulting with people, Mr. 
Speaker. I don’t think anyone in our caucus is going to 
apologize because we consult with people and talk to our 
constituents. She needs to read it all into the record, Mr. 
Speaker. How we talk to businesses, how we talk to the 
chamber, how we talk to the Federation of Independent 
Business, Mr. Speaker, how we talk to the businesses within our 
constituencies and our constituents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was speaking specifically to the decrease to the 
personal income tax. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Land Acquisitions for Regina Bypass Project  
and Global Transportation Hub 

 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the wealthiest in our province are 
still getting an income tax cut. And their new tax giveaway for 
not-so-small businesses is not going to help the thousands of 
small businesses struggling to stay afloat. Mr. Speaker, the 



November 29, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3185 

former minister of Finance said that members of that caucus run 
businesses that will get their new tax cut but nowhere else in 
Canada would these companies be considered small businesses. 
 
And it’s being that out of touch, their focus on the wealthy and 
their well-connected friends, that has people so concerned with 
the Sask Party’s GTH scandal. And that’s why they’re 
concerned with who is getting richer with taxpayer dollars with 
the Regina bypass. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Now we already know that the land at the heart of the RCMP 
[Royal Canadian Mounted Police] investigation made $11 
million for two Sask Party supporters, but now they’re 
stonewalling on answers to other questions. Just before question 
period, they released a total amount, but that’s not the question 
that we were asking, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’m going to try this again. Can the minister provide the total 
amount that was paid out in lawsuits over land sales at the GTH 
and the bypass? Not the total amount of the purchase. We want 
to know about the lawsuits and how many of those who 
benefited have donated to the Sask Party. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Mr. Speaker, there is a process for 
Highways to acquire land through appropriation. The way we 
do it, expropriate the property, it’s no different than it’s been for 
the last 30 or 40 years. It’s the same process. We hire assessors 
to do the assessment on the property. If the landowner wishes to 
get a third party assessor, we do that. We put those values 
together. We come up with a value. 
 
If the process doesn’t work, that the expropriation process 
doesn’t work, there’s a mediation process that can work, Mr. 
Speaker. And at the end of the day, if the landowner isn’t happy 
with that process, there is the court. And at the end of the day, 
the court will decide the value of the land, not the government, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, there’s no wonder he’s being 
awarded an award for stonewalling. The question was, not a 
lesson, but how many dollars, taxpayers’ dollars have been paid 
out in lawsuits over the GTH and the bypass? That’s the simple 
question. Let’s get the answer. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Mr. Speaker, we made it public, the 
process that we went through. There was a total of 103 different 
landowners in the GTH, in the property. There’s about 190 
different properties, but 103 landowners, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
public document. 
 
The land acquisitions and the other compensations total roughly 
about $80 million. And in the budget that the GTH, that we 

used, it is well under that, and it’s well under that number, Mr. 
Speaker. So that’s where we’re at with the dollar numbers. It’s 
public. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Employment and Provincial Economy 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Mr. Speaker, today’s financial update showed 
more bad news for jobs in Saskatchewan. Revenue from income 
taxes is 110 million less than the government originally 
predicted. The minister has a lot of excuses, but let’s be clear: 
income tax revenue is down because there are more people 
unemployed in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, according to the latest numbers from Stats 
Canada, while EI [employment insurance] claims are decreasing 
in most parts of the country, the number of people in 
Saskatchewan making claims actually increased 6.7 per cent. 
That’s the second-highest increase in Canada, and the highest 
increase outside Atlantic Canada. Mr. Speaker, instead of 
making excuses and looking out for their friends, when will 
they step up, stimulate the economy, and start helping 
Saskatchewan people get back to work? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Bonk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I empathize with 
anyone who’s been impacted by a job loss. But low global 
commodity prices have had a real impact on our financial 
situation in the past few years. But despite these challenges, 
unemployment rate of 5.9 per cent is lower than the national 
average of 6.3 per cent nationwide. And we’re seeing 
improvements in these areas. Jobs in oil and gas are on the 
increase, Mr. Speaker. The industries with the largest gains in 
our economy, Mr. Speaker, are construction, transportation, 
warehousing. 
 
There are 64,400 more people working in Saskatchewan today 
than there ever was under the best days of the NDP, Mr. 
Speaker. We stand by our record of job creation compared to 
their job creation record of the worst, dead last, in Canada. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Mr. Speaker, they can’t take credit when job 
numbers are good but then point fingers when they drop the 
ball. The reality is when other provinces are creating jobs and 
sparking record growth, Saskatchewan people are losing their 
jobs and the Sask Party is letting our economy fall behind. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are 11,000 more people looking for work 
than a year ago. Across the province, we’ve lost jobs in the 
resource sector, in agriculture, in construction, and in the 
private sector. And the Finance minister said today that she 
wouldn’t rule out firing even more public sector workers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after seeing the numbers today, after all the 
evidence that their cuts, tax hikes, and sell-offs are costing 
Saskatchewan people jobs, when will the Sask Party finally 
start taking job losses seriously? And when will they finally 



3186 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2017 

come up with a plan to put Saskatchewan people back to work? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Bonk: — Mr. Speaker, thank you for . . . I thank the 
member opposite for that question. I am very proud to say, in 
Saskatchewan we have worked hard to create an atmosphere 
where everyone can thrive in this province. We keep our taxes 
low. We have incentives for our private businesses, who are the 
small businesses in this province, who are the drivers of our 
economy, who are the businesses that employ people in this 
province. We’ve had unprecedented job growth in this province 
over the last 10 years. 
 
If you look at the long-term trends in employment numbers in 
this province, it’s a far cry from the dark, dreary days of the 
NDP when people were fleeing this province and they had the 
worst job creation record in the nation. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Assistance for Cattle Producers 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As all members are 
aware, wildfires near Burstall, Leader, and Tompkins destroyed 
thousands of acres of land and claimed the lives of hundreds of 
cattle. The government has promised some funds, but it isn’t 
enough. And over a month later, producers are still waiting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, according to today’s financial update, agriculture 
expenses are down — almost $90 million less than expected, 
partly due to a reduction in crop insurance claims. Why won’t 
this government use some of this surplus to provide 
much-needed disaster relief to these producers? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
member for her question. The wildfires were a tragedy. There’s 
no question about that. And first of all, I extend my condolences 
to the family and friends of James Hargrave, who lost his life, 
and to those who were injured as well fighting the wildfires, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The livestock branch has put together a technical document on 
disposal recommendations and we’ve provided the five 
impacted RMs [rural municipality] with dollars, Mr. Speaker, to 
help with the disposal of dead stock. We’ve providing funding 
to the Saskatchewan Stock Growers Association, Mr. Speaker, 
in the amount of $100,000 to bolster their fund that they’re 
raising to help the victims of the wildfires. 
 
Mr. Speaker, AgriStability is available to those who have it, and 
a number of them may be able to trigger claims this year 
because of the losses in the wildfires from AgriStability, Mr. 
Speaker. And regular programs, agricultural programs are all 
available. 
 
And as the grassland recovers from the fires, Mr. Speaker, our 
experts in the ministry will be helping producers with grazing 
plans and monitoring the recovery of the grass. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — I thank the minister for that answer, Mr. Speaker, 
and share in the condolences and the sentiments expressed. 
 
But the reality is — we all know, and the minister knows this 
— that what has been provided for producers to this point is 
simply inadequate. We have producers who are looking to 
replace their herds, who are wondering how they’re going to 
come up with the dollars to feed their cattle over the winter, and 
to find pasture land to graze these cattle on in the long time. 
 
We have had a surplus in the agriculture funding as noted today 
of $90 million. My question is this: will the minister commit to 
using some of that funding to help these producers in this very 
desperate time of need? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve illustrated 
how the government will help those producers, Mr. Speaker. 
And it’s substantial of course. You know, this is another case — 
the Finance Minister mentioned it earlier — where we’re 
criticized for not always running a surplus. And every instance 
where there’s an opportunity to spend more money, the 
opposition encourage us to do just that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, this really isn’t the time for spin. I 
appreciate what has been done to this point, but we all know 
that it is not adequate. Those answers and that spin will not feed 
those cattle. It will not replace the herds. It will not provide the 
much-needed answers to these producers who are wondering 
where they’re going to graze their cattle next year. There are 
provisions that should be made available by this government in 
the time of this unprecedented disaster — wildfires of this 
scope — to help these producers. The minister knows that more 
is needed. Will he commit to it today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And again I 
thank the member for her question. It’s legitimate. Mr. Speaker, 
we have provided substantial funds for this. We’d all like to 
give more, but our programs don’t cover insurable assets, Mr. 
Speaker. So while in our hearts we might like to stroke a big 
cheque from public funds to help these people, some of whom 
are actually hurting, Mr. Speaker, our programs do not cover 
losses on insurable assets. And virtually all of the losses in the 
wildfires were insurable assets and that’s why, on top of 
everything else we’ve done — with veterinary help, help to 
dispose of animals — we provided the $100,000 for the Stock 
Growers. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 113 — The Planning and Development  
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 



November 29, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3187 

Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doke: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 113, The 
Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill No. 113 be now introduced and 
read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doke: — Next sitting of the Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING  
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
instructed by the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies to report Bill No. 84, The Income Tax (Business 
Income) Amendment Act, 2017 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in the 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the Minister of 
Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole on this bill, and that the bill be now 
read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has requested leave 
to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bills on 
Bill No. 84, The Income Tax (Business Income) Amendment 
Act, 2017, and the bill be now read the third time. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed to move 
third reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 84 — The Income Tax (Business Income) 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I move that the bill be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 84, The Income Tax (Business Income) Amendment Act, 
2017 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question?  
 
I recognize the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, just an opportunity to present a 
few words on this bill. We do support small businesses on this 
side of the House. Small businesses create about 80 per cent of 
all new jobs across our province and they grow our economy, 
and the NDP is committed to finding ways to support all small 
businesses in Saskatchewan. But that is not what this bill is 
about. 
 
This bill is about the Sask Party changing the definition of 
“small business” to benefit the wealthiest. And last night in 
committee, the minister confirmed that this change will only 
help 1 in 13 small businesses in Saskatchewan. 
 
[14:30] 
 
If the Sask Party was truly serious about helping small 
businesses, it would recognize that their PST hike has hurt all 
small businesses, all producers, and all families big and small 
across the province. 
 
Now we’ve heard from business owners about how this tax hike 
has hurt the restaurant industry. The restaurants and bars are 
struggling and have had to lay off employees because of these 
tax hikes. Saskatchewan is the only province where people have 
to pay PST on life and health insurance. We’ve heard from 
producers about how the PST increases on insurance have 
impacted their bottom line. 
 
We absolutely should be doing more to support small 
businesses throughout the province. But the fact is that Bill 84 
will only help 1 in every 13 small businesses — and these are 
the wealthiest, Mr. Speaker — while the Sask Party’s PST hikes 
have hurt all of the small businesses. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this spring when I was asking the former 
Finance minister about the tax changes he said, and I quote: 
 

So you could have a small business making $600,000 in 
taxable income, and there are a lot of them in this 
province. I dare say I’ve got some colleagues in my 
caucus, caucus colleagues that run some of those 
businesses. 
 

It’s an odd thing to have one Finance minister using his caucus 
colleagues as examples of business owners who make 600,000 
while another Finance minister changes the law to help those 
business owners. 
 
Nowhere else in Canada would these businesses be considered 
small businesses. Across the board, the limit is $500,000, Mr. 
Speaker — everywhere, in every other province, and federally. 
But in this province these businesses are now being deemed to 
be small businesses. 



3188 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2017 

We are committed on this side of the House to finding ways to 
support all small businesses — all of them. And we want to 
help all those who have been hurt by the Sask Party’s PST hike, 
not just the richest businesses that the Sask Party is looking to 
help with this tax giveaway. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the third 
reading of Bill No. 84, The Income Tax (Business Income) 
Amendment Act, 2017.  
 
All those in favour say yes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Yes. 
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed say no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — I think the yeses have it. Call in the members. 
 
[The division bells rang from 14:32 until 14:40.] 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is third 
reading of Bill No. 84, The Income Tax (Business Income) 
Amendment Act, 2017.  
 
All those in favour of the motion please stand. 
 

[Yeas — 46] 
 
Wall Heppner Makowsky 
Stewart Reiter Morgan 
Harpauer Duncan Cox 
Marit Hargrave D’Autremont 
Docherty Merriman Doke 
Bonk Tell Eyre 
Brkich Harrison Ottenbreit 
Ross Weekes Hart 
Kirsch Bradshaw Steinley 
Nerlien Carr Lawrence 
Wilson Young McMorris 
Michelson Buckingham Doherty 
Lambert Beaudry-Mellor Moe 
Wyant Dennis Kaeding 
Steele Fiaz Cheveldayoff 
Olauson   
 

[Nays — 11] 
 
The Speaker: — All those opposed to the motion please stand. 
 
Sarauer Chartier Belanger 
Sproule Forbes Rancourt 
Mowat McCall Beck 
Meili Wotherspoon  
 
Clerk: — Those in favour of the third reading motion, 46; those 
opposed, 11. 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the motion carried. 
 
Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND  
SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Before orders of the day, Mr. Speaker, 
it is my pleasure to submit supplementary estimates 
accompanied by a message from the Administrator of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — Would you please rise for the message from 
the Administrator of Saskatchewan. 
 

The Administrator of Saskatchewan transmits 
supplementary estimates November of certain sums required 
for the service of the province for the 12 months ending 
March 31st, 2018, and recommends the same to the 
Legislative Assembly. Hon. Robert Richards, Administrator, 
province of Saskatchewan. 

 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answers to questions 55 through 72. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered the 
responses to questions 55 to 72. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 112 — The Miscellaneous Vehicle and Driving 
Statutes (Cannabis Legislation) Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today 
to move second reading of The Miscellaneous Vehicle and 
Driving Statutes (Cannabis Legislation) Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
[14:45] 
 
The federal government is moving to legalize personal cannabis 
use in July of next year. In advance of that, the federal 
government is preparing to amend the Criminal Code in the 
coming weeks to add drug-impaired driving offences. Police 
will have the ability to lay the new charges on Royal Assent. 
 
The federal changes make it necessary to update some of our 
provincial legislation for administrative consequences for 
impaired driving. We do this so that the tough consequences 
impaired drivers in Saskatchewan face will also apply to anyone 
charged under the new federal laws. 
 
Anyone charged with any of the new drug-impaired driving 
offences under this Criminal Code will receive an immediate 
licence suspension until the charges are dealt with in court. 



November 29, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3189 

Drivers also face a minimum 30-day vehicle seizure or 60 days 
if the driver also has a blood alcohol content over .16, and 
significant financial penalties under SGI’s [Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance] safe driver recognition program. 
 
As you are aware, Saskatchewan has some of the toughest 
impaired driving laws in the country, Mr. Speaker. Our strict 
penalties are meant to send a clear message that it is never okay 
to get behind the wheel of a vehicle if you are impaired by 
alcohol or drugs. And that is a very important message for the 
people of Saskatchewan to remember, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is currently, and will continue to be, illegal to drive while 
impaired, even when cannabis becomes legal next July. There 
are misconceptions among some cannabis users that it does not 
impair driving. That is simply not true, Mr. Speaker. Cannabis 
impairs drivers’ judgment, reaction time, motor coordination, 
and ability to make decisions. And some drivers mix drugs and 
alcohol, which can significantly increase impairment. 
 
While we hope that legalization will not lead to more people 
choosing to drive impaired by cannabis, we have to be realistic 
and recognize that it is a potential safety concern. The new 
federal legislation expected to be proclaimed in the coming 
weeks gives police new tools to detect drug-impaired drivers 
and charge them. Specifically, it allows police to use federally 
approved roadside testing devices to detect drivers who may be 
impaired by cannabis. 
 
It’s also important to note that Saskatchewan will have zero 
tolerance for all drivers for drug-impaired driving. The zero 
tolerance approach means that drivers should not get behind the 
wheel with any level of impairing drugs in their system that is 
detectable by a federally approved screening device. Police can 
already request the standardized field sobriety test at roadside  
or a drug recognition evaluation if they have reasonable 
suspicion that a driver is impaired. 
 
More and more, police in Saskatchewan are being trained to 
recognize signs of impairment from drugs. By July of next year, 
Saskatchewan will have almost 100 officers certified in drug 
recognition evaluation. Training has been funded by SGI. Even 
more officers will be trained over the next five years, with 
financial support committed by the federal government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, combating the terrible problem of impaired 
driving in Saskatchewan is a priority for our government. 
During the fall sitting of this legislature, we introduced 
legislation that will mean stronger penalties for people who 
drive impaired with children in the vehicle. We have also 
announced that we intend to enable ride-sharing services to 
operate in this province so that people have another option for a 
safe ride home. And now our government plans to implement 
zero tolerance for all drug-impaired drivers. 
 
Quite simply, drivers should not get behind the wheel with any 
level of impairing drugs in their system that can be detected by 
a federally approved screening device or that would cause them 
to fail a field sobriety test or a drug recognition evaluation. 
While cannabis may soon be legal, driving under its influence is 
illegal. It is dangerous to public safety and it will be dealt with 
harshly. Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The 
Miscellaneous Vehicle and Driving Statutes (Cannabis 

Legislation) Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Crown Investments 
has moved that Bill No. 112, The Miscellaneous Vehicle and 
Driving Statutes (Cannabis Legislation) Amendment Act, 2017 
be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
again pleased to stand on my feet today to talk about Bill No. 
112, The Miscellaneous Vehicle and Driving Statutes (Cannabis 
Legislation) Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to do a quick recap of the bill 
as we interpret it, and obviously this is a very important bill to 
spend a lot of time in the Assembly and throughout the process 
as we try and grapple with the notion of how to certainly get 
impaired drivers, such as those that may be under the influence 
of drugs, off our roads and streets, Mr. Speaker. That certainly 
is an important endeavour to ensure safety for all people and I 
think, Mr. Speaker, nobody’s arguing with that point. 
 
Certainly I think that’s something that we have to also keep in 
the back of our minds as we move down this whole process of 
having cannabis become legal in the country — I believe the 
date that’s been set is July 2018 — and this bill is somewhat of 
the preparation for that law coming into effect. And this 
particular bill, Mr. Speaker, adds the new federal drug offences 
under the Criminal Code to various sections of The Automobile 
Accident Insurance Act as well as The Traffic Safety Act, so 
obviously, Mr. Speaker, that federal drug offences are part and 
parcel of the rollout strategy as it pertains to the cannabis 
legalization plan for July 1st of 2018. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the bill also adds a definition for “drug” to The 
Traffic Safety Act and this bill also adds a new section to The 
Traffic Safety Act that outlines a zero tolerance for drug. Mr. 
Speaker, the Act also sets out licence suspensions, legal 
impoundments, and administrative fines for drivers found to 
have driven while having consumed drugs. Drug offences will 
be dealt with in the same way as alcohol-related offences are 
dealt with, except that the ignition interlock can’t be used to 
deal with the consumption of drugs. And, Mr. Speaker, it is 
currently illegal to drive while impaired, whether it’s from 
alcohol or from drugs, and that remains the same with this bill. 
 
We will continue having questions for the minister as this 
whole process rolls out, Mr. Speaker, in particular when you 
look at the notion around the drug offences that are being 
identified in this particular bill. Mr. Speaker, obviously the 
minister was correct in indicating that an ignition interlock can’t 
be used to deal with the consumption of drugs. 
 
As the member would very well know, that one of the tools in 
combatting the drug-impaired driver, Mr. Speaker, is how 
would you measure the amount of drugs consumed, and what 
drugs consumed by the individual that could be in question as to 
their impairment from drug use? And, Mr. Speaker, from some 
of the discussions that we’ve had internally as a caucus, we’ve 
looked at some of the issues that remain with, how do we track 
this? How do we monitor this? How do we test — as you test an 
impaired driver with a Breathalyzer — how do you test an 
impaired driver with drugs? 



3190 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2017 

And, Mr. Speaker, one of the concepts that had been certainly 
brought forward to many discussions around the whole notion 
of safe driving in the province of Saskatchewan was the fact 
that there was not enough drug recognition experts. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m not familiar with the drug recognition experts as to 
what kind of training they have, what kind of certification, and 
how they become an expert in their particular field, but one of 
the challenges that was raised during some of the Committee on 
Traffic Safety’s hearings was they heard very clearly that drug 
recognition experts are available, but there aren’t enough of 
them to begin to address what I think may be an increase in 
activity from drug impairment challenges, as you move down 
this path towards the legalization of cannabis, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what happens in this case is that there was discussion and 
presentations brought forward to the panel on safety while 
driving. And, Mr. Speaker, one of the points that was raised, 
that drug recognition experts that could train police officers, 
there was not a lot of those drug recognition experts that could 
do the training in Saskatchewan. 
 
So one of the things that we have to look at is how do we begin 
to develop a system of policing the fact that there may be — 
well there is already — but there may be other matters that 
pertain to impaired driving due to drug use, Mr. Speaker. 
There’s no question one of the things that we have to do is to 
ensure that we have drug recognition experts that train as many 
police officers as possible, so the policemen, like in the alcohol 
case, are able to police the streets with sound science. 
 
I am uncertain, Mr. Speaker, as to whether consultations with 
lawyers have been undertaken because obviously they say there 
is a test available — I think it’s a saliva test — to determine 
whether there is drugs involved in a suspicious driver, Mr. 
Speaker. And some defence lawyers have indicated that that 
process can be easily defeated in a court of law. So this is the 
reason why we have to look at perhaps a myriad of processes to 
discuss what the best way is, the most legally concrete way in 
which we could legally charge people with impaired drug 
driving, Mr. Speaker. And that’s something that’s really 
important. 
 
On the flip side, Mr. Speaker, as we all know that cannabis will 
be legalized in July of 2018, and this is going to be a federal 
Act. And obviously the federal government have gone through 
a lot of process in determining, you know, how the industry is 
regulated and certainly how the plan will be rolled out in terms 
of making sure that this industry no longer becomes a illegal 
activity, that there is now a process in place to legalize it. And 
there are many opportunities attached to this Act, Mr. Speaker, 
and the federal government have identified those opportunities. 
They have also identified challenges. And they’ve certainly 
identified what role that the provincial governments can play in 
the rollout of the legalization of cannabis in July of 2018. 
 
So the biggest thing that we have to do as opposition, and I 
understand several members of the Sask Party have undertaken 
some of these meetings, is to talk to those people that have 
prepared Acts and prepared processes and certainly prepared for 
the inevitable declaration of the legalization of cannabis in July 
of 2018, and they have gone so far as to set up shop to begin to 
sell some of the products as a result of this legalization. I 
understand that there are several businesses that are now open. 

Obviously in Alberta is an example I would use that there is 
some forward thinking by the government in terms of 
recognizing that this is going to be a law, and that as much as 
some people may not like the idea of drugs in general, Mr. 
Speaker, cannabis by and large has been one of the softer drugs 
that the federal government saw fit to legalize. And as opposed 
to us going on the path of whether that should have happened or 
not, Mr. Speaker, many people are embracing that change, and 
they’re certainly preparing for the opportunities attached with 
legal sales of cannabis, Mr. Speaker. And our job as legislators 
is to see if we could sit down and see how this could be 
regulated, how this could be monitored, and how we protect the 
public in general. 
 
There are many, many arguments for and against the particular 
process. And it’s incumbent upon us as people that make laws 
in Saskatchewan such as the bill before us, Bill 112, is to take 
the time to understand what the federal law states, what their 
process is in place to make sure that it’s regulated, it’s 
monitored, and that there’s some benefits for the federal 
government as well. 
 
What are the challenges health-wise, Mr. Speaker? Some say 
that there aren’t, compared to the consumption of alcohol, Mr. 
Speaker. There are some medicinal properties of cannabis that 
have provided some significant advantage for many people 
throughout the country. 
 
So all of these factors are flying at various provinces, Mr. 
Speaker, as we speak. And it’s important that we take the time 
to do two or three things, Mr. Speaker, as the minister indicated 
in the bill, to ensure that we don’t have impaired drivers on the 
road — that’s important — impaired by drugs. We suggest that 
there has to be a proper test. And one of the biggest 
opportunities we see is having drug recognition experts train 
police officers so they’re able to make sure they’ve got the 
strongest case against a suspicious drug-impaired driver, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s really important. So we don’t have enough of 
those experts. 
 
We also have, Mr. Speaker, the ability to understand what other 
jurisdictions are doing. I made reference to Alberta. What are 
they doing? What are their best practices? BC [British 
Columbia] is probably another example that we could seek 
advice from and offer advice to, as a province. So it’s important 
that we keep those channels open to seeing what other 
jurisdictions are doing. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s also important to talk to the industry 
because we know people are preparing for the cannabis 
legalization opportunities. And it’s important that we sit down 
and see what medicinal values are found in these properties, 
because we all know that there’s laws now that allow for the 
medicinal value of cannabis. Some patients do have that 
opportunity, particularly cancer patients, as you know, that I’m 
aware of. 
 
[15:00] 
 
So this is a bill that’s fairly complex. There are a lot of angles to 
it. There’s some that like the bill, others that don’t, but the 
important thing is that we have to make an informed decision 
on how we proceed as a result of this federal Act coming into 



November 29, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3191 

play. And obviously as a province I would dare say that it is 
probably not wise to try and fight this federal law, because the 
bottom line is it’s going to be proclaimed. Most provinces are 
preparing for it. And our best bet, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what 
the bill intends to do, is to try and keep drug-impaired drivers 
off our streets. 
 
We also need to look at the opportunity attached from the 
regulatory and taxation perspective. And most important of all, 
Mr. Speaker, we have to talk to those that are preparing for this 
industry to make sure that we are able to make sound decisions 
not based on hearsay, not based on moral perspectives that may 
be just not willing to listen to any other point of view, Mr. 
Speaker. We must take the time to hear what the industry’s 
saying about the future of the cannabis industry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So by and large, it’s a complex bill. We have a lot of issues that 
we haven’t talked about. There’s a lot of moving parts to this 
bill. And it’s on that note that I move that we adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 112, The Miscellaneous Vehicle and Driving Statutes 
(Cannabis Legislation) Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 112. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 85 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 85 — The 
Reclaimed Industrial Sites Amendment Act, 2017 be now read 
a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is my 
pleasure today to rise and enter into debate on Bill No. 85, The 
Reclaimed Industrial Sites Amendment Act, 2017. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, as has been noted, previously this bill had its first 
incarnation in 2007. And it has a clause that requires it to be 
reviewed every five years, so this would be the second review 
of this particular bill. 
 
I’m going to first start with some of the comments that the 
minister for mines and resources mentioned on second reading. 
Again as was mentioned by my colleague from Saskatoon, the 
bill was initially presented by the Minister of the Economy, but 
second reading was presented by the member for Martensville. 
 
In her reading, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister noted, as I just 
said, that this is an update of the current Act which was 
approved in 2007. Some of my colleagues happened to be 
around at that time when this Act was initially brought forth, 
and in doing some reading about this bill prior to getting up 

today, I found that very helpful I think to have some of that 
background. 
 
Often when we get up and we start talking about bills, we don’t 
always know why the initial bill came into force, what some of 
the impetus was for that, who was consulted, what issue it was 
to address. And again it’s always helpful to have that 
background information so we can measure if the legislation 
has, up to this point, done what it was initially intended to. And 
to be fair, the minister as well as my colleagues both provided 
some background around that. But I’ll get into that. 
 
As noted by the minister: 
 

The current Act was approved in 2007 and, as part of its 
attendant regulations, implemented the institutional 
control program . . . or ICP, [which] manages the transfer 
of remediated sites back to provincial custody and 
manages the long-term monitoring and maintenance of 
those sites. 

 
For those maybe who . . . that seems like a bit of a technical 
explanation, these are sites, often mine sites, that have closed 
down for various reasons, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and there’s an 
element of environmental risk there. So those lands are 
transferred into the control of the ICP and there are measures 
taken to remediate those lands and to monitor, and as well 
there’s a fund in place should there be a need for cleanup or the 
like, Mr. Speaker. So there’s a controlled fund and some 
mechanism for the province to assume control of these lands to 
ensure that they are properly protected and not posing an 
environmental risk. 
 
As noted by the minister, this has been seen as both a benefit 
environmentally, but also a benefit to industry to be able to 
have a mechanism and these controlled funds to deal with 
remediated sites. 
 
And that didn’t happen in a vacuum. It happened in part, and 
both my colleagues noted there were some issues such as mines 
around Uranium City if I’m correct there, and concerns that 
there was no money set aside for the remediation or for the 
cleanup of those sites. And I believe, and I’m looking for 
confirmation that we are still paying for those sites. So this was 
a measure undertaken so that we didn’t find ourselves in that 
situation again. 
 
And certainly, you know, we don’t always make the right 
decisions, but when we have a chance to see how things could 
be put right, I think it’s a worthwhile endeavour to undertake 
that. So this was a measure to address both concerns of 
industry, but also environmental concerns. 
 
So again, as has been noted, this is the second review of this 
legislation, and there are some proposed changes here. The 
minister noted that, in completing the review, the Ministry of 
Energy and Resources has consulted with stakeholders and is 
now introducing these amendments identified through those 
stakeholder discussions. She did mention some of the folks that 
they met with. She noted that “I’m pleased to say that this bill 
has the support of industry, industry organizations, the federal 
and provincial regulators involved in the stakeholder 
consultations.” 



3192 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2017 

And I just offer here that when we’re talking about consultation 
with stakeholders it’s always . . . I find it helpful anyway to 
know exactly who was consulted with and maybe some of the 
feedback that was received. It gives us maybe a better picture of 
the reasons that we see these changes coming forward and in 
the long run gives us the ability to evaluate whether the 
legislation meets the measures that were set out, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. So there are some questions there in terms of the width 
and breadth of who was consulted with; certainly industry, as 
has been noted. And the government is very, very proud, and I 
know the minister noted in her remarks of being seen as being 
very favourable to the mining community, and that is fair, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
But there’s a dual purpose to this legislation and that is to 
enhance both industry but also environmental, forward 
environmental safety and stewardship I guess, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And that certainly is a delicate balance sometimes but 
is one that is very worthy and worth our time. And I’m 
wondering if that balance was met in terms of the consultations, 
and that would be a question that perhaps can be asked in more 
depth when we get into when we get into committee. 
 
And a few other highlights here just in terms of what the issues 
are in this bill. One of the amendments, or it’s actually a 
clarification of the ministerial authority, regulatory authority, to 
require that a site holder has provided acceptable financial 
assurance before a closed site can be accepted into institutional 
control program or ICP. Which certainly seems reasonable that 
if you’re putting a piece of land into the ICP that has potential 
future liabilities or will need a great deal of remediation or may 
propose a significant risk perhaps to waterways or other bodies, 
it seems reasonable that you want to be assured that industry is 
putting sufficient funds forward into that fund so that we’re not 
depleting the fund on one instance of remediation. 
 
There’s also a new section that outlines that the minister can 
transfer a closed site from the institutional control program to a 
responsible person or entity. This is something I do have a lot of 
questions about. It’s not really explained in the second readings 
why, once a site goes into ICP, I’m not sure what the incentive 
would be to pull it back out and transfer control to a private 
entity. When it is in the ICP, there are certain oversights, and 
certainly the review of this legislation is one of those 
oversights. But I don’t know why that would happen. And it’s 
an honest question, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and hopefully we can 
get some answers about that when we get into committee.  
 
But it does seem a little counterintuitive that once the site is 
taken into the ICP and is mandated and there are funds available 
for remediation but it’s, you know, it’s a site that has certain 
environmental qualities, why another entity would want that. So 
maybe that’s something that came out of the consultations. 
 
I would be curious to know what, you know, is the business 
case or what the reasons would be for that change because it 
really is a rather significant change. Up until now, my 
understanding is that once lands are transferred into the ICP that 
they remain there. And I’m getting nods from my colleagues. 
So I hope that we do . . . and I’m sure that our critic and 
members of the opposition will have further questions about 
that. 
 

Another main feature of this bill is a new section that allows the 
minister to appoint a fund advisory committee to advise on the 
Institutional Control Monitoring and Maintenance Fund — 
again that fund that I’ve been talking about and has been talked 
about previously — and the Institutional Control Unforeseen 
Events Fund, which is more the long-term investments of those 
funds. So certainly we’ve seen that done with other funds, to 
have people appointed to make sure that those funds are 
adequate and being properly invested, that there are, I would 
suspect, audits. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, a couple of points under that. This 
committee is exempt from liability for investment decisions, so 
I guess perhaps the minister would assume responsibility or 
there would be some other place, but that’s one caveat in these 
proposed changes. And it also, it seems that there’s some 
indication that this committee would be composed of Econ 
employees. So just a couple of points there, and maybe we’ll 
have a chance to get into that a little further into committee. 
 
Another main point that I will spend a little bit of time on is the 
fact that this maintains that the minister must conduct a review 
of the Act every five years. As we’ve said, that has been a part 
of this bill. This is our second review. But it makes some 
changes and it removes the specifics on who this review must 
consult and the requirement to review that the money in the 
funds is sufficient to meet the needs of the accepted site into the 
program. 
 
So on the first piece of that, I do find that a little bit problematic 
and I suspect others will as well. You know, if not specific 
agencies or entities, certainly a broad-based consultation of all 
stakeholders, which really would be industry, environmental 
groups, and I think really the people living around these sites — 
that seems reasonable. Many of these sites are in the North. We 
certainly hear consistent, and many, concerns about the lack of 
consultation with people in the North. And these are sites that 
have the potential to impact land and way of life very 
significantly. So there is some concern there that that isn’t 
spelled out, that there must be specific groups to be consulted 
with. So that would be something that I would wonder about the 
reason for that, for removing those specifics and maybe suggest 
that there be very robust and wide-reaching consultation. 
 
[15:15] 
 
The other part is the removal of the requirement that there is a 
review that the funds are sufficient. Now perhaps that is 
because there is this new committee to oversee the maintenance 
fund and the institutional control monitoring unforeseen events 
fund, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But I guess that’s something that we 
may have to ask. And how that committee will report back and 
their accountability, I think, is a little bit unclear at this point. 
So that would be something that we would have questions 
about. 
 
So I’m afraid I stand here with more questions than answers, 
but it would be interesting to hear my colleagues’ comments on 
this and hear the minister’s responses in committee. I do think 
that this is, you know, back in 2007, this seems there was good 
reason to put this legislation forward. And by the minister’s 
own admission, it has served this province well with that 
delicate and dual role of providing benefit to industry and also 



November 29, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3193 

ensuring good environmental stewardship. 
 
So I think I have come to the end of my comments. I look 
forward to further debate. And with that, I will move to adjourn 
debate please. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 85, The Reclaimed 
Industrial Sites Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 86 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Merriman that Bill No. 86 — The 
Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2017 be now read 
a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And it’s 
always part of the great pleasure of being an MLA that we get 
to participate in the debate here in this Assembly, and I 
certainly appreciate the opportunity to do so. Today I’ll be 
talking a little bit about the changes to The Child and Family 
Services Act. 
 
And as you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is one of the most 
difficult areas, I think, of governing, is looking after children 
who need support, who are struggling within their family unit. 
And it’s definitely something I know that governments 
undertake with care and sincerity and with great difficulty, Mr. 
Speaker. Obviously offering new homes for children that have 
been traumatized or troubled, who aren’t getting the parental 
care they need, is always fraught with difficulty. And I think 
some of the needs of these children are incredible.  
 
I have friends who work in this area and it’s really . . . Although 
they don’t tell me the details, I know that it’s very difficult 
work for them. And everyone I believe is doing their best to 
protect these children. Having said that, when you act in the 
place of a parent, as a government, there are expectations, and I 
believe there are legitimate expectations for governments to 
look after these children as if they’re their own. In loco parentis 
I believe is the Latin phrase. 
 
And so it’s a complicated bit of work. It’s certainly one that 
needs the full support of a government and all the services that 
go with it, and you know, holistic family supports too. I know 
that’s part of the piece, is ensuring that the families that are 
struggling have supports they need to be able to keep their 
children with them. Addictions and poverty are a large cause of 
a lot of the troubles these folks are facing, and housing. And 
even today on the radio we were hearing about toothaches and 
people not being covered for dental care and how that can 
seriously impact quality of life for children and for adults as 
well. 
 

But I think in terms of the bill itself, Mr. Speaker, there are, as 
the minister pointed out in his second reading speech on 
November 7th, there are a number of administrative changes. 
Now he tells us that these administrative amendments are 
paving the way or setting the stage for this government “to 
move forward in a more substantive change in the future.” So I 
always get a little worried when this government talks about 
substantive changes in the future because sometimes, you 
know, they fix things that aren’t broken and other times they 
don’t fix things that need fixing. So it’s a little flag and I think 
we’re going to have to watch it very carefully of course to 
ensure that these — what did he say? — “move forward in a 
more substantive change in the future.” So he says they’re still 
doing “additional policy development, stakeholder consultation, 
and financial analysis prior to introduction.” 
 
Now we’ve seen the height of financial analysis that this 
government’s capable of when it comes to tax analysis . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, it’s dizzying, as my colleague 
says. You know, where they actually go out and they talk to 
people, Mr. Speaker, and that’s the level of tax analysis that 
appears to be sufficient for making decisions for this 
government. So when it comes to financial analysis for Social 
Services and the child and family services provision, it makes 
me a little bit nervous when we see that that’s . . . They’re out 
talking to their friends and that should be sufficient. So 
hopefully the ministry will convince the political folks that it’s 
important to do an actual proper financial analysis that 
recognizes all the aspects of these changes and whatever 
changes that are being contemplated. 
 
So there are a number of minor changes being contemplated in 
the bill. I notice once again that the war on “where” or “if” is in, 
you know, full force here. In fact they might put North Korea to 
shame with the way they’re attacking it, but “where” is being 
completely wiped out and we are now using the word “if.” So 
this appears to be “if” is winning the war and “where” is losing 
it badly. So in a number of clauses — section 11, section 13, 
section 13.1, section 14 — so those all have changes where 
poor “where” is being wiped out and “if” is taking over, also 
section 19 of the existing Act, section 22. Yes, there’s a whole 
bunch of them, Mr. Speaker, if you go through. 
 
Oh yes, and there’s also a war on “shall.” It’s now being 
replaced by “must.” So we have two wars going on here, and I 
think the drafters are certainly on the side of “must” and “if.” 
So glad to see that. 
 
Oh yes, section 36, “where” is disappearing, as it is in section 
38, oh, and 39, section 50 — I’m getting near the end — 53, 54, 
55, 56, 60. What’s this one— 63, 69, and so on and so on. I 
guess you get the drift. 
 
So that’s some of the administrative changes that are being 
made. And it’s interesting to see these, I would say, phases of 
drafting where certain words win out over others. But I think I 
would use “if” in most cases. “If” I’m going to town, I will do 
this, instead of “where” I go to town. So it makes more sense in 
many contexts. 
 
I tried finding online where the rule makers are landing on this. 
There’s not a lot that can be found. But you will find a lot about 
computer programming, because if you use “where” instead of 



3194 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2017 

“if” it means something very different in computer 
programming. So if anybody wants to get caught up on that, 
they can certainly go to the Internet. But in the meantime, “if” 
is winning the war. 
 
Some of the other changes that the minister talks about was 
apparently back in 1980s there was a hope that “. . . First 
Nations participation in the decision making of matters relating 
to First Nations children.” We started talking about that in 
1989, and there was a family board that was created. 
Unfortunately, apparently it was never operationalized, and so it 
was just never used. And I think that’s something this bill is 
attempting to review and maybe recreate a new system out of 
that. 
 
He says in his speech, “The 1984 legislative amendments were 
intended to address the shortcomings of this Act, specifically 
with regard to the transfer of custody . . . guardianship, and the 
financial assistance and kinship-in-care arrangements.” And he 
said it was accepted by many, but “. . . First Nation leaders and 
organizations articulated that the provisions were counter to 
their culture and values.” 
 
So what has happened instead when these changes were made, 
the ministry “. . . continued to strengthen extended family 
options through the enhancing of policy and the Person of 
Sufficient Interest program.” 
 
So these programs have sort of taken over what was intended in 
the provisions of the Act and he’s saying now that the program 
is going to be prioritized through transformational change. 
 
Well there it is, Mr. Speaker. Transformational change has 
revisited us once again and we see it here in the changes in the 
family services, child and family services. So I guess 
transformational change is hard at work in the ministry and 
they’re now using this for their “. . . future phase of the 
ministry’s legislative renewal.” 
 
So again as I say, I get a little bit nervous when these guys talk 
about transformational change. I get a little bit nervous when 
they talk about renewal and legislative reforms. So we’ll see 
what happens, and we’ll make sure once that happens that 
proper consultation . . . We need proper consultation. We need 
proper financial analysis to make sure these programs are 
sustainable and we need proper — well especially — 
consultation with First Nations and Métis. 
 
People in this province, Mr. Speaker, as you know, too often the 
duty to consult stops at duty to consult and there isn’t enough 
talk about accommodation for First Nations. And in this case, 
some of the changes that are happening, and this has been long 
called for, I believe, is changes to the definitions of — I want to 
make sure I have it right — oh yes, the child’s best interests. So 
currently in the existing Act we refer in section 4(c) to the 
“child’s emotional, cultural, physical, psychological and 
spiritual needs.” 
 
And the explanatory note tells us that this is being changed. The 
entire section’s being changed, but really the main changes are 
in the existing section (c). And they’re indicating the change 
reframes “. . . the focus of a child’s development to a 
needs-based assessment and the support required to optimize a 

child’s potential.” 
 
So those are very lofty aspirations and we can only hope that 
that is where we get to. “It further stresses the importance of 
cultural and spiritual heritage to a child’s upbringing, promoting 
a holistic approach to the best interests of a child.” 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we now have, 50 years later, the effects of 
the Sixties Scoop for many, many First Nations and Métis 
children. And I think the work done by Betty Ann Adam in 
terms of her family’s story and the framing of her story in her 
own words really, really tells the importance of the impact of 
the Sixties Scoop on those children. And I don’t think it takes 
away from the fact that a lot of those children were in need, but 
the way they were taken from their families and then their entire 
heritage, their entire DNA was denied them as they were raised 
in non-First Nation homes. And I know there was love in some 
of those non-First Nations homes and there was caring. Some of 
them there weren’t. But their cultural and spiritual heritage was 
taken away from them, and their language too in many cases. 
 
So we see, too often we see the impacts of these things 50 years 
after the fact. We see it in the residential school program. We 
see it in a lot of the First Nations relations. 
 
And so with the Supreme Court of Canada talking about the 
honour of the Crown, we are the Crown. This is our obligation 
as a government. It’s our obligation as a people, as treaty 
people, to ensure that we keep trying at least to get it right. We 
don’t always get it right, but in this case I think the 
recommendations to include the heritage of these children will 
be an important fact that the homes they’re put in will take 
seriously. And then people know about it nowadays. They 
understand so much more about the treaty relationship. 
 
And so the change that’s being made, mainly to this clause, is 
about adding the words “spiritual heritage.” So they have to 
take into account whenever there’s an order to determine the 
best interests of the child, this is now one of the key 
components is the child’s culture and spiritual heritage and 
upbringing. 
 
So I think it’s a step in the right direction and certainly one that 
will encourage and direct the families that take these children 
in. And again, my kudos to all the foster families in 
Saskatchewan who are opening their homes to children in need. 
Again the First Nations families that are doing this for the First 
Nations children, and also other children that are taken, need to 
be taken from their homes. It’s one of the most traumatic things 
that can happen to a child, and when the government steps in 
we have to make sure we get it right. 
 
[15:30] 
 
So I believe, Mr. Speaker, there’s some other minor changes 
about time frames and revocation periods and things like that. 
So I know that our Social Services critic and others who have 
been more close to this area of government will be able to 
provide more insight and more questions to the government, 
especially when we get into committee. I think that you know 
my concerns; I’ve pretty much laid them on the table here 
today. So I will move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 86, An 
Act to amend The Child and Family Services Act. 



November 29, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3195 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 86. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 87 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 87 — The Data 
Matching Agreements Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s always a 
pleasure for me to join in the debate, and today I’ll be talking 
about Bill No. 87, The Data Matching Agreements Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I was reviewing the minister’s notes he was 
indicating that The Data Matching Agreements Act would allow 
for the matching and linking of information and databases to 
improve fact-based decision making within government. And 
we know that we need to improve on having decisions made 
based on facts here. So that’s a good step in the right direction. 
 
Also he indicated that this would promote co-operation amongst 
government institutions, sharing information while still 
protecting the privacy rights of individuals, which has been 
recommended by the Office of the Information and Privacy 
Commissioner. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think back of some of my work that I did 
previous to being elected here, Mr. Speaker, and when I was 
working for the Ministry of Health with regards to mental 
health and addictions. When I first started working at the 
agency, technology wasn’t as advanced as it is today. And so 
the way we kept our information was in a file cabinet and we 
had them all over the place and things like that. 
 
And then we started getting more involved in the technology 
that we have now with regards to computers and emails and 
such, and even towards the end using cellphones a lot of the 
time because that was the main form of communication with 
clients. And I know when I first started there, that was totally 
taboo to call a client on their cellphone because you couldn’t 
trust those devices and you had to use a land line. And we had 
all these strict requirements. And that’s also important because 
confidentiality is so important when we’re dealing with clients’ 
sensitive issues. 
 
And so we struggled with the fact that we were moving towards 
more of a technology-based system, and how do we ensure that 
client confidentiality is kept but still being able to share 
information with other agencies. And as of now, like email 
being so readily used, and how do we keep track of that and 
how do we make sure we’re emailing based on other agencies 
that also have strict requirements with regards to safety with 
their emails? 
 
And so I’m really happy to see that the Office of the 

Information and Privacy Commissioner is looking into this as 
well and ensuring that when we do communicate amongst each 
other that all of this information will be protected, and privacy 
rights of individuals will be respected and protected as well. 
 
And more and more we’re working with other agencies because 
we know that having wraparound approaches with regards to, 
oftentimes, clients is really important, whether it’s in Health or 
whether it’s in Social Services or Justice and all of these 
departments. And we’re all working together for the best needs 
of the individual and to support the individual. And so because 
we’re doing so much of that work and also, like was mentioned 
in the minister’s notes, working with other agencies, like maybe 
police officers and such, making sure that all of this information 
is kept confidential. So my understanding is part of the priority 
of this Act is to do that. 
 
So the oversight will be provided by government access 
coordinator and the Office of the Information and Privacy 
Commissioner. And I think that’s good that both of them will 
be overlooking that because as we know the Office of the 
Information and Privacy Commissioner is an independent 
agency, and so he’s appointed by government to oversee things. 
And I believe that he’s done a really great job so far and his 
office has always been open to talk to. And so for them to be 
paired together, that’s great. 
 
The government access coordinator is a new role, Mr. Speaker, 
and that will be created through amendments to The Freedom of 
Information and Protection of Privacy Act. And so the duties 
will include reviewing data-matching agreements and provide 
comments; receive reports from government institutions where 
a data-matching project is completed; receive and respond to 
access requests, which will be working towards centralization 
of access to information service for government agencies. 
 
So it’s a big role. It’s a big job for the individual that will be 
placed in that position. But again, like I said, this is so very 
important. And also it indicates that anyone who is seen to 
contravene the Act would be fined up to $50,000. So that’s a 
hefty fine and I believe that will show the importance and 
severity of sharing any information that you shouldn’t to other 
individuals or risking the fact of protecting the privacy rights of 
individuals. 
 
So although I think going this direction is a really important 
step, Mr. Speaker, I do think it’s important for me to also talk 
about the fact that when it comes to accountability and 
transparency, this government has a terrible track record with 
regards to that. 
 
And so I find it interesting how we have this government who 
. . . They can’t figure out how to stop using private emails 
housed in their party server, but here they want to talk about 
government agencies and them protecting rights. I know for a 
fact that as a government employee, if I was using my own 
personal email, I would have been terminated from my position. 
And the Premier won’t even allow us to let the people of 
Saskatchewan determine that as well and terminate him. Instead 
he’s running away from all of his troubles here. 
 
But I think it’s really important for us to realize that this House 
needs to show, be the role models with regards to accountability 



3196 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2017 

and transparency and be the role models of showing how 
professionalism is key. And they should be doing it in-house as 
well. So I hope this agreement also will manage the individuals 
in this House and they could stop using their private emails for 
government issues. 
 
We also have serious concerns about the Sask Party’s 
accountability and transparency when it comes to the GTH land 
scandals and denying witnesses to testify. If there’s no issues, 
why can’t these people who have had a key role in this actually 
testify? And withholding information from our side of the 
House, from journalists, and the extreme costs and delays for 
information requests that the Privacy Commissioner has already 
spoken about. So he’s indicated that this should be more 
available. And improperly sharing information about journalists 
and other people as they try to cover up and spin their issues 
about the GTH. 
 
So in general, I have some real serious concerns about how this 
government continues to politicize to access of information. 
And they should show by example of how they feel that 
transparency and accountability is important, and they should 
start demonstrating this right here in this House, Mr. Speaker. 
And that’s exactly what we feel on this side of the House. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know I have a lot of other 
colleagues that would like to add some more information with 
regards to this Act. And I know that the critic with regards to 
this file will also do her due diligence. She’ll talk to the 
stakeholders that are involved and also ensure that all the 
information is provided and the questions are asked. So with 
that, I move to adjourn debate on Bill 87, The Data Matching 
Agreements Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert Northcote 
has adjourned debate on Bill No. 87. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 88 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 88 — The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise into this debate on Bill No. 88, An Act to amend 
The Automobile Accident Insurance Act. And this is one that in 
our day and age becomes more and more important as we deal 
with accidents with our cars and our vehicles, and what’s the 
law behind that. 
 
And it was interesting. My colleague from Nutana talked about 
how she gets nervous when the government says they’re going 
to do substantive or major changes. And I get nervous when 
they say they’re going to, and I quote the minister: “There are a 

few minor amendments to this Act, Mr. Speaker.” And I think 
well, you know, we’ll have many questions in the committee on 
that. 
 
But I think I want to highlight a couple of the things that this 
really starts to do. And the minister talks about SGI’s safe 
driver recognition program, and that’s been really popular. It’s 
been sort of a carrot-stick approach. You get rewarded for great, 
good driving habits, and then you also get a lot of punishments 
for bad driving, and whether that’s accidents or speeding or 
failing to follow the rules of the road. And so that’s based on 
their driver history, and that’s fair enough. You know, we all 
are very familiar with that, and over the course of time we build 
up a good reputation. 
 
What this really does is it starts to move a lot of the information 
into regulations. And this is one that might be a good thing or 
might not be. It’s one we’re always nervous about because then 
there is no real debate, no examination of the reasons for why 
things are changed in regulations. It’s decided by cabinet, and 
we understand that. There’s an appropriate amount of decision 
making that stays with cabinet. That’s fair enough. They are the 
members of Executive Council. We have to keep the wheels of 
decision making happening within Executive Council and 
government. But then there’s a fine line; there’s a balance of 
how much should go over to cabinet and not really see the light 
of day and how much should remain so it’s debatable on the 
floor of the House. 
 
And this is one where we start to see . . . And the member went 
through all the examples of prescribed manner, prescribed 
circumstances, prescribed fees, prescribed documents, and on 
and on the list goes. And you know, unless you watch and 
really pay attention to The Saskatchewan Gazette, you may not 
be aware of the changes that are happening. And so this is one 
that we really have to pay attention to. 
 
I think it’s always a good thing to profile improvements to this. 
I mean we’ve just last week had a lot of discussion about 
distracted driving and the idea of texting and what are the rules 
around texts or using your cellphones. But it’s not only that. 
People are distracted . . . You know, we see now in vehicles, 
you can watch a movie inside your car. Hopefully that’s not on 
the front seat, but you could be listening quietly to that in the 
back or watching that, and that could be a problem. 
 
Eating is one that many of us have fallen trap to because we’re 
in a rush. We’re in a rush more than ever, more than ever, and 
so you stop at a restaurant, pick up a coffee, pick up something 
for breakfast. And maybe the road conditions aren’t what they 
were the day before, and you find yourself caught because you 
don’t have both hands free. And this could be a problem. 
 
[15:45] 
 
And then of course we’re debating issues around the use of 
drugs and marijuana while driving, and we’re also debating 
issues of impaired through alcohol use. So this is a big topic for 
this fall, and one that’s really, really important. So we’ll be 
having a lot of questions in the committee about this type of 
thing and what do we do. 
 
And it’s interesting — another part of the new bill talks about a 



November 29, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3197 

new section that clarifies that the insurer has the right to recover 
money paid to an insured customer or family of a deceased 
customer from an insured person who’s been convicted of a 
specific Criminal Code offence. And of course we’ll need to 
know more details around that. We might have assumed that 
that was the case, what in . . . When he talks about a specific 
Criminal Code offence, what was the offence and what can we 
find out more about it? 
 
And so this is interesting that we have this situation. So SGI can 
recover any insurance money paid for pain, suffering, or 
bereavement damages from that driver’s third party liability 
insurance. So we will be watching this very closely. 
 
And of course then the other one is that we’ve seen many 
changes in terms of the tougher consequences for risky drivers, 
and it’s caused — and fair enough — some hardships for these 
drivers because of the size of the financial penalties. So they’re 
allowing or setting up a system where in fact you can make a 
payment schedule so that they actually do get their penalties 
paid. Which makes some sense because we know many people 
depend on being able to drive to work, and if it makes sense 
that they can continue to drive but they are paying their penalty, 
that’s an appropriate thing to do. But we’ll be watching that and 
what kind of range that is all about. 
 
And he talks about also a change that clarifies who will pay for 
counselling costs for somebody, but that would be outlined in 
regulations so we won’t be able to go to the Act. So we really 
want to make sure people are accessible; they have access to the 
legislation or how this impacts them. That’s what’s really 
critically, critically important but, as I say, I do get concerned 
when things do leave the floor here and get turned into 
regulation because that is unfortunate in so many ways. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know that we’ve got a lot of work 
to do this afternoon and we’ve got some ground to cover. But I 
would like to move adjournment now on Bill No. 88, The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2017. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 88. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 89 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Eyre that Bill No. 89 — The School 
Choice Protection Act/Loi sur la protection du choix d’école 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As always it’s my 
pleasure to wade into debate today, this time on Bill No. 89, 
The School Choice Protection Act, Mr. Speaker. This bill in 
essence will allow the government to invoke the 

notwithstanding clause. 
 
It’s always good to take a look at the minister’s second reading 
comment. It’s not always the whole story, but it tells often a 
good chunk of the story here and often it’s from the 
government’s perspective, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 
Education, in her second reading speech, pointed out that this 
bill “. . . proposes several amendments to The Education Act, 
1995 in order to provide certainty to parents and students that 
the government can continue funding students who attend 
Catholic separate schools regardless of their religious 
affiliation.” I’ll get back to that in a little bit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But just her comments around the words “certainty” are 
interesting because I don’t think it actually offers certainty over 
the long haul and in fact . . . I think it’s important to put on the 
record that the opposition fully supports publicly funded 
education in Saskatchewan for both our public and our Catholic 
systems. I know, I happen to have . . . I’ve heard from many, 
many of my constituents who have children in the Catholic 
system who know how important this is. I know in my own 
experience, I have a . . . this would impact me. I have a child at 
a Catholic school and she is not Catholic, Mr. Speaker, despite 
my own religious affiliation, Mr. Speaker. But I’ve heard from 
many, many families of whom this is a huge concern. And we 
fully support publicly funded education of both our Catholic 
and public systems. 
 
And there’s no doubt that the decision, the decision last spring 
that the Theodore decision could have a very negative impact 
on many families and put them into a bit of a panic, those folks 
who have non-Catholic children in Catholic schools who 
learned that there was a court decision saying that there would 
no longer be any funding for those children. So there’s no 
question, unchallenged, this ruling would make fundamental 
changes to education and classrooms, not only here in 
Saskatchewan, but all across the country. It would have a huge 
impact. 
 
And right from the beginning last spring, we’ve said in order to 
move forward, both time and clarity are needed. And we 
support the appeal because it provides something that the Sask 
Party’s approach to this doesn’t. So around the appeal, Mr. 
Speaker, the government didn’t get into the appeal right away. 
It was the Saskatchewan Catholic School Boards Association. 
And the appeal actually is what would provide certainty and 
clarity, Mr. Speaker. And in fact the Premier said last spring 
himself that there was no need for this clause because there’s 
. . . and time was not a bad thing. He said, “There’s time. 
There’s going to . . . appeal and the ruling is stayed because of 
the appeal.”  
 
So the minister’s comment that this notwithstanding clause had 
to be invoked and in play for next spring is not in fact the case, 
Mr. Speaker. The Premier’s own words point out that the ruling 
would have been stayed during the appeal process. And it’s 
important to point out that with the notwithstanding clause, in 
terms of certainty, the government would have to come back 
every five years to implement it again. So I’m not quite sure 
what kind of stability that it provides for someone who’s got a 
child in grade 1 or grade 3 or anywhere along the lines, Mr. 
Speaker. The reality is that it doesn’t provide certainty, that it 
buys you a five-year window, a five-year window at best, 



3198 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2017 

because there has to be some point in those five years where 
government has to start having the conversations about whether 
or not they’re going to pursue this. 
 
So invoking the notwithstanding clause wasn’t necessary in this 
case and we fully supported the . . . I can hear actually the 
member from Meadow Lake heckling that it was, but the 
Premier’s comments actually say that the ruling would have 
been stayed, Mr. Speaker, because of the appeal. So the 
minister’s comments around clarity and certainty are interesting 
because it does not provide that, Mr. Speaker. This in fact, 
every five years having to come back to putting this clause in 
place is a problem. So I would argue that this is the Sask Party 
once again playing politics with our kids, Mr. Speaker, and our 
kids’ classrooms. 
 
While the appeal is considered, there is no need to jump to the 
notwithstanding clause. And again I’ve spoken to lots of 
families who want certainty and who want to have that 
opportunity to have their children in the Catholic system if they 
so choose, Mr. Speaker. But I’ve talked to many of them who 
understand that this is a process, a legal process, that buys them 
more time, and will not just buy them more time but in fact 
create the opportunity for some certainty down the road. 
 
But I think the one thing . . . And it’s not to say one doesn’t rule 
out the notwithstanding clause, but I think that it would be wise 
to let the process play itself out, which could literally be years 
in the making, Mr. Speaker. So we should follow the appeal and 
make sure that it’s supported as much as possible, and that 
should be the priority of this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I think the interesting thing for me is this government is 
attempting to appear to be a champion of education. We only 
need to take a look at their record, Mr. Speaker, in recent years. 
We have a government, Mr. Speaker, that has cut at least $674 
in government funding for every student across the province. 
And you know, talking to teachers and talking to families, to 
parents, that is very apparent in classrooms. I’ll talk in a few 
minutes about some conversations that I have had with 
educators about what their reality looks like in the classroom. 
 
So this is a government that hiked education property tax by 67 
million but cut total government funding for education by $121 
million in this budget, Mr. Speaker. And that is showing up in 
the classrooms, Mr. Speaker. I can tell you some of the stories 
that I’ve heard. And we need to talk a little bit about numbers. 
 
So in the last decade or so there’s . . . The government likes to 
talk about how they’ve increased funding. Well they sure as 
heck better have increased funding, Mr. Speaker. This is a 
government who’s had more revenue at its disposal than any 
government in the history of this province, but in fact they’ve 
also seen an increase in the last decade of 20,250 students 
added to our schools. And that’s a good thing, Mr. Speaker, but 
education is the cornerstone for our future, Mr. Speaker. If we 
don’t support our children from their early years onward, we are 
not setting ourselves up to be a strong province down the road. 
 
This last year alone, there was at least 2,500 students added this 
year. And you know, in fact the minister finally admitted this 
week with her own numbers that there’s about 180 fewer 
teachers in education or school-based supports. And it was 

interesting, her comment — I’m paraphrasing here — but she 
had said that it wasn’t as bad as they expected. It was a little 
crisis, Mr. Speaker, not a big crisis, but just a little crisis. 
 
But you talk to anybody in the classrooms . . . There’s members 
on the other side of the House who have young children. I’m 
not sure if they’re quite at school age yet, but I know my own 
daughter in her classroom in her school this year, I believe 
there’s not a single classroom that now isn’t a split classroom, 
which is incredibly difficult for teachers to manage split 
classrooms. You see it occasionally, a few classrooms in a 
school, but without fail there’s not a single classroom that isn’t 
split in her school at this point in time, Mr. Speaker. I know in 
my daughter’s own classroom, a Grade 4/5 split, and trying to 
manage well over 30 students and two different grades is 
challenging. 
 
But that’s actually one of the better cases that I’ve heard, Mr. 
Speaker. I’ve talked to parents and teachers in recent years — a 
grade 1 teacher actually who was telling me about her class. 
She’s got 32 children in grade 1. I know as a parent of two 
children, I’m not quite sure . . . I can’t even imagine what a 
classroom of 32 grade 1 children looks like. And in fact she had 
an EA [educational assistant] for a whopping 15 minutes — or 
sorry — she had one EA, Mr. Speaker, for two hours a week in 
a classroom of 32 grade 1 students. She had some children who 
were in need of English as an additional language. They got 15 
minutes of English as an additional language training, two times 
a week, Mr. Speaker. So I’m not quite sure how you bring kids 
up to speed and help them grow and thrive in their classroom 
with 15 minutes of English as an additional language support. I 
can’t even imagine what a classroom of 32 grade 1 kids looks 
like. 
 
I talked to a teacher who was just telling me recently her school 
doesn’t have the math resources to provide to her kids, so she 
just has spent $800 of her own money. She herself is a single 
mom who doesn’t have a lot of money herself, but she wanted 
to make sure that her kids . . . She needs to have multiple levels 
of materials for her students, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I spoke to a teacher recently at one of the schools in my 
constituency actually, probably a school that has more 
challenges than many in the province around socio-economic 
issues, parents who are struggling with systemic racism, and 
struggling with the legacy of residential, Mr. Speaker. This year 
the teacher that I spoke to recently has 21 kids in her grade 1 
class and she has one EA, so she’s grateful for one EA, but she 
talked about being run . . . Her EA, she says, is run ragged and 
she is run ragged, Mr. Speaker. She’s got two children who 
can’t count to three. She’s got many students with FASD [fetal 
alcohol spectrum disorder]. She’s got kids who are hungry on a 
daily basis. She has new students all the time because of 
insecure housing, Mr. Speaker, kids whose families are 
struggling with maintaining housing. And these are huge 
challenges. 
 
[16:00] 
 
Because of this government’s budget cut last year, the Catholic 
School Board in Saskatoon had to cut the Aboriginal liaison 
workers, which were a huge support for teachers and to ensure 
that families got their kids to school because not everybody has 



November 29, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3199 

a legacy of attending school, Mr. Speaker. And these are things 
that we have to support folks to do sometimes. This teacher was 
telling me about she has two children who aren’t verbal, and 
they had, for a period of two months, 15 minutes of speech 
pathology a day for two months for which she was grateful. But 
it stopped because the speech pathologist has a huge list of 
other students that they have to support. 
 
I’ve spoken to a teacher at a school here in Regina who . . . In 
fact the copy paper is being rationed because of the . . . The 
school-based budget is not where it should be at, and in fact the 
copy paper is locked up and is rationed, Mr. Speaker. This is 
this government’s legacy of education, a government who has 
had more resources at its disposal than any other government in 
the history of this province and who doesn’t recognize that 
those investments in children bear fruit 20 years down the road, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are story after story. I have a nephew who is a teacher in 
Saskatoon, a brilliant kid who’s just finishing his Ph.D. Any 
child would be lucky to have him as an educator, and I know 
that he’s struggling and he is wondering if education was the 
right career for him after a decade or so in the profession. 
 
The stats that I’ve read, I understand we’re losing half of 
teachers in the first five years, Mr. Speaker, half of teachers 
we’re losing in the first five years. So they go through their 
education and are feeling not supported by a government, by 
their government, Mr. Speaker, a government who isn’t putting 
the resources into classrooms and into our children and into our 
future, for all intents and purposes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It was heartbreaking, actually, one of the conversations that I 
had recently with an educator who told me she feels like she’s 
failing. It was heartbreaking, as this teacher is crying, Mr. 
Speaker, and telling me that she wouldn’t wish this job on 
anyone. She says she loves her kids and she knows . . . Like 
people get into education because they want to make a 
difference and they want to change lives. And she kept 
affirming for me how much she loved her kids, but she feels 
like she’s failing them, Mr. Speaker. And as such, I think this 
government . . . It’s not her who’s failing those children. It is 
this minister and this Sask Party government that is failing our 
students and not . . . It’s about today, but it’s about the next 20 
years and going forward. 
 
I think also about children on reserve, Mr. Speaker. This is a 
government who can’t recognize the injustice of the fact that 
children on reserve get 60, about 60 cents on the dollar of what 
my child in Saskatoon receives at a school, Mr. Speaker. 
Instead of making sure that that isn’t an issue and ensuring that 
kids on reserve have what they need, instead of fighting over 
jurisdiction, the government needs to get its act together and 
support those kids as they support . . . Well actually I was going 
to say as they support kids in the city, in the bigger centres, but 
the reality is they’re not supporting children well anywhere. But 
there’s a huge disparity between kids on reserve and off reserve, 
Mr. Speaker. So bare minimum, those kids should be receiving 
the same amount of funding as my child does in Saskatoon, but 
I think we have to raise the bar for everybody. 
 
So despite this government’s grandstanding around this 
particular bill and the notwithstanding clause, they really need 

to start showing people in Saskatchewan that they support our 
education system and need to invest in our future, Mr. Speaker. 
We have a government who has some interesting priorities. I 
don’t think that they’re priorities of the people of Saskatchewan 
by and large, Mr. Speaker. And I guess we see how that plays 
out in the coming years. 
 
But with that, I know that there will be my colleagues who will 
also weigh into the debate on Bill No. 89, The School Choice 
Protection Act. I know the critic will weigh in, in time, in 
debate, but will also have many, many questions when we get to 
committee on this. She will have many questions, I have no 
doubt about that, Mr. Speaker. But with that, I think I’d like to 
close my comments and I would like to move to adjourn debate 
on Bill No. 89. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Riversdale has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 89. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 90 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Makowsky that Bill No. 90 — The 
Heritage Property Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 
pleasure to rise and enter into this debate again. I was speaking 
a bit yesterday, but I wanted to make sure I got a few more 
comments on the record because I do think this is a very, very 
important piece of legislation. And some of the comments that 
are flying around the province these days, it’s very important 
that we get them on the record and talk about the issues at hand. 
 
As I said yesterday, we are very blessed to be working in one of 
most highly regarded heritage properties in this province, if not 
in Canada, I would think. It’d be certainly up amongst the top 
25 I would think, if not higher than that. But of course I’m 
talking about the Legislative Building here and the grounds that 
really we are so very, very proud of. 
 
And we did a lot of work over the past few years on the dome, 
and of course that cost us, I think, somewhere around $12 
million, I think 12 or $15 million. And it’s been pointed out, 
quite often when you do heritage properties like that, there’s a 
multiplier effect where the benefits that are seen really can be as 
high as 12 times. So the benefit of doing, maintaining this 
property here in that one project could be as high as $200 
million. 
 
And I wanted to also give another shout-out to what’s 
happening in Saskatoon and urging people and if they’re not 
aware of the initiative that Wanuskewin is taking on. And it’s 
Thundering Ahead, I think is what it’s called. And it’s a bold 
initiative to be a first UNESCO [United Nations Educational, 



3200 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2017 

Scientific and Cultural Organization] site here in Saskatchewan. 
And there is a lot of merit to that initiative in terms of the 
archaeological digs, the cultural significance of that area right 
beside the South Saskatchewan, and the way the city has come 
together with Wanuskewin too, that we hope to see bison 
actually roaming within a few short years. And that will be very 
interesting to see that kind of thing happening. 
 
So there is a lot of good reasons to get excited about heritage 
here in Saskatchewan because we really have such a wide 
range, a real gamut of experiences. And I was talking yesterday, 
even my hometown of Mortlach which had the first professional 
archaeological dig in Saskatchewan: it’s called the Mortlach 
Site. And it really is something that, you know, we’re pretty 
proud of. And when you talk to archaeologists, you know, well 
they get pretty pumped about different things. And I was talking 
to one at an event just a few weeks ago and it’s sort of like the 
basic 101. You have to talk about the Mortlach dig, and that 
happened in the mid-’50s. And I actually think that it was part 
of the . . . Was it the Jubilee, the 50th anniversary of 
Saskatchewan that they were starting to do that in 1955, which 
is hard to believe that we’re here that much further. 
 
Yesterday I talked a little bit about the heritage projects that are 
happening in Saskatoon Centre and that we’re all getting these 
letters. And I don’t think it’s any mistake that we are getting 
these letters. And I’m sure the members over there are. And I 
know the minister has been cc’d on my letter from the 
Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation to talk about the provincial 
impact that SHF [Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation] has 
provided through its grants program since 1991. And I 
highlighted that in my town, my riding, a couple. One was back 
in 2006, the Fairbanks-Morse Warehouse restoration and 
conversion. They received a grant for 13,000. 
 
Then there was just a couple of activities. But the other one that 
was quite major and I’m quite familiar with as they’re often 
lobbying me and they have been successful in the SHF award 
— they’ve had three in 2011, 2012, 2013 — the Cathedral of St. 
John the Evangelist in Saskatoon, of which they’ve received 
three awards totalling about 109,000. But to be fair to those 
folks, they’ve applied for 300,000 so they’ve got about a third. 
 
So people don’t get all that they need. And I know the work that 
the people for St. John’s Cathedral, a church that’s over 100 
years old — in fact I think they just had their celebration of 
their 100th annual service this past summer — it’s important 
work. It’s hugely important work because many of us who will 
know Spadina Crescent in Saskatoon will think about the three 
churches that are along Spadina, will think about the 
Bessborough, will think about the heritage properties there 
along in that area — it’s quite a dense area — and how 
important that is. And so it’s something that we should take a 
lot of pride in, a lot of pride in. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think that . . . And then they also talk about 
some of the other things that happened, that they’ve helped 
fund: a water tower restoration project in Hague; a log home 
that was built in 1892 in Shellbrook, they received some 
money. Indian Head Grand Theatre received $45,000, and I can 
imagine that it probably is a pretty impressive theatre and 
probably deserved that; the Zion Church in Moose Jaw, 33,000. 
The Bent Nail Cafe in Mossbank received 5,000. And then 

there was another one for St. Matthew’s Church here in Regina. 
And in fact it’s the church that my wife and I were married in 
on Winnipeg Street. It received $25,000. 
 
So there’s a lot of work that needs to be done. And this is how 
Neil Russell closes off the letter: 
 

On behalf of the board, it’s my honour to share and 
celebrate the incredible heritage conservation projects in 
your constituency and look forward to continuing this 
important work across the province. 

 
And so it’s really critical that we do that and we take a look at 
that letter and reflect on what this bill . . . While the minister 
says it’s pretty straightforward, we do have some questions 
about it. 
 
And I guess the one big one that I’ll have and will be talking 
about is this: the review board will now consist of at least three 
people who are appointed solely to carry out the review board 
duties. And the idea was they wanted somebody at arm’s length 
because the foundation does give out the awards. They do the 
grants on behalf of the province to different organizations who 
are wanting to maintain or restore their heritage properties, and 
sometimes there are appeals or reviews. But it’s really 
important that these three people, I think, have some critical 
experience or critical expertise in heritage property, that we 
don’t have just all three might be just random people. 
 
Well you know, we would never have a situation where in the 
Arts Board where we have a process where you don’t have 
people who know something about art, adjudicating art 
applications. We would never have somebody in the 
environmental review process, we would never have somebody 
or three people on a board who know nothing about 
environmental protection. And we would never have, when it 
comes to either manufacturing or resource management or 
where we’re talking about just on the industrial sites board, to 
manage their money, we would never put three people on a 
board who knew nothing about money. That doesn’t make a lot 
of sense. 
 
And so here we’re concerned that the three people who may be 
appointed solely to carry out the review board duties — I 
understand the arm’s-length thing, and I think that’s fair enough 
if they’re not awarding the money — they should have, they 
should have some expertise, some knowledge that they’re 
working from and that they value heritage property in the 
province. 
 
[16:15] 
 
I mean if they’re just not at all interested in heritage property 
and they’re more interested in development and that’s what 
their real endgame is, to get developers on this board, that could 
be the worst case scenario: who don’t see the value of some of 
our older properties and rather just see them be torn down. They 
don’t see the actual impact and the leverage that when you 
invest in heritage property that actually you can do quite well. 
 
I wanted to as well — and this is a letter and I talked about Dr. 
Merle Massie’s letter yesterday — and I wanted to refer back to 
it. And it’s one that just came out just a few short weeks ago. It 



November 29, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3201 

was printed in the Leader-Post on November 1st this year and 
the headline was “Province needs to prove that heritage 
matters.” And I think it’s one that we should listen to this fellow 
and we should be thinking about and really think about the kind 
of province that we want to have for our future generations.  
 
I mean the wonderful thing about heritage is, while it’s 
attractive and beautiful and interesting for the people 
immediately, it’s even more attractive and interesting and 
intriguing and interesting for people, generations down the 
road. We’ve all travelled to places in the world — whether it be 
Quebec or the Maritimes, any place really — and we’ve 
wondered at the history of the place. And so the fellow, Dr. 
Massie, talks about, and he refers to last summer, the 
Government of Saskatchewan received an international award 
for heritage restoration done on this dome. And we were all 
very impressed and happy that that happened. 
 
It took over a year to complete. Many of us actually went up to 
the dome, and in fact I know my colleague from Prince Albert 
went up with me. We had our hard hats on and our safety 
glasses, and it was quite a thing to see. And it was very 
important. And he talked about how that cost about $21 million, 
and actually the return on investment was 252 million for the 
city of Regina. And that’s an impressive number. That’s very, 
very important. 
 
The unfortunate thing, and this is something like when I’ve 
talked about St. James, that in fact not many other groups have 
that kind of access to $21 million. They couldn’t all of a sudden 
say, let’s do the Cadillac version on our church, our theatre; 
we’re just trying to make do. And so that’s really the issue, that 
we need to make sure that we do fund the Heritage Foundation 
and that it’s appropriate. 
 
And we did see a cut last year where the funding from the 
government was just over 500,000 — 504,000 — and it was cut 
to $290,000. There’s not much work that you can really do. 
They’ve worked hard to be as efficient as they can, to make 
sure as much money of that gets out the doors, but it’s hard. 
And when we see a budget clawback . . . 
 
And we talked about the choices. You know, this government 
over here likes to talk . . . You know, they’re keeping a lot of 
money in certain areas like Agriculture, $90 million. They’re 
keeping — and we know there are people in need in agriculture 
— 90 million they’re keeping. But it’s choices they have made, 
choices they have made, Mr. Speaker. They get grant requests 
from across the province — from universities, cities, churches, 
banks, libraries, businesses, the small rural churches that are 
kept standing through bake sales and pocket money and donated 
hammer time — and the number of requests and the amount of 
these requests far outstrips the available grant revenue by an 
order of magnitude, and they just can’t deliver. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there were changes. There were changes that 
happened after, in the last few years. “After years,” and I’m 
quoting: 
 

After years of growing tension, the government saw fit to 
quietly let all of the old board members go and appoint an 
all-new board, no doubt hoping they would be better at 
bowing. But the new board members are just as smart — 

smarter than the old. They formally cut all ties to the 
ministry, and have hired their own manager and their own 
grants and a finance officer.  
 
The board and staff are dedicated to serving the province 
of Saskatchewan, as is their mandate. 

 
So we’ll have some questions to the minister. Is that the case? Is 
that the case? He goes on to say: 
 

It is imperative that the SHF, with its public granting 
programs, be arm’s-length from the government. The 
interference was too much. [Dr. Merle calls on, he says.] I 
call upon the five Saskatchewan Party leadership 
candidates to look into this issue, and make it part of their 
platform. It is imperative that you give the Saskatchewan 
Heritage Foundation transfers directly from the 
[government] General Revenue Fund, at the level given to 
other third party agencies . . . 

 
And then he lists, he lists . . . And you know, I’m a big 
supporter of the other two, or at least of the Saskatchewan Arts 
Board which received $7 million last year, or Creative 
Saskatchewan which received 8 million. So the three 
arm’s-length boards, one gets $200,000 and the other two get 7 
and 8 million. Now I know the good work that the Arts Board 
does, and I would hate to see it cut. But I think when you’re 
cutting, what kind of work can you do for $200,000? So he 
challenges us. He challenges us in the legislature. He says: 
 

You’ve proven it yourself. Saskatchewan has a bold, 
international statement to make through heritage 
conservation and preservation. Heritage matters.  
 

He goes on: 
 

Therefore we expect our government to support its many 
inspiring national, provincial, and municipal heritage 
properties from north to south and from east to west, not 
just the dome in Regina.  
 
Do better. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, I really feel that this is not an urban issue. This 
is not a rural issue. This is a Saskatchewan issue. This is one 
that we all matter. We’re on a verge of getting a UNESCO site 
here in Saskatchewan, we hope. We hope. But really the signal 
needs to be from this province, from this government, that 
heritage does matter, does matter. And a paltry $200,000 a year 
just doesn’t cut it. And while they can be concerned about 
who’s on the board and the appeal process, we can have that 
discussion. But I really urge people to take a look at the letter 
they received, that we all received this fall from the Chair of the 
board. And then also take a listen to Dr. Merle Massie. I think 
he’s got a lot to say that we need to pay attention to. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s always a 
pleasure to join in the debate when it comes to discussing some 
of the new bills that are coming out, and so I’m going to be 



3202 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2017 

adding some of my comments to Bill No. 90, The Heritage 
Property Amendment Act, 2017, Mr. Speaker. According to 
some of the minister’s remarks here, he indicated that The 
Heritage Property Act was established in 1980. And so the 
primary focus for the Act was to govern the protection, 
conservation, and development of heritage property in the 
province, and this enables both the province and the municipal 
governments to recognize, preserve, and manage heritage 
properties. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, this is really important because in 
Saskatchewan we have a lot of heritage sites which are really 
important to our history of our province and to maintain all the 
stories that our province has.  
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in my constituency we have a lot of heritage 
sites inside Prince Albert Northcote. And actually my own 
house was built in 1909, so it’s 108 years old. So I really 
appreciate our historical sites and our historical homes. And we 
were just talking about some of the beautiful museums that 
Prince Albert has as well, and I think Prince Albert has done a 
wonderful job with restoring and encouraging people to utilize 
our older buildings and heritage sites. 
 
And also growing up I lived just on an acreage between St. 
Louis and Batoche, so spent a lot of time at Batoche. And so I 
know museums and history have always been very important in 
my family and our history, and I love the fact that we keep it 
well alive in Saskatchewan.  
 
And I oftentimes think of Moose Jaw and how, what a 
wonderful job they’ve done with restoring their buildings and 
keeping them looking really nice. But you also feel like you 
kind of walk into a time zone sometimes too there, and it’s just 
really lovely. So I think this is important for our government to 
realize that we have to ensure that we have heritage properties 
that are properly maintained in our province. 
 
So “heritage property” is broadly defined as any property that is 
of interest on account of its historical, architectural, and 
scientific or cultural value. And it provides for the formal 
designation of heritage property by both municipalities and the 
province, and that’s what the purpose of this Act is. 
 
Some of the amendments that are going to be discussed and 
presented are . . . One of the first amendments will be to 
implement an operational separation between the review board 
and the Sask Heritage Foundation in order to avoid any 
potential conflicts of interest between these two entities. So the 
review board will operate separately and independently to 
provide objective and partial and transparent hearings. 
 
So some of the questions that I had, Mr. Speaker, was what 
conflicts have already been raised. What were the issues that led 
to the decision of separating these two, the review board and the 
Sask Heritage Foundation? I would think that there’d be more 
transparency and accountability with having two different 
entities involved. But maybe there’s a little bit more to this, and 
I hope when the critic gets a chance to meet with the minister 
that they have this discussion because I think it’s really 
important what’s led to this decision. And who asked for these 
changes? Was this something that outside stakeholders were 
asking for or was it one of the two agencies here, the Sask 

Heritage Foundation or the review board, recommending it? 
 
My understanding is that this decision here isn’t accepted by 
some people, you know, and I think it’s really important that we 
hear out what their concerns are and discuss with all the 
stakeholders and consult with them and ask their feedback. My 
colleague was talking about how there was some concern about 
the review board and who would be the members of that board 
and how they’re selected and who makes those decisions. And 
so I think those are also really good questions to ask when this 
is brought back to committee. 
 
The second amendment would be to provide an efficient and 
cost-effective process for amending existing provincial heritage 
property designations such as alterations to designation, 
boundaries, and name changes. The hope, with regards to this 
amendment, is to allow appropriate changes to be made 
efficiently and cost effectively. And it sounds like they’re 
wanting to expedite the process because the process that 
happens now is a little bit more cumbersome. But you know, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, sometimes cumbersome processes are 
there for a purpose because it allows people to have an 
opportunity to evaluate the situation and look at all sides, and 
do some more investigative research and evidence-based 
decisions, which I was talking in a bill earlier about, you know. 
And I think that’s really important that we keep that in mind as 
well. 
 
So again, who asked for these changes? And, what was the 
purpose of wanting to come forward with making these 
changes, after all these years of doing it the way we have been 
doing it? So I think it’ll be very important that we talk with all 
the stakeholders and that we have these discussions. 
 
And I know some of my colleagues are going to be wanting to 
have more input with regards to this bill, and I know that the 
critic is going to have a lot of questions that they’ll want to 
present to the minister. So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am 
going to move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 90, The Heritage 
Property Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The member from 
Prince Albert Northcote has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 
90, The Heritage Property Amendment Act, 2017. Is that 
agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Carried. 
 
[16:30] 
 

Bill No. 91 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 91 — The 
Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair of 



November 29, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3203 

Committees. Good to join debate this afternoon on The 
Snowmobile Amendment Act. Certainly winter is upon us in 
Saskatchewan, and there’s some folks I know that are about as 
keen on sledding as I am on cross-country skiing certainly. And 
I’m sure there was no end of rejoicing about three weeks ago 
when we had that great snowfall, only to turn to dismay when 
we’d watch the, you know, the unseasonably hot, 
record-breaking hot temperatures come in and change the 
conditions considerably, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so one thing I know about Saskatchewan: there are a lot of 
passionate, avid snowmobilers north to south, Mr. Speaker. I 
know that some of them are even in this House, although 
perhaps . . . I’m getting a nod in the affirmative, a vigorous nod 
in the affirmative from the member from Carrot River Valley. 
And certainly given his need for speed, Mr. Speaker, I have no 
doubt that being the case. 
 
But certainly The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2017 and the 
transfer of responsibilities, they’re, I guess, different things in 
the bill. But certainly one of the more dominant themes than 
what’s set out in the legislation here, Mr. Speaker, is the move 
from a number of responsibilities of what had been with the 
Highway Traffic Board being transferred to the SGI. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it’d be interesting to find out why the Highway Traffic 
Board has been deemed no longer sufficient to carry out these 
duties, why it made more sense to transfer to SGI. And certainly 
we’ll look to pursue that matter further in committee under 
closer questioning of the minister. 
 
In terms of updating the definition of non-resident, making it 
consistent with The Traffic Safety Act, again, Mr. Speaker, fair 
enough. Don’t know if we need to stop the press for that one, 
but certainly that’s what happens when you’re setting out to 
modernize the legislation. And probably a good move. 
 
There’s an update to the definition of snowmobile to conform 
with current standards. Now again I don’t know if it needs to be 
fast enough for the member from Carrot River Valley or how 
that works out precisely, but certainly these things change over 
time and that’s the way it goes. 
 
Removal of the definition of trail permits, those no longer being 
required, Mr. Speaker. The requirement of licence plates being 
displayed on snowmobiles or the carrying of a registration 
permit if the snowmobile is registered by a permit. Again, Mr. 
Speaker, fair enough, seems like a good move. And again 
referencing that transfer of different functions between the 
Highway Traffic Board and the SGI, that it would be SGI and 
not the Highway Traffic Board to set the expiry date on 
certificates of registration and licences. 
 
In the legislation it sets out December 1st and April 15th, 
snowmobile trails being restricted to snowmobiles and trail 
maintenance equipment. Again, Mr. Speaker, pretty 
straightforward. 
 
The removal of authority of trail managers to set trail permit 
fees, making them more uniform, Mr. Speaker, and the 
snowmobile trails being funded through registration fees. And 
again it’s an interesting . . . I’ll be interested to find out myself, 
Mr. Speaker, how many registered snowmobiles there are, what 
kind of dollar figures are involved, and how that in turn works 

to make the considerable system of snowmobile trails in this 
province go around, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In terms of again clarifying that it’ll be SGI and not the 
Highway Traffic Board prescribing the form on which accidents 
are to be reported, again, Mr. Speaker, you know, safe sledding 
is good sledding. And there are a lot of great snowmobilers out 
there that do so safely, have a lot of fun, but there’s obviously 
some danger involved with the speeds you can reach on a snow 
machine. And again that that is more uniformly regulated would 
only make sense. And in terms of, you know, which is the 
authority for that, the appropriate form, and then how that 
relates to insurance, how that relates to different things around 
health outcomes, if that’s involved, Mr. Speaker, then so be it. 
But again clarifying that it’s SGI and not the Highway Traffic 
Board which is prescribing the form again makes good sense. 
 
And also clarifying that it’s SGI and not the Highway Traffic 
Board that receives accident reports. Again clarifying the 
respective authorities, Mr. Speaker, and that it is SGI and not 
the Highway Traffic Board with the authority to restrict or 
prohibit snowmobile use for safety concerns. Again, Mr. 
Speaker, clarifying the appropriate authority and then the 
powers and the different functions that flow therefrom. All 
pretty straightforward, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I do want to say that as straightforward as the legislation would 
appear, it’s good . . . I know that in the sector there are a lot of 
great people involved, Mr. Speaker, lobbying, examining the 
regulations that are in place. I think certainly of the Brewers out 
of Regina Beach and, you know, a family that’s put endless 
hours into the betterment of conditions and the way that people 
are able to enjoy snowmobiling in Saskatchewan. And I think of 
different of the stories from my northern colleagues about the 
different poker rallies that get going. People going great 
distances in all kinds of weather on their snow machine. 
Snowmobiles are about as Saskatchewan as they come, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So again it’s good to see the legislation being brought forward. 
Not anything too earth-shattering here, but good to see them 
being brought forward, and further proof of good co-operation 
between the association and the snowmobilers and the 
government. And I know there are certainly folks in Parks, 
Culture and Sport . . . And I’m sure the same is true for folks 
over in SGI and in the transfer of different of these powers from 
the Highway Traffic Board to SGI. I’m sure there are a lot of 
good public servants that have impacted Bill No. 91 that we see 
here before us, here today. 
 
So now all we need, Mr. Speaker, is good, consistent snow and 
we’ll be good to go. So with that, I know other of my 
colleagues will certainly be hitting the trail for this one as well. 
And in that regard, Mr. Chair of Committees, I would move to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 91, The Snowmobile Amendment 
Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The member from 
Regina Elphinstone-Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 
No. 91, The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2017. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



3204 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2017 

The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 92 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 92 — The 
Saskatchewan Telecommunications Amendment Act, 2017 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s once again 
my pleasure to rise and enter into debate today on Bill No. 92, 
The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Amendment Act, 2017. 
This bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is rather straightforward, but I 
think requires some context and has some significant impact for 
people in Saskatchewan. 
 
This bill and the next bill, Bill No. 93, are in front of us 
contemplating a change to both The Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications Act as well as to SaskTel Holdco to allow 
a maximum aggregate borrowing limit to be raised from 1.3 
billion up by another half a billion dollars to $1.8 billion, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. In reading the second reading by the minister, 
he noted that the borrowing limit has been unchanged since ’91 
and that it does not allow the flexibility that SaskTel needs to 
grow and have capacity to respond to any financial demands. 
 
And certainly I think members on both sides of this House have 
been hearing about the need for increased Internet access and, 
more so, speed in rural areas, rural and northern areas in this 
province, and upgrades to those services, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And you know, I’ve heard people describe access to Internet as 
sort of the second coming of rural electrification. It is, to 
business and to schooling and to families, that important. And 
we’ve heard that from a lot of different sectors. Certainly I’ve 
heard that from the stockgrowers who put some points forward 
with regard to that. One of the concerns that they had noted was 
when marketing cattle online, you could actually miss sales 
because your Internet speed was not fast enough. And certainly 
that has a huge impact. 
 
When we were in discussions around the libraries Act or the 
contemplated cuts to the libraries, one of the concerns that we 
heard from people particularly in small towns and more remote 
locations was that the library was the one place that they could 
access the Internet. So they were doing their books there, we 
heard from some people. They were doing transactions for their 
small business or their operations in the library. So we certainly 
have heard that. I know that SARM [Saskatchewan Association 
of Rural Municipalities] also passed a resolution in this regard. 
 
And when I think of education in this province, our ability to 
provide students with access to Internet as well as content really 
is impacted by their ability, how quickly they can access 
information — electronic information, digital information. 
 
I think there’ll probably be impacts when we think about things 
in terms of diagnostics, the ability to do medical imaging, 
remote medical imaging to rural and remote areas. That’s 
another area. 
 

So certainly we understand the need for continued innovation, 
and that is something that SaskTel has done really quite 
effectively over the years. As well as providing important 
employment opportunities, they really have been an innovator 
over the years. I think of fibre optics. We were a world leader in 
fibre optics, and that technology came out of the innovation of 
this very important Crown corporation. And we would like to 
see, as is no secret, we would like to see that success continued. 
 
And if we have some concern about the future of our Crown 
corporations, I don’t think that anyone who has been paying 
attention would question that too much. Certainly we have seen 
a threat to our Crown corporations with the passage and now 
sort of partial repeal of legislation that would allow the sale of 
up to 49 per cent of any one of our Crown corporations and 
some, you know, threats to those jobs that are contained there. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been very clear that that’s not 
something we want to happen. 
 
[16:45] 
 
As well as the innovation that SaskTel provides and the 
services, the lowest cellular rates in the country, having that 
third major carrier in the province not only provides low rates 
but provides downward pressure on the rates of the other 
carriers, you know. That’s but one more benefit for all of us. 
 
The fact that SaskTel has provided half a billion dollars in 
dividends back to the GRF [General Revenue Fund] in this 
province, that’s also no small measure. And it is something that 
allows us to pay for things that we all value here in this 
province, well that people value in this province anyway, Mr. 
Speaker, like education. 
 
The other context here that I think is important to point out is 
the borrowing limit, you know, as we’ve noted some concession 
with regard to the need to invest in increased technology and 
availability of high-speed Internet in more areas of the province. 
This is part of a trend that we have seen, certainly we have seen 
with SaskPower for example, an increase of their debt ceiling 
from 5 and then quickly to 8 and then quickly to $10 billion.  
 
I think over the course of — I’m looking to the critic here — 
over three years and a doubling of that debt . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Over five years. I stand corrected, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And a current level of debt back in 2008, the public 
debt in this province was $18.2 billion. We have seen that grow 
to the current 18.2 at the end of this year and projected $22.3 
billion by 2021, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that is something 
that is a concern. Of course we have had difficult times as some 
reduction in resource revenue certainly over the last year or 
two, but the debt was growing even during the best years. 
 
I look back . . . I’m just going to take a screenshot here of some 
of the projections. Back in 2008 as I noted, sorry, total public 
debt was $10.5 billion; 2009, as we’re entering some of the 
years of the 150-plus-dollar-a-barrel oil, there was some 
reduction down to 7.9. But from that year has steadily 
increased, 8.2, 8.3, 8.5, relatively stable; 2013, 9.4; and then 
climbing more rapidly starting in 2014, 10.7 billion, 11.7 
billion, 13.4 billion; up to this year, 16.1; and again projected to 
18.2 by the end of this year. 
 



November 29, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3205 

I don’t know; they’re through the contingency already. We’ll 
see what else happens here. But by 2021 — and I’m reading 
from the budget documents here — up to $22.8 billion by 2021. 
And certainly when I mention that to people in the community, 
they’re quite surprised by that. They’re surprised that through a 
decade of growth that we have actually, the government has 
managed to actually double and almost triple — well, over 
triple — from the low of 7.8 per cent. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I say that in conversation about this bill 
because we have to think very carefully about the long-term 
plan here. Certainly we enjoy relatively low borrowing rates at 
this time. The Premier has mentioned that several times. But 
that doesn’t happen forever. Some of us are old enough to 
remember when interest rates were much higher. And while 
there will be a little bit of a buffer, we have seen interest rates, 
you know, 18 per cent. Our ability to pay this debt off is called 
into question even at those rates, the current rates at numbers 
that high. 
 
But when you talk about potential interest rate hikes, which we 
have seen slow hikes recently, I worry about what we’re 
kicking down the road for our kids. And it makes budgeting 
choices and choices, you know, to incur more debt — we ought 
to have a very good reason to do that. 
 
And perhaps I would concur that, you know, that the task of 
ensuring access to Internet is important. Maybe we ought to 
look at, you know, other spending decisions and see if there 
aren’t other places that maybe we could have . . . well certainly 
in retrospect there are many places we could have spent less 
money. I think of, you know, recent concerns about the GTH is 
not a small part of that, but other funding decisions. 
 
We also, you know, adding to this concern when we’re talking 
about getting best value for Crown corporations and ensuring 
that the work there, that it continues to be innovative and 
supported. It’s difficult, as I mentioned, back to Bill 40 and 
subsequent partial repeal of Bill 40. That sort of uncertainty 
really draws attention away from the core business of any 
operation, be it education, be it a private business, be it a Crown 
corporation. 
 
When you are concerned about rollbacks, you’re concerned 
about what potentially the makeup of your company looks like 
when there’s a vacuum of leadership and certainly direction by 
the government in terms of . . . and mixed signals about what’s 
going to happen. That has an impact on an organization, and 
certainly I’m sure that it has things like morale, but just in terms 
of where energies are spent. It is difficult when there is so much 
uncertainty. 
 
And we certainly, you know, some of us haven’t been here very 
long yet, but we’ve already seen a lot of different directions or 
signals and mixed signals with regard to what the intentions are 
of this government with regard to our Crown corporations. 
 
I know, you know, initially there were no meetings with regard 
to the sale of SaskTel. And then there were meetings, and then 
people were at meetings and they weren’t at meetings. And 
there was, you know, packaging it up to sell 49 per cent, and 
then we’re repealing it. So, Mr. Speaker, I think we would 
forgive anyone who felt a little bit less than certain with regard 

to what exactly the intentions are here. 
 
One of the clear intentions of course with this bill is increasing 
the borrowing limit and, as I said, I understand some of the 
reasons for that. It would be interesting to tuck into a little bit 
exactly what the projections are for how this money will be 
spent. 
 
One of the things we should always pay attention to when we’re 
talking about borrowing, and certainly one of the measures 
that’s used, is the debt-to-equity ratio. This is from the 
minister’s second reading on November the 15th. He noted that 
SaskTel’s, based on the approved plan, debt ratios are forecast 
to be 51 per cent. He also notes that industry standard is 
between 47 to 76 per cent, but that if SaskTel and a SaskTel 
Holdco did reach their limit at 1.8, that would bump that debt 
ratio forecast up to 63 per cent, which is getting towards that 
higher end, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and is something we all . . . 
You know, when it’s the case with one Crown corporation, but 
when we’re piling debt on all of the Crown corporations, that 
has an impact. 
 
And again, I think, many people have said it, but this is also 
something that I hear from my constituents: there’s a real 
concern about what we’re leaving for our kids in terms of 
kicking responsibility down the road, which is a reasonable 
consideration, Mr. Speaker. There has been sometimes, you 
know, much talk at one point about paying down the debt. And 
again, as I recognize, there was a dip there one year. But it’s 
been steadily climbing since 2009, again, even during some of 
the best years of this province. And I think that that is, as I 
stated before, people really are surprised by that. Sometimes, 
you know . . . not buried. Certainly this is readily available right 
within the most recent budget. 
 
But, you know, the fact that we are forecast to be at $22.8 
billion by 2021 really does capture people’s attention, and often 
they’re unaware of that. And, you know, there’s a message 
often that we’re keeping strong and everything is fine, but that 
is an increasing concern for people. And when they have a 
chance to look at the numbers in black and white, I do hear 
from a lot of people that that is something that they’re first of 
all surprised by, but concerned about as well. 
 
I’m sure we’ll have some more comments and questions about 
this, Mr. Speaker, as we move through the comments and the 
debates of some of the members on this side. And also I’m sure 
the critic will have more questions. But I think I have concluded 
my remarks here with regard to this bill, Bill No. 92, The 
Saskatchewan Telecommunications Amendment Act. And with 
that I would move to adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 92. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 93 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 



3206 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2017 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 93 — The 
Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now for something 
completely different. I’m afraid some of my remarks on this bill 
might be curiously similar to the ones that I just made. But I 
think I will . . . It’s worth repeating. I’m getting some nods from 
this side, anyway. Mr. Speaker, so of course as I sort of gave a 
little foreshadowing that Bill No. 93 sort of is coupled with Bill 
No. 92, this being The Saskatchewan Telecommunications 
Holding Corporation Amendment Act. And between these two 
bills, they contemplate increasing the debt ceiling of SaskTel 
and SaskTel Holdco, increasing it from 1.3 billion up to $1.8 
billion. 
 
And I think to summarize some of my remarks, on one hand 
certainly understand the need to invest in infrastructure and to 
ensure access to the important utility that, you know, perhaps 
wasn’t contemplated in this province not so long ago but has 
become the way that people do business, the way that they 
socialize and communicate, and the way that we conduct, 
increasingly, schooling and, you know, venturing into areas 
such as medical diagnostics. 
 
The other train of my comments was around just paying very 
careful consideration to the amount of debt that we’re taking on 
and the decisions that we’re making and what we are passing on 
to people who will be here far after us. I know when last time 
we were up to $15 billion in debt in this province, we didn’t 
quite get it paid down. And now through the best years, we’re 
starting to — well we have more than started to — rack it up 
again. And I think that that bears some scrutiny and some 
consideration, Mr. Speaker. So with that, I think I have 
probably doubled up on my remarks a bit and I will continue to 
talk for a second here. 
 
The Speaker: — It now being 5 p.m., this Assembly stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 
 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3177 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3177 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3177 
  Bonk ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3177 
  Beck ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3177, 3178 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3177 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3178 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3178 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3178 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3178 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3179 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3179 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3179 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3179 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3180 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3180 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Regina Group Raises Funds for Music Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3180 
 Recycling Association Celebrates 10th Anniversary in Saskatchewan 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3180 
 Code of Silence Award 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3181 
 Partnerships Support Housing Initiatives  
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3181 
 Saskatchewan Roughriders and Football Saskatchewan Honour Principal 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3181 
 Opening of Housing Units for Families With Complex Needs 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3182 
 New Elementary Schools Open in Warman 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3182 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Access to Reproductive Health Services and Members’ Views on Abortion 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3182 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3182 
 State of Provincial Finances 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3183 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3183 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3183 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3183 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3184 
 Land Acquisitions for Regina Bypass Project and Global Transportation Hub 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3184 
  Marit ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3184 
 Employment and Provincial Economy 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3185 
  Bonk ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3185 
 Assistance for Cattle Producers 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3186 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3186 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 113 — The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2017 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3187 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3187 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 84 — The Income Tax (Business Income) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3187 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3187 
 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 3188 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3188 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3188 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 112 — The Miscellaneous Vehicle and Driving Statutes (Cannabis Legislation) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3188 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3189 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 85 — The Reclaimed Industrial Sites Amendment Act, 2017 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3191 
 Bill No. 86 — The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2017 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3193 
 Bill No. 87 — The Data Matching Agreements Act 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3195 
 Bill No. 88 — The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2017 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3196 
 Bill No. 89 — The School Choice Protection Act/Loi sur la protection du choix d’école 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3197 
 Bill No. 90 — The Heritage Property Amendment Act, 2017 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3199 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3201 
 Bill No. 91 — The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2017 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3202 
 Bill No. 92 — The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Amendment Act, 2017 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3204 
 Bill No. 93 — The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding Corporation Amendment Act, 2017 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3206 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

 
Hon. Steven Bonk 

Minister of the Economy 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 
Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Larry Doke 
Minister of Government Relations  

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 
Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Nancy Heppner 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Gene Makowsky 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  
and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 


