






















































Hansard: March 08, 2017


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 54A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 8, 2017, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 

 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 

Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 

 

 

 
 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 

Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 

Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 

Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 

Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 

Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 

Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 

Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 

Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 

Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 

Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 

Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 

Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 

D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 

Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 

Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 

Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 

Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 

Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 

Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 

Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 

Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 

Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 

Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 

Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 

Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 

Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 

Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 

Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 

Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 

Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 

McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 

Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 

Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 

Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 

Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 

Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 

Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 

Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 

Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 

Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 

Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 

Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 

Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 

Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 

Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 

Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 

Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 

Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 

Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 

Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 

Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 

Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 

Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 

Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 

Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 

Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 

Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 

 

 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 11 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1583 
 March 8, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on Points of Order 
 
The Speaker: — I’m prepared to rule on the points of order 
that were raised by the Government House Leader immediately 
after question period on Tuesday, March the 7th, 2017. The 
Government House Leader raised three separate instances of 
unparliamentarian language which he indicates were contrary to 
the rule 47 and were used during question period by the 
Opposition Whip, the Opposition House Leader, and the 
member for Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
The Government House Leader, while raising his point of order, 
alleged the Opposition Whip shouted “lies, lies, lies” from his 
seat. He went on to state that the Opposition House Leader used 
the paraphrase “half-truths” and, further, that the Finance critic 
used “lies” in her questions. In response to the point of order, 
the Opposition House Leader encouraged a review of the record 
and asked that not just the words should be considered but also 
the manner in which the comments were made. 
 
I’ve reviewed the record and am now prepared to rule on this 
matter. With regards to the first instance, the Government 
House Leader alleged that the Opposition Whip shouted from 
his seat “lies, lies, lies.” I have carefully reviewed Hansard, 
taken into consideration there is no other record of the member 
making these remarks, and, further, I did not hear these 
remarks. It is on this basis I find that the point of order is not 
well taken. 
 
However, I would like to remind all members that hurling 
insults across the floor is contrary to the proper conduct in this 
Assembly and can incite disorder. 
 
In the second instance, the Government House Leader indicated 
that the Opposition House Leader used the phrase “half-truths.” 
On page 1568 of Hansard, the member did state, “. . . they want 
the whole truth, not a half-truth.” On May 16th, 2013, Speaker 
D’Autremont ruled the former member for Prince Albert 
Carlton out of order when he used the words “half-truth.” At the 
time, the Speaker cited the definition of half-truth as “. . . a 
statement that mingles truth and falsehood with deliberate intent 
to deceive.” In this instance, the member was required to 
withdraw his remark and apologize. 
 
I find this point of order is well taken. At the end of my 
statement, I would ask the Opposition House Leader to 
withdraw the comment and apologize. 
 
The final point of order relates to the use of the words “lies” by 
the opposition Finance critic, the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. I reviewed Hansard and on page 1568, there are two 
instances where the member used the phrase, “. . . the games, 
the lines, the spin . . .” and “. . . the lines that we keep 
hearing . . .” 
 
During the debate there was a lot of noise in the Assembly and 

it may have been difficult to discern the difference between the 
words “lies” and “lines.” However, after reviewing the record, I 
find that the member from Saskatoon Nutana did use the word 
“lines.” I find the point of order not well taken. 
 
In closing I would like to caution all members to temper their 
comments and use restraint when making comments across the 
floor as this interferes with the proper function of this 
Assembly. Members should be mindful of displaying proper 
decorum and adhere to the rules of the debate. I’m requesting 
that all members co-operate in toning down the banter as it does 
not add to the effective parliamentary discourse. 
 
I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, I apologize and withdraw the 
comment. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, it is an 
honour for me, a real honour for me to be able to introduce a 
couple of special people that are seated in your gallery, in the 
Speaker’s gallery. 
 
I’ll begin with my only sibling, my brother Barry. He was here 
earlier. He had the chance to meet a number of members on this 
side of the House. And I didn’t request leave for an extended 
introduction, but I hope members are patient, that it might be a 
little longer than convention. 
 
He had a chance to meet some of my colleagues on this side of 
the House. The Deputy Premier helpfully pointed out, asked 
how much younger was he than I. He’s my older brother, for 
the record, Mr. Speaker. But I am very pleased to tell members 
of this House that he and his wife, Glenda, have recently moved 
back to Saskatchewan from Lethbridge, Alberta. 
 
He is a farmer and an entrepreneur. He is a man of character. 
He’s a man of faith and faith in action. I would note a couple 
examples of his activities, both in Alberta and here and abroad. 
He volunteered with Samaritan’s Purse when they responded to 
the crisis as a result of the Katrina disaster in Louisiana and was 
there for some two weeks. He is an example actually to which I 
aspire, Mr. Speaker, and I’m very grateful that he’s here in the 
House today. I think it’s his first time here, a chance for me to 
introduce Barry to all of you and through you to the province. 
 
I would also want to introduce that he is joined today by 
someone who’s very special as well. Barry and Glenda have 
three sons. One, the oldest son, lives near Swift Current. The 
middle son is in Saskatoon. He’s an autobody tech there. And 
their youngest son is living near Swift Current with Barry and 
Glenda, and he’s joined us today. His name is Darren. 
 
Darren Wall has . . . He’s got expertise in a number of areas, 
and I shared that as well with members of the cabinet. I had the 
chance to make sure he got to meet members of the cabinet. He 



1584 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2017 

knows a lot of them because one of the areas of his expertise is 
to follow politics here in Saskatchewan and previously where 
they were in Alberta. I had the chance to introduce Darren to his 
MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly], who is also the 
Minister of Highways. They live on Highway 363, and he had 
the opportunity to point out to the Highways minister that he 
still has a lot of work to do when it comes to 363. 
 
Some of his other areas of expertise include, well, trucks. He 
knows a lot about trucks of all sizes, I would say. And he is a 
great friend to all pets that he meets including our own Zeke 
and his own cats. And, Mr. Speaker, Darren’s just very special 
to me and special to all of us in our family. 
 
So I would like to ask all members of this House to join with 
me in welcoming to their Legislative Assembly today, Barry 
and Darren Wall. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And in 
recognition of International Women’s Day, you’re going to be 
hearing a lot from the women in our caucus today. And I’m 
going to start it off, first of all, with a couple of introductions. 
 
First off we’d like to welcome some of our labour leaders who 
are here in the east gallery. This is Lorne and Bill from Unifor. 
They’re here representing the interests of working people here 
in Saskatchewan and on behalf of us we’d like to welcome you 
to your Legislative Assembly and thank you for the important 
work that you do for the working people of Saskatchewan. So 
welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to also take 
this opportunity to introduce one of my colleague’s 
constituency schools. All the way here from Saskatoon is the 
Caswell Community School we’d like to welcome. This is the 
grade 8 students. My son went to Caswell many years ago, so I 
know your school and I think it’s a great school. 
 
And so we have the grade 8 students from Caswell Community 
School accompanied by their teachers, Susan Lutkin — where’s 
Susan? There she is — and Kayla Fraser. There’s Kayla up 
front. And then we have a couple parent chaperones too: 
Belinda Bilous is there somewhere — there’s Belinda — and 
Kerri-Anne Puderak. There they are. 
 
So thank you very much for coming to your Legislative 
Assembly. You’re about to witness democracy in action, and so 
we’re very pleased you took the time to come here today. And I 
think MLA Forbes will be giving you a tour later . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . The member for Saskatoon Centre. I apologize 
to the House for that. So your MLA will be taking care of you 
after the House, and he could answer any questions you might 
have. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Welcome these 
students. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the member opposite in welcoming the union leaders that 
are here today. The people of the workforce of our province, 

both within the civil service and those who are part of the 
workforce outside of the civil service, are part of what makes 
our province the great place that it is today. So I want to 
certainly welcome them to their legislature. 
 
And I note they had a few of their friends here with them for 
lunch earlier today, and I want to wish them all the very best 
and thank them for the service that they provide to our 
province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you. To you and through you, Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to introduce a good friend and constituent 
of mine. Her name is Victoria Jurgens, former MLA. She was 
the former MLA of Prince Albert Northcote and we spent many 
hours together, so I’m very pleased to see her here again. As 
well I would like to introduce her husband, Allan Jurgens, in 
your gallery, and please welcome him to his Assembly. Thank 
you. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition to stop the redirection of funding of 
the Northern Teacher Education Program Council, Mr. Speaker. 
The petitioners point out that this is . . . NORTEP [northern 
teacher education program] is, and NORPAC [Northern 
Professional Access College], particularly NORTEP has been a 
program with 40-plus years of success, Mr. Speaker. The most 
recent report that this government commissioned saw that, in 
the last five years, 94 per cent of NORTEP grads found 
successful employment in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
and this program has also improved the teacher retention rates 
in Saskatchewan schools. 
 
I think it’s important to point out on this International Women’s 
Day, Mr. Speaker, that of those 94 per cent of NORTEP grads, 
many of them, a large majority of them, are in fact women, Mr. 
Speaker, women who, through having opportunity, raise their 
community, uplift those in their community as well, Mr. 
Speaker. NORTEP provides the opportunity for these graduates 
to raise and create further opportunities for people in our 
community, Mr. Speaker. And people in the North and quite 
frankly all across Saskatchewan are not happy about this 
redirection of funding. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Sask Party government to immediately restore their 
five-year agreement to fund the Northern Teacher 
Education Program Council, Inc. and continue to fund 
NORTEP-NORPAC programs in La Ronge. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens from 
Stanley Mission, Air Ronge, and La Ronge. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Bonk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased today to 



March 8, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1585 

rise and present a petition from the citizens who are opposed to 
the federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer reads as follows, respectfully request that 
the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by citizens of Wapella, 
Moosomin, Rocanville, Whitewood, Fairlight, Weyburn, 
Fleming, Spy Hill, Wolseley, Indian Head, Yorkton, Lemberg, 
Wawota, Langbank, Esterhazy, Maryfield, Welwyn, Redvers, 
Manor, Carlyle, Storthoaks, Peebles, and Kipling. 
 
I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m rising to present 
a petition to the Legislative Assembly. The people who have 
signed this petition wish to bring to our attention the following: 
citizens in this province believe in an economy powered by 
transparency, accountability, security, and equity; and that all 
women should be paid equitably; that women are powerful 
drivers of economic growth, and their economic empowerment 
benefits all; that research published by the World Bank suggests 
that closing the gender wage gap could be worth the equivalent 
of 10 per cent of Canada’s GDP [gross domestic product] — 
that’s a lot. 
 
That the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives found that in 
Saskatoon in 2016 women earned on average 63 cents for every 
dollar that a man makes, and in Regina, women earned on 
average 73 cents for every dollar that a man makes. According 
to the most recent Statistics Canada data, the national gender 
wage gap for full-time workers is 72 cents for every dollar a 
man makes. And I think on today, Mr. Speaker, International 
Women’s Day, this is even more poignant that we’re pointing 
this out. 
 
I’ll read to you the prayer. The prayer reads that they: 
 

Respectfully request the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan eliminate the wage gap between women and 
men across all sectors where the Government of 
Saskatchewan has jurisdiction, provide a framework under 
which this can be done within this term of the Assembly, 
and that the Saskatchewan government call upon 
workplaces within Saskatchewan within the private sector 
to eliminate the wage gap between women and men. 

 
I so submit. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

present to you a petition to increase the funding to Prince Albert 
mobile crisis. Mr. Speaker, Prince Albert has a higher than 
provincial average for domestic violence and the victims are 
primarily women and children. It’s very important that we have 
trauma- and crisis-trained professionals to attend those calls, to 
work with the victims, and provide referrals to community 
agencies that can provide support. If trauma is addressed at the 
initial contact, there is a lot of research that shows that the 
long-term effects are minimized. 
 
Not only does mobile crisis provide that support but also, after 
the incident, they go back and they provide follow-up services 
to victims to ensure that they’re receiving the support they need. 
Our Prince Albert Police Service and the staff at Victoria 
Hospital do a very good job when they’re working with victims, 
but they are not trained for the specialized work that the crisis 
workers do. And since services to mobile crisis has been 
reduced, women and children are not receiving the support they 
need and deserve. So, Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly in Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to increase funding to 
Prince Albert mobile crisis unit so they may once again 
provide 24-hour emergency crisis service. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing this particular petition are 
from the city of Prince Albert. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition regarding child care centres in the province. Those who 
have signed the petition wish to draw our attention to the 
following: many of our licensed non-profit child care centres 
pay commercial property taxes, and this is something that is not 
done in Manitoba, Alberta, Ontario, BC [British Columbia], or 
New Brunswick. 
 
Child care is essential to the economy, yet most centres struggle 
to balance their budget. This issue threatens both the number of 
child care spaces as well as the quality of care. Quality child 
care has an enormous positive impact on a child’s future 
outcomes and yields high rates of economic return. 
 
Child care centres are institutions of early learning and 
childhood development, and it is appropriate that they have the 
same tax treatment as schools. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan recognize 
that licensed non-profit child care centres provide 
programs that are foundational to a healthy society by 
including them in the Saskatchewan education Act, and 
exempt all licensed non-profit child care centres in 
Saskatchewan from property tax through changes to the 
appropriate legislation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those signing this particular petition today reside 
in Regina. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 



1586 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2017 

Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 
today to present a petition opposing Bill 40 and a potential 49 
per cent Crown corporation sell-off. The Sask Party’s Bill 40 
creates a new definition of privatization that allows the 
government to wind down, dissolve, or sell up to 49 per cent of 
the shares of a Crown corporation without holding a 
referendum. 
 
In 2015-2016 alone, Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations 
returned $297.2 million in dividends to pay for schools, roads, 
and hospitals. Those dividends should go to the people of 
Saskatchewan, not private investors. Our Crown corporations 
employ thousands of Saskatchewan people across the province, 
and this short-sighted legislation risks sending millions of 
Crown dividends to Ottawa rather than the people of 
Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately stop 
the passage of Bill 40, The Interpretation Amendment Act 
and start protecting jobs and our Crown corporations 
instead of selling them off to pay for Sask Party 
mismanagement. 

 
Mr. Speaker, there are thousands of people across the province 
that are rising up to stand against this bill. There are thousands 
of signatures that we have on petitions. For this particular 
petition I submit today, the signators come from Regina, Prince 
Albert, and Pilot Butte. I do so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

International Women’s Day 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m truly honoured to 
stand here today on behalf of the NDP [New Democratic Party] 
on International Women’s Day. The official United Nations 
theme for this year is Be Bold for Change. It is a call on all 
people to help forge a better world, a more gender-inclusive 
world. And I tell you it was great to see so many sisters outside 
today being bold and demanding change. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the idea for International Women’s Day arose 
around the turn of the 20th century out of a long-standing 
movement for women to participate equally in society. We’ve 
made progress, but when it comes to fairness in the working 
world, we all know that women — our sisters, our daughters, 
our mothers — they deserve so much more. Mr. Speaker, the 
World Economic Forum predicts that at the current rate, the 
gender gap won’t be closed entirely until 2186. 2186, Mr. 
Speaker, is too long to wait. 
 
Around the world, International Women’s Day can be an 
important catalyst and a vehicle for driving greater change and 
moving closer to gender parity. Mr. Speaker, the status quo is 
simply unacceptable. We must be bold for change. I would ask 
all members in this House to join me in acknowledging 
International Women’s Day and recognizing the essential work 

that women across Saskatchewan and this world do every day, 
and in recognizing it is well past time for change. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to commemorate March 8th as International Women’s 
Day. International Women’s Day is observed annually to 
celebrate the economic, political, and social achievements of 
women everywhere. Mr. Speaker, today is an opportunity for us 
to celebrate Saskatchewan women and girls who are leaders and 
role models in their community. 
 
In Saskatchewan, the theme this year is Strength and Resilience 
of Indigenous Women in Saskatchewan. Throughout history 
many indigenous women have made a difference in 
Saskatchewan, Canada, and around the world. They have been 
and continue to be leaders, artists, athletes, and other role 
models who have helped shape our economy, society, and 
culture. They are demonstrating acts of courage, innovation, 
and leadership in sharing their knowledge in the face of 
economic, environmental, social, and cultural challenges. Their 
voices are helping to strengthen the diversity in our province 
and make Saskatchewan the best place to live, work, and raise 
families. 
 
Over the next few weeks, with support through our 
International Women’s Day grant program, communities across 
our province are hosting events that celebrate female indigenous 
knowledge keepers and emerging leaders. I ask everyone to join 
me in celebrating the innovative women who continue to inspire 
other women and girls to achieve their dreams. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

2017 Women’s March 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, only one day after the 
presidential inauguration in January, hundreds of thousands of 
people congregated at the United States Capitol to participate in 
a revolutionary women’s march. The goal of the march was to 
send a message to the new administration, a message that 
misogynistic rhetoric will not be tolerated, that women’s rights 
are human rights, and that people of all religions, races, and 
creeds will stand together to ensure that the health and safely of 
women are not compromised. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this march started as a small grassroots effort. It 
began with a single Facebook post by Hawaiian grandmother 
Teresa Shook, but through the determination of people around 
the globe, her idea quickly turned into one of the largest 
single-day demonstrations in US [United States] history, with at 
least 500,000 people marching in Washington. And that’s just 
Washington, Mr. Speaker; it is estimated that millions of people 
marched in cities across the world. Here in Saskatchewan, 
dozens in Regina marched to the Legislative Building in a show 
of solidarity, and in Saskatoon hundreds more gathered around 
city hall to proclaim their own support. And, Mr. Speaker, there 
are a lot of people marching today about exactly the same thing. 
 



March 8, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1587 

Mr. Speaker, the urgency of the women’s march demonstrates 
that equality and justice for women are still very much needed. 
I hope that all members will join me today in congratulating the 
millions of brave people who marched to fight for the rights of 
women around the world, in our country, and in our province. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 

Countdown to Canada 150 Event 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On December 31, 
2016, I had the honour of bringing greetings at the Countdown 
to Canada 150 New Year’s Eve event in Saskatoon’s Kiwanis 
Memorial Park. The city of Saskatoon, along with a large 
number of volunteers, orchestrated a wonderful evening of 
entertainment, skating, and snow decorating for everyone to 
enjoy. It was an excellent way to usher in 2017 and the 
anniversary of Confederation in Canada. 
 
Our province has a rich history and heritage in the development 
of Canada. Since 1905 Saskatchewan people have contributed 
to Canada’s identity. Our mosaic of communities, cultures, and 
people have really helped to define what it means to be a 
Canadian. In recognition of Canada’s 150th birthday, the 
Government of Saskatchewan is working alongside the 
Provincial Capital Commission to plan events like Countdown 
to Canada 150. 
 
It is important for our country as well as our province to 
recognize and celebrate the accomplishments and contributions 
that our nation has made over the past 150 years. Again I would 
like to extend a sincere thank you to all of the volunteers and to 
the city of Saskatoon for making this celebration possible. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
North. 
 

Saskatchewan Surgical Team Cares for Guatemalans 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Well thank you. Mr. Speaker, we all have 
people in our communities who give so much of themselves to 
make it a better place in the world. Well last month a surgical 
team from Moose Jaw and Regina demonstrated just how much 
they were willing to give. Jackie Wilson, a surgical nurse from 
Moose Jaw, was part of that team. From February the 13th to 
the 17th, the team travelled to Patzun, Guatemala to work at 
Clinica Corpus Christi, which is a small hospital and orphanage. 
The 24-bed hospital run by the nuns has three fully functioning 
operating theatres; however, there is no surgeon on staff. 
 
This surgical team was able to care for 35 patients in their short 
trip, performing mainly gall bladder removals and hernia 
repairs. Mr. Speaker, this is truly a remarkable group of 
individuals who recognize the need and that every hand helps. 
As the team noted in their GoFundMe webpage, we are truly 
blessed to have the healthcare system that we do. Mr. Speaker, 
there’s always much more to do, but it is important to realize 
how fortunate we are here in Saskatchewan. 
 
I ask all members to join me in thanking the surgical team from 

Moose Jaw and Regina for their dedication and congratulating 
them on their successful mission’s trip. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

Celebration of India’s Republic Day 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 
stand in this Assembly today to acknowledge India’s Republic 
Day that was celebrated at the Regina Public Library on 
January 28th. I had the privilege of sharing greetings at this 
event on behalf of our government where we saw some of the 
diversity of our city and province showcased. Mr. Speaker, the 
entire celebration and the people who attended reminded me of 
our provincial motto “from many peoples, strength.” 
 
Republic Day is a significant reminder of the power of 
democracy, although India’s journey to self-governance was not 
without hurdles. It today stands as the world’s largest 
democracy. This celebration and events held in India and 
around the world commemorates not only India’s transition to a 
republic, but also memorializes some of the figures that played 
a prominent role in leading India on the path to democracy. The 
strong relationship between Saskatchewan and India continues 
to grow through trade, investment, and culture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite all members of this Assembly to join me 
in acknowledging India’s Republic Day, the strong ties that 
Saskatchewan and India share, and in thanking the India 
Canada culture association of Saskatchewan, their volunteers, 
and members for a great event. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

New Potash Production Shaft in Operation 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I am proud to stand 
here today to share with my colleagues that on Friday, February 
17th of this year, Mosaic K3 mine near Esterhazy reached 
potash at an astounding depth of 3,350 feet. Development 
started in 2009, and after many cycles of drilling, blasting, 
mucking, and years of hard work, they hit potash. This is the 
third production shaft now in operation at the Mosaic Esterhazy 
site, making it one of the largest in the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an exciting moment, and I would like to 
acknowledge the members of Mosaic’s leadership team who 
were on hand for this momentous event: president and CEO 
[chief executive officer] Joc O’Rourke, senior vice president 
Bruce Bodine, and executive vice president and CFO [chief 
financial officer] Rich Mack. 
 
The senior leadership team acknowledged the hard-working and 
dedicated, skilled workers of Mosaic potash who work hard at 
the mine every day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the hard-working people of our province, along 
with the policies and record of our government, has made 
Saskatchewan the number one jurisdiction in the world for 
mining investment. Mr. Speaker, Mosaic’s K3 mine is another 
example of how Saskatchewan, even in the midst of lower 



1588 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2017 

global commodity prices, has seen continued strength in the 
mining sector. 
 
I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in congratulating 
Mosaic and all those who have worked hard at K3 to achieve 
this milestone. Thank you. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — Members, before question period I’d like to 
remind all members of the rules that we have agreed upon, and 
these rules that were established before myself becoming 
Speaker. I’d like to bring the attention of both House leaders to: 
 

20(2) Questions relating to any matter within the 
administrative competence of the government or on matters 
related to individual . . . [ministries’] responsibility may be 
asked of a Minister of the Crown. Questions on issues not 
officially connected with the government, of a private 
nature, related to Board of Internal Economy, caucus, party 
or political responsibilities are prohibited. 

 
QUESTION PERIOD 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Land Transactions and Changes to Members’ 
Compensation 

 
Ms. Sproule: — Well another day, another line of attack from 
the Premier. Mr. Speaker, he says we won’t accept the pay cut. 
He’s wrong. Of course we will, and our intrepid leader has been 
very clear about that. 
 
But if he thinks that we’ll stand by and let the Sask Party 
cabinet make Saskatchewan people pay for their 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste, we will not. If he thinks 
we’ll stand by while he keeps covering up for his GTH [Global 
Transportation Hub] scandal that took Saskatchewan money 
and put $11 million into the pockets of his well-connected 
friends, Mr. Speaker, we will not. 
 
Every day, every day, Mr. Speaker, we push for answers on the 
GTH land scandal, and instead of transparency, we get lines, 
lines, and more spin lines. The people of Saskatchewan are tired 
of those lines, but are the people who sat around the cabinet 
table fed up yet? We’d like to know. Can the Minister of 
Government Relations tell us if she still stands by this scandal 
that ripped off Saskatchewan taxpayers? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the question was 
allowed with respect to the referencing of Board of Internal 
Economy, so I trust the answer will be as well. 
 
Yesterday a meeting was scheduled expressly to deal with the 
interim leader of the NDP’s commitment that NDP MLAs 
would accept the pay cut that we had announced on behalf of 
the elected side of government — a cut that I’ll be taking, a cut 
that ministers will be taking. And by the way, the ministerial cut 
will wind up being twice what is taken by private members 

because it comes off both of the allowance that ministers 
receive and the base pay as MLAs. In fact it’s about a 49 per 
cent increase on the basic cut. Mr. Speaker, they didn’t show up 
at the meeting. 
 
And what we were hearing in this place from across the way — 
and the interim leader was all over this — they really weren’t 
interested in the pay cut, notwithstanding his comments 
publicly, unless a list of demands had been acquiesced to by the 
government. 
 
So they didn’t show up for work this morning . . . or yesterday 
at the committee meeting, Mr. Speaker . . . or this morning I 
guess it was. It was this morning. They didn’t show up for 
work. When they were caught not showing up for work, not 
willing to do their part, not willing to take their cut, why then 
the leader of the NDP, the interim leader of the NDP, came 
forward and said no, they are going to be a part of this. That’s a 
good sign. We welcome his reaffirmation of his support. We 
think it’s important to lead by example with respect to the 
budget challenges that the province is facing. And we’re glad 
that after second-guessing and changing their mind, the NDP is 
back on board, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, it is rich that we have a Premier 
of Saskatchewan talking about leading by example when we 
know he’s pocketed almost half a million dollars in bonus 
payments. 
 
Our leader has been as clear as a bell on this, and we are totally 
online with the pay cut. But we know, we know that there’s 
more to it than that and that the Premier’s spin and his lines on 
this are completely inaccurate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But you will note again we have more deflection from this 
government. We asked the question about the GTH land 
scandal from one of those cabinet ministers. But again they’re 
being silenced or else they’re refusing to speak, and we’d like 
to know which one it is. All we get is the Premier and his lines. 
 
Now we know the Premier likes to boast about the recent land 
sales at the GTH, but his math is terrible. How can it ever, ever 
be positive that they threw away $11 million? Never, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s $11 million. Or maybe the more than $1 billion 
overrun for the Regina bypass that went to a conglomerate from 
France and beyond, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now we know the Minister of Central Services was around the 
cabinet table for those decisions. So maybe, just maybe, she 
might have something to say, and we’d like to hear it. What 
does the Minister of Central Services have to say about the 
GTH land scandal? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member 
opposite spent the first minute and a half of that statement 
talking about what happened this morning at the Board of 
Internal Economy, and I would like to address that. She said 



March 8, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1589 

that they’re on board with the three and a half per cent 
reduction, Mr. Speaker. They had the opportunity this morning 
to show up and vote for a three and a half per cent reduction. 
What did they do, Mr. Speaker? They didn’t show up for work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to be very, very accommodating to 
the NDP. Maybe they didn’t get the memo. I’m not sure. Maybe 
the dog ate their homework, Mr. Speaker. They’re going to 
have an opportunity. I would offer to the members opposite 
4 o’clock this afternoon, they can live up to their word. They 
can show up at the Board of Internal Economy, and they can 
vote for a minus 3.5. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, two cabinet ministers being 
silenced or refusing to speak on a scandal that has rocked this 
province, and then we get that from the minister. That is just 
unacceptable. 
 
And I’ll point out again once more, I did ask the question to the 
Minister of Central Services, and again, like her colleague, 
she’s either refusing or not being allowed to speak. Again all 
we get are the same old lines. And again, Mr. Speaker, we have 
to point out that’s shameful. How do all you members opposite 
sit over there, dutifully clapping at each non-answer while your 
colleagues in cabinet keep cutting our services and attacking 
workers? 
 
Mr. Speaker, a three and a half per cent pay cut for them, or for 
me for that matter, is far different than cutting the salary of or 
the job of a single mom or a young couple or a senior. Mr. 
Speaker, is that cabinet really that much out of touch? Do they 
really think that taking a 20 per cent pay cut on their ministerial 
bonus and admitting they were wrong to add even more MLAs 
to this place is too much for them to pay for running deficit 
after deficit and driving up the debt? Really, Mr. Speaker? Do 
they believe that? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — That is awfully rich coming from a 
party that didn’t even show up for work this morning, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This crew opposite had the opportunity to come to work this 
morning at 8 o’clock. The meeting had been scheduled. They 
knew about the meeting. Mr. Speaker, you had sent out the 
notice of said meeting to the members opposite. They knew it 
was happening. They knew what the agenda was, Mr. Speaker. 
There were a number of items, but the most important and 
significant item on that agenda was the minus 3.5 per cent 
reduction for MLAs, of which their leader yesterday said that 
they were on board with that. 
 
What happened this morning, Mr. Speaker? They boycotted the 
meeting. They didn’t show up. They refused to take the minus 
3.5 per cent reduction. 
 
We on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, think it’s important 
to lead by example. That’s what we propose to do. That’s what 

we’re going to do. And I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, one way or 
the other, there is going to be a 3.5 per cent reduction for 
members of this Assembly. 
 
And I would note with respect to ministers, ministers are taking 
a 49 per cent larger reduction than MLAs. They’re saying 20 
per cent. Ministers are taking a 49 per cent larger reduction in 
addition to a 70 per cent reduction in travel over the . . . from 
the NDP period, and a smaller cabinet, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Intent of Bill No. 40 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, they are the ones who got us into 
this mess. They blew through the rainy day fund and the 
surpluses and the good times, and they should be the ones who 
are made to pay the price. Cutting jobs, cutting salaries, and 
selling off our Crowns is not going to fix this mess; in fact it 
will make it worse. 
 
Our Crowns like SaskTel provide services across the province. 
They lower rates across the province, and they create jobs 
across this province. Mr. Speaker, they drive the economy of 
this province and, more than that, they help people from around 
the province get the services that they need, from Telehealth to 
distance education, small businesses to remote connections. Our 
Crowns were built to tie us together — so why does the Sask 
Party want to tear this province apart? Why don’t they drop Bill 
40 and help in building Saskatchewan together? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned in the 
House yesterday, this whole bill on the Crown . . . public 
Crown ownership Act is based on one word, and that word is 
privatization, Mr. Speaker, a word that’s not defined in the 
legislation. And I would point out that the member from 
Lakeview yesterday stood in her place during debate and she 
started talking about how many types of definitions there are for 
that particular word, which really begs the question, Mr. 
Speaker: why didn’t they put a definition in the Act to begin 
with, Mr. Speaker, and we wouldn’t have to be doing it now, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the idea of moving forward with this bill is exactly 
aimed at that, Mr. Speaker. It’s aimed at strengthening the 
Crown corporations in this province, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ll continue with the Act. We have no intention of 
withdrawing it from the House. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, not for sale? Aimed at 
strengthening? No one is buying that. If they’re not for sale, 
why haven’t they gotten rid of Bill 40? They are fooling 
absolutely no one. Our Crowns exist because rural 
communities, rural households, rural schools weren’t able to get 
the services that they needed — electricity, telephone, Internet. 
They’ve all been brought to rural communities because of our 



1590 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2017 

Crowns. Our Crowns ensure that everyone in the province can 
get the services that they need. 
 
Crown corporations and the unions that represent their workers 
also help to close the wage gap, something that is very 
important to be talking about on International Women’s Day. 
Public corporations pay women more equally for work of equal 
value. But this government, they don’t seem to care. 
 
And why are they even toying with the idea of selling our 
Crowns and selling off our ability to ensure that students in the 
classrooms across this province get access to the technology 
that they need to learn? Mr. Speaker, will they today back off, 
do the right thing, and rescind Bill 40? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, there was a couple of things 
in the question which I’d like to answer. First of all, I’d like to 
point out to the member opposite that more than 50 per cent of 
the representatives on our Crown boards are women, and that’s 
something we’re very, very proud of. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year, Mr. Speaker, last year the Auto Fund 
invested hundreds of millions of dollars in funds outside this 
province, Mr. Speaker, without the ability to make those 
investments in our Crowns in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. So 
those funds that get invested outside Saskatchewan, those funds 
that get invested outside Saskatchewan, we think it would be a 
good idea if there was a possibility of some of those funds 
being invested in Saskatchewan so that the return on equity 
from those investments could be returned to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Act is about strengthening the Crowns, and 
it’s about time that the opposition understood that and got on 
board to support Bill 40 because at the end of the day, this will 
strengthen our . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day, this 
bill will strengthen our Crowns. It will strengthen the services 
that are going to be provided to the people of Saskatchewan 
and, as I’ve mentioned before, we have no intention of backing 
away from it. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, they say they won’t sell SaskTel, 
but the bill before us, Bill 40, despite those objections will 
allow them to do just that. They also say that there have been no 
cuts to education, but ask any teacher, any parent, any school 
division anywhere in this province and they will tell you that is 
simply not the case. This is a government that asks school 
divisions to find “$5 million in efficiencies.” We know what 
that means, Mr. Speaker. It means cuts. 

Mr. Speaker, school divisions dug deep, and they found $15 
million with cuts to teachers, staff, and resources to already 
under-resourced classrooms. But apparently that’s still not 
enough for them, Mr. Speaker. They want more cuts and more 
layoffs. Parents and teachers are tired of the spins and the lines. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Will the minister admit that his government’s mismanagement, 
scandal, and waste have led to deep cuts in education? The 
Premier wants to disregard the fact that they’ve asked 3.5 per 
cent reduction from teachers’ salaries. And will he commit, will 
that minister commit to reinvesting in our kids’ education and 
in our shared future? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 
opposite for the question. Mr. Speaker, we are more committed 
to education than any time in the province’s history. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the numbers speak for themselves. Since we have 
formed government the increase in the operating grant to 
divisions has increased by 33 per cent. In ’07-08 it was $1.41 
billion. In ’16-17 it had moved up to $1.88 billion. At the same 
time the amount of money raised by education property tax 
dropped from $714 million to $680 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in our province now under this government we’ve 
increased the number of teachers by 754. Our enrolment has 
gone up 10 per cent, Mr. Speaker. We are now serving 179,707 
teachers and, Mr. Speaker, our teachers are doing a great job 
and we thank them for that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Support for the Northern Teacher Education Program 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve watched the Premier and 
the Sask Party overshadow women in this Chamber today and 
every day. And we know their actions in the North are 
impacting women too. Yesterday the Minister of Advanced 
Education couldn’t promise local control of 
NORTEP-NORPAC and along with it northern women. 
 
Northern women are the strongest advocates for this program. 
They are the biggest users of the program and they have the 
most to gain. NORTEP and NORPAC provides northern 
women with opportunities to create more opportunities. This 
program is fundamental to the North and the minister can’t 
commit to ensuring their autonomy. She can’t get behind 
supporting the northern women. It’s not too late for her to 
change her mind, to listen to northern communities, to listen to 
northern women, and to support the NORTEP-NORPAC 
program. 
 
Can the minister commit to continuing to support this program 
so it can stay successful as it has been the past 40 years? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 



March 8, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1591 

Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I’ve said, this 
is an important decision for students, for all students. It’s a 
decision that will be forthcoming very soon. 
 
I appreciate the role that NORTEP has played in this process 
and I realize it’s an emotional issue. But surely the goal, Mr. 
Speaker, is to provide a well-governed, administratively sound 
management, as well as equitable opportunities and access to 
post-secondary education for all northern students. Solid, 
high-quality teaching education, so that a student anywhere in 
the province can teach, work, and thrive in their community or 
in any community — that’s the goal. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Support for Saskatchewan Workers 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, the decision to take local 
control away from NORTEP-NORPAC is taking power away 
from northern women. What is outrageous about the Sask 
Party’s lines and the stunts that they’re using to justify going 
after Saskatchewan people, are unacceptable. 
 
After 10 years in government the Premier, Saskatchewan Party, 
cabinet ministers need to accept responsibility for their string of 
billion-dollar deficits. After taking hundreds of thousands of 
dollars in top-ups, the Premier stands on his soapbox and 
applauds himself for taking a pay cut; all the while he threatens 
and takes pay away from hard-working families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 43,000 Saskatchewan people are already looking 
for work. Saskatchewan families are working hard to make ends 
meet. Why does the Saskatchewan Party want to make life even 
harder for them? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — I’ve listened closely today to the 
questions from the members opposite and I can appreciate them 
wanting to defend members of the public service in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 112,000 low-income people off the tax 
rolls in this province since this government came to office. How 
many of those are women? When they were in office, Mr. 
Speaker, they closed 52 hospitals and fired hundreds of nurses, 
Mr. Speaker. How many of those were women? They closed 
176 schools under their tenure, fired 400 teachers, Mr. Speaker. 
How many of those were women? 
 
They didn’t raise the seniors’ income plan by so much as a 
dime in 16 years in office, Mr. Speaker. The most vulnerable 
seniors in our province, how many of those were women? And 
then you have the audacity to walk out to rural Saskatchewan 
and say to them, we’re going to take 60,000 farmers’ contracts 
in GRIP [gross revenue insurance program] and just rip them 
up. How many of those were women? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will take no lessons from those members over 
there on how to treat women in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Provision of Health Care 
Services 

 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, it’s 2017. This government has 
been in power for 10 years. It is time for them to start taking 
responsibility for their mismanagement, scandal, and waste. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were many health care workers here today at 
the legislature. They are speaking out about the cuts because 
they just want to do their jobs. They want to be able to provide 
the kind of care the people of Saskatchewan deserve and expect. 
They are speaking out about the cuts that the Minister of Health 
refuses to acknowledge and the cuts he claims will have no 
impact on patient care. But the cuts are real. Regina ERs 
[emergency room] have been busting at the seams. Recently the 
Pasqua Hospital was at 118 per cent capacity. ER waits at the 
General were over four hours, and hallway medicine is this 
government’s sad reality. 
 
Now the government is asking health care workers to take pay 
cuts, to not show up for work and leave even fewer people to 
provide care. Wait times and over capacity will only get worse. 
How can the Sask Party say these cuts won’t impact patient 
care? How can they keep forcing Saskatchewan people looking 
for health care to pay the price for this government’s 
mismanagement? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
health care is a priority for this government. Mr. Speaker, the 
situations that the member opposite mentions, the over capacity 
at some of the major tertiary centres, we’re very concerned 
about that. Steps have been taken by the health regions to 
mitigate that. This isn’t a Saskatchewan phenomenon, Mr. 
Speaker. This is an issue in major centres right across the 
country and in fact, Mr. Speaker, it was also an issue when the 
members opposite were in government. 
 
The critic mentions the fact that there were health care workers 
out front for the protest, Mr. Speaker, and that leads me to a 
situation where I guess we have a question for them. Mr. 
Speaker, last I think it was November, December, there was a 
situation in Alberta where at some sort of a rally, the chant 
“lock her up” was used in reference to the Alberta Premier. Mr. 
Speaker, the interim leader of the NDP tweeted, and I quote, 
saying that “That chant has no place in Canadian politics, no 
place at all anywhere.” 
 
I’m wondering if he’ll denounce what happened outside, Mr. 
Speaker. There was a jail cell. There was pictures of the 
Premier, pictures of other colleagues of mine. There was signs 
saying “lock them up.” I wonder if he’ll do the same 
denunciation that he did in Alberta. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — We certainly will, Mr. Speaker, but this 
government and this minister needs to take responsibility for the 
damage that he’s doing to health care here in Saskatchewan. It 
is incredibly rich that it’s come from a party whose Premier 
once stood up and promised the people of Saskatchewan there 



1592 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2017 

would be no waits in ERs by March 2017 — no waits, zero, 
none. Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s 2017 and it’s March. And yes, the 
Sask Party did walk away from their original promise already, 
but they’re still nowhere close to any ER target they’ve set. 
People are sitting on floors in ERs while they wait in pain and 
yet they’re threatening to cut even more. 
 
How is it possible that this government thinks they are going to 
shorten wait times by cutting front-line workers, by forcing 
them to take days off, and by forcing them to struggle without 
the supports that they need? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
critic opposite, she certainly likes to fire up the rhetoric. 
Yesterday in reference to the consolidation of health regions, 
she said that that was going to lead to front-line health care cuts. 
Not the case, Mr. Speaker. It just simply isn’t factual. In fact, 
Mr. Speaker, when the consolidation was announced, the 
member is on record and scrumming in the media saying that 
every single time that there was an amalgamation of health 
districts, union hospitals into larger regions, that there was 
massive loss of front-line health care. Mr. Speaker, those 
changes were under the members opposite. I don’t know how 
she justifies that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We take health care very seriously. And frankly, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ll take no lessons from them on that. The fact of the matter 
is, as far as front-line health care workers since we’ve been 
given the privilege of forming government, Mr. Speaker: over 
3,000 more nurses, over 800 more long-term care workers. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Funding for Court System 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if the budget could be 
balanced solely on mansplaining by the Minister of Finance, 
we’d be in a much better fiscal situation. It’s just not believable 
that the Sask Party cuts aren’t going to have an impact. They’re 
treating unpaid days off like they’re vacations. But those 
consequences will have . . . Those cuts will have real life 
consequences. Consequences for those who will have their 
wages cut and consequences to those who use the services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, forcing public service employees out of days of 
work means that the justice system will move even more 
slowly, making a difficult situation even worse. All this while 
the court systems are already backlogged, Mr. Speaker. Across 
the country, we have seen court cases tossed out because of 
court delays. Some of the accused have walked free without 
trial, again because of court delays. Mr. Speaker, there’s a 
limited amount of time that prosecutors can take to bring an 
accused to trial. A legislative delay to these services is 
incredibly worrisome. So can the minister commit today to stop 
the cuts to workers in the justice system? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
read with some interest some of the reports that come in from 
around the country with respect to court delays. Mr. Speaker, I 
can assure the member opposite that in my communications 
with the chief judge of the Provincial Court, which is the court 
that I’m primarily responsible for, Mr. Speaker, we don’t have 
any delays. We don’t have any cases, except for three cases that 
have happened recently, Mr. Speaker, which were delays that 
were caused by the Crown, Mr. Speaker. They’re cases that are 
being thrown out of court, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’m very, very comfortable with respect to where we are 
with the justice system, especially around trials, especially 
around time to trial, Mr. Speaker. And we’ll continue to work 
with the Provincial Court. We’ll continue to work with the other 
levels of court, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that the ends of justice 
are served in this province so the people of Saskatchewan have 
the best justice system in Canada. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 40 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 40 — The 
Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 
sur l’interprétation be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure and 
honour to rise today to speak on Bill 40. You know, we just 
ended question period, and I think we gave the Minister of 
Justice about three opportunities to remove this bill. And I was 
really hoping he would, Mr. Speaker, because that would mean 
I wouldn’t have had to do this speech. 
 
But you know, not to worry. To the Minister of Justice: I’m 
sure we’ll give him ample opportunity again to remove this bill 
from the order paper and change his mind, because I think it’s 
probably the best thing for the province of Saskatchewan. It 
would have been better for me personally if he would have done 
it today in question period, selfishly. But unfortunately he 
didn’t, so instead I will give him again many of the reasons why 
Bill 40 is not appropriate for the Government of Saskatchewan, 
or for the people of Saskatchewan, frankly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we had hundreds, if not — dare I say — 1,000 
people outside in front of the legislature at noon today, standing 
up against public sector wage cuts, against Bill 40 and what it 
means and what it will mean for the province of Saskatchewan. 
It was heartwarming to see. We’ve received many calls from 
people. We’ve received many petitions, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 
done a lot of . . . I know my colleagues as well as myself have 
done a lot of canvassing all around the province, Mr. Speaker, 
around this bill, asking constituents what they think about this 



March 8, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1593 

bill. Because that’s our job frankly, Mr. Speaker, as legislators 
and as MLAs, to go to the people of Saskatchewan and ask 
them for feedback on the activities of this House. 
 
[14:30] 
 
And I have yet to find a single person, Mr. Speaker, who thinks 
that this is a good idea. And I’m asking . . . And I know my 
colleagues have had the same response. We have yet to find a 
single person who thinks that this is a good idea, other than of 
course the members opposite. 
 
And I wonder if the members opposite have actually asked their 
constituents what they think about this, and asked them and 
actually explained to them what this bill actually means. And if 
they don’t know what this bill actually means, hang on, stay 
tuned, because I will happily explain it to you. And then 
hopefully the members opposite can go out to their constituents 
and explain to them what this is going to mean for the people of 
Saskatchewan and what it’s going to mean for decades to come, 
which is what we’re worried about. 
 
And that’s why it’s so important to speak up now, Mr. Speaker, 
speak up against this bill and hopefully have this bill removed. 
Because once this bill is enacted, there is a lot that will happen 
in terms of privatization of the Crowns, which we will not have 
any knowledge of until after it’s done. We will not have the 
opportunity to have a say. People of Saskatchewan will not 
have an opportunity to have a say when 49 per cent of the 
Crown’s shares are sold off. This is really the opportunity to 
stand up and speak out against it. 
 
And we have a Premier who, you know, to his credit, will 
occasionally change his mind on things when he finds out, or 
through his networks, I suppose — polling, dare I say — finds 
that they are unpopular positions to take. And apparently, I 
don’t want to, you know, get too excited, but apparently as of 
Monday, SaskTel is one of those where he has floated many 
trial balloons about selling SaskTel, and then has said on 
Monday that selling SaskTel is off the table. So he clearly said 
that . . . He’s clearly done some polling and some work and 
found that that’s probably not a go for the people of 
Saskatchewan. And that’s what we’ve heard too: selling 
SaskTel is not on the table for people in Saskatchewan. Similar 
to Bill 40, I haven’t found a single person who thought that that 
was a good idea as well. 
 
But his words were used very, very carefully . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Well yes, except for the Minister of Justice, 
Mr. Speaker. As I said before, not very many people seem to 
find Bill 40 is a good idea, but the Minister of Justice clearly 
thinks it’s a good idea. Oh yes, that is something that I have 
already said, that the members opposite are the only ones that 
we’ve found . . . that they were a good idea. I’m keeping the 
Minister of Justice back up to speed here so that he’s up to 
speed on what is going to be an enthralling, enthralling speech, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I’ve said, this bill is going to result in fundamental changes 
to our Crowns, like that we may never hear about until it’s too 
late. And I’m going to start off by actually explaining what this 
bill does. 
 

So the bill is called The Interpretation Amendment Act and it 
sounds like a fairly harmless, innocuous bill. It’s really a wolf 
in sheep’s clothing, Mr. Speaker. The Interpretation Act is an 
Act that I don’t think many people in Saskatchewan know exist. 
It’s something that, a bill that’s typically used by lawyers, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s typically used . . . Well it is frankly a bill that’s 
used to provide definitions for what are usually germane terms 
or terms that are non-controversial so that they can be used for 
all legislation throughout the province instead of having to 
insert that definition into every single piece of legislation in the 
province, Mr. Speaker. So it’s one that’s used in a legal context 
quite frequently, but it’s not one that’s typically seen commonly 
in the people’s mindset, I suppose, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But that’s the thing about this bill, is it seems at first glance like 
it’s not an incredibly controversial or exciting bill. But you 
don’t have to scratch the surface very deep to find out where the 
problems actually lie. 
 
So this bill, as I’ve said before and has been said in this House 
quite often, changes or creates a definition for “privatize.” And 
I’m just going to read that out for the record. It amends 
subsection 27(1) by adding the following definition in 
alphabetical order, and it only adds one definition, which is 
“privatize.” And I’ll read that definition: 
 

“‘privatize’ means, with respect to a Crown corporation, 
the transfer to the private sector of all or substantially all of 
the assets of the Crown corporation, the controlling interest 
of the Crown corporation or the operational control of the 
Crown corporation through one or more transactions that 
use one or more of the following methods: 
 

(a) a public share offering; 
 
(b) a sale of shares through a negotiated or competitive 
bid; 
 
(c) a sale of the assets and business of the Crown 
corporation as a going concern; 
 
(d) a management or employee buyout of the Crown 
corporation; 
 
(e) a lease or management contract; 
 
(f) any other method prescribed in the regulations; 
 

but does not include a winding-up and dissolution of the 
Crown corporation or other restructuring of the Crown 
corporation . . .” 

 
And what’s really interesting here, Mr. Speaker, is it’s inserting 
what is a highly politicized term into The Interpretation Act, 
Mr. Speaker, and to have a highly politicized term inserted into 
The Interpretation Act is actually quite a controversial and rare 
thing to do, Mr. Speaker. If you look actually at The 
Interpretation Act, and I’m going to look at that, the terms that 
are in there frankly aren’t terms . . . Like I said, are terms that 
are quite germane. From looking at other jurisdictions, it’s 
pretty rare to have anything in The Interpretation Act that could 
be considered politically controversial, which is what is so 
unique and frankly jarring with the legislation that’s being 



1594 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2017 

proposed by the minister. 
 
And so just to give some of those . . . So some of those 
definitions that are in The Interpretation Act, and I’m looking at 
The Interpretation Act right now, section 27 which is where 
“privatize” is going to be inserted. It’s definitions for things like 
Court of Appeal, Court of Queen’s Bench, director of 
corporations, Executive Council, Gazette. These are very, very, 
very innocuous terms, Mr. Speaker, so to include “privatize,” 
it’s quite alarming. And it’s interesting that it was included here 
and not inserted in the Crown corporations protections Act, 
which is where the crux of the reason for this definition actually 
lay. 
 
So I find that an interesting point, and it’s frankly part of the 
whole reason, or it plays to the whole theme of why this 
amendment was created in the first place. It’s essentially — and 
everybody knows this, frankly, Mr. Speaker — it’s the Sask 
Party trying to create a loophole for themselves, a backdoor 
way of getting around legislation that they don’t like, frankly 
the Crown corporation protection Act, which is funny because I 
believe that they agreed to the legislation and I think it was a 
unanimous support to the legislation when it passed through this 
House. However it doesn’t seem like it is convenient for them 
anymore. 
 
But as the Premier has said, it has been made clear to them by 
the people of Saskatchewan that the people of Saskatchewan 
aren’t interested in a referendum. So that’s what’s interesting 
about this, Mr. Speaker. It’s the Premier that has been very, 
very specific with his words on Monday when he was speaking 
to members of the media. He said the people of Saskatchewan 
aren’t interested in a referendum. Right, that’s correct. So what 
the Sask Party is doing is developing a way for themselves so 
that they can privatize without having a referendum. Problem 
solved, from their perspective. But you know what? It’s 
frustrating to me because it’s so obvious that it’s circumventing 
the whole concern that people have with respect to 
privatization, with respect to this bill. Changing the definition 
doesn’t change the concerns and doesn’t change the issues that 
are associated with it. 
 
Like I said, there’s nothing else in The Interpretation Act that’s 
really like this. It’s a very unique addition to this interpretation 
Act. And I believe my colleague from Saskatoon Nutana — 
who is a very, very well-versed lawyer and who did quite an 
extensive amount of research with respect to this legislation, 
and I, like the other colleagues who have spoken before me, 
thank her very profusely for her work and her research with 
respect to this bill and with respect to the definition of 
privatization as it applies in other jurisdictions — in reading her 
remarks, I note that we could not and she could not find any 
other Commonwealth jurisdiction that has something similar, 
that has this definition for privatize. 
 
And we ask . . . And I read the comments from all of my other 
colleagues who have gone before me, and I know we’ll have 
other time and we will continue to have more time to talk about 
this legislation. We continue to ask the Minister of Justice for 
this World Bank definition of privatization that he says that he’s 
used. We’ve looked. We can’t find it. We’ve asked it from him. 
He hasn’t provided it. I’m not too sure why he won’t just be 
transparent and provide that information to us. If he feels that 

there is a real reason for this definition, if he feels . . . If there is 
actually a World Bank definition for privatization, we have yet 
to see it. 
 
And I do encourage the Minister of Justice, whenever he has 
time, to provide that definition to us. I’m still waiting for it 
frankly, Mr. Speaker, and I’m hoping he has the opportunity to 
provide that to me soon. And if he doesn’t, you know, I know I 
will be at committee with him and I will be asking his officials 
for that as well. But ideally he provides that to us earlier, 
because the purpose of us having these second reading 
speeches, Mr. Speaker, is to have an actual dialogue and 
discussion about the legislation. 
 
And it’s difficult to, or it would help us to have a further 
dialogue about this legislation if we actually had whatever is 
this definition that he’s using as his, I suppose, guiding post, or 
what he’s sort of waving in the air to say that this isn’t as big of 
a deal as we say it is. We’ve looked, as I said. We can’t find it. 
We’ve looked through all of the other Commonwealth 
jurisdictions. We have not found anything similar to this 
whatsoever, which is very alarming. I’m not too sure why the 
Minister of Justice created the wording in the way he did. It’s 
hard for us to find any arguments for it when we can’t find 
anything similar in other jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker, and that’s 
the interesting thing. 
 
And I’m looking now . . . I’m moving on to the second reading 
speech that the Minister of Justice gave when he tabled this bill 
back October 31st, I believe, 2016. And he said a few specific 
things that I really want to highlight. I’ve already highlighted 
them, but I think it’s important to read his comments into the 
record, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So with respect to this definition that I was just talking about, 
he said, “Mr. Deputy Speaker, the definition is based on the 
World Bank definition of privatization. It will clarify what 
transactions will be considered a privatization under The Crown 
Corporations Public Ownership Act.” 
 
So two issues there, Mr. Speaker. So if this is a definition that’s 
specifically going to be used for The Crown Corporations 
Public Ownership Act, why didn’t he insert it in there instead of 
The Interpretation Act, which would make more logical sense 
and make more sense from the legislative drafting point of 
view, Mr. Speaker? And I think I know what the reason is. I 
think it’s a bit more controversial to amend The Crown 
Corporations Public Ownership Act without taking it back to 
the people of Saskatchewan which — guess what, Mr. Speaker? 
— they haven’t done with respect to Bill 40. 
 
The other issue, as I said, is this World Bank definition. Again, 
we have yet to see it. We can’t find it. We asked the minister, 
please provide it to us so we can take a look at it, we can 
analyze it, and we can have a healthy debate on whether or not 
this is appropriate wording for legislation in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Another interesting point he says here, and I quote, “The Crown 
Corporations Public Ownership Act will continue to govern the 
process to be followed in the case of a privatization.” So, Mr. 
Speaker, as I’ve said already and as I say again, it’s clear that 
the whole purpose of this definition is to deal with the word 



March 8, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1595 

“privatize” as it is in The Crown Corporations Public 
Ownership Act. So again I bring that up as a flag, as an issue: 
why was this brought up in The Interpretation Amendment Act 
instead of The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Act? 
 
Another quote I want to point out is, and I quote, “For example, 
the terms like ‘bank’ and ‘lawyer’ are defined so that they don’t 
have to be defined in each legislative instrument that they are 
used in.” 
 
[14:45] 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice here is talking about 
The Interpretation Act, and he’s saying the same thing that I 
just said frankly, Mr. Speaker, with respect to The 
Interpretation Act. He’s saying that the point of The 
Interpretation Act is to provide definitions for what are 
essentially innocuous words, common words, Mr. Speaker, that 
are in legislation like . . . and he used “bank” and “lawyer.” 
Pretty germane, pretty innocuous, pretty common. And I 
wanted to point this out just to highlight that what I’m saying 
about The Interpretation Act is actually the exact same thing 
that the Minister of Justice said about The Interpretation Act. 
But it’s funny that for some reason he’s decided that this is also 
as innocuous of a term as he used “bank” and “lawyer” for 
example. 
 
So why did the Sask Party feel the need to do this, to make this 
clarification? Why now? That’s the strange thing about this. 
They have been in power for 10 years but never seemed to feel 
the need to change this definition or create this definition. And I 
think the answer for that . . . And often we hear heckles from 
the other side of the House: why didn’t you do this when you 
were passing this legislation? Well that’s funny, because I 
believe there were members opposite that had every opportunity 
to propose an amendment should they have felt that it was an 
important issue to bring up at that time. They don’t seem to . . . 
I don’t see anywhere where they proposed an amendment to 
include this definition. They didn’t do that then. They didn’t do 
it for a decade. All of a sudden they did it now. 
 
So I think it’s really important to take a historical tour of where 
we were then and where we are today, what sort of discussion 
happened, and why the Sask Party feel that it’s necessary to 
provide that definition now. You know what the real reason is? 
They haven’t done it for a decade. They had 10 years to do this. 
They didn’t see the need at the time. They seem to see the need 
now. I’m not too sure why. Hmm, maybe because we’re . . . 
Anyways, I’m getting heckled, Mr. Speaker, from members 
opposite. It’s throwing me off of my well thought-out script and 
I apologize if I get a little thrown off base. I’m also trying to 
come off from question period. Members opposite seem to be 
heckling, and I apologize if I repeat something or if I’m thrown 
off script a little bit because of that. So my apologies, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Let me see where I was at again. I believe what I wanted to do 
was to paint a picture frankly and explain why the Sask Party 
seem to feel it’s necessary now to make this definition. It’s 
pretty clear that it seems like everybody was working okay with 
what the common definition was or how The Crown 
Corporations Public Ownership Act was working before. It 
doesn’t seem to suit the Sask Party’s needs anymore so they’re 

going to create themselves this legislative loophole, frankly, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think it’s important when we’re having this discussion to 
actually look at The Crown Corporations Public Ownership 
Act, see what it does, see its importance in terms of legislation 
in the province, and then go on from there. So if you’d just 
excuse me for one moment, I’m going to see if I still have it 
somewhere . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — A lot of material. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Lots. Lots. We have a lot of material frankly, 
Mr. Speaker, and sometimes it’s hard to find all of your stuff, 
and I can’t seem to find it right now. I know it’s in here 
somewhere. Oh, you know what? I bet it’s right here 
somewhere. Here it is. Not to worry, Mr. Speaker. I found it. 
I’m sure members opposite would have helped me out and 
brought me over a copy of this legislation. They didn’t seem to 
be getting up too quickly so . . . But not to worry, Mr. Speaker. 
I found a copy of The Crown Corporations Public Ownership 
Act myself. 
 
I want to make sure that . . . It’s important that we know exactly 
what this piece of legislation is supposed to do, and I think it’s 
important actually, frankly, Mr. Speaker, to read the whereas 
clauses into the record. So I’m going to do that right now: 
 

WHEREAS Saskatchewan Crown corporations are an 
investment in the future of Saskatchewan to provide 
necessary public services, to assure the quality of life of 
residents and to promote economic development; 
 
AND WHEREAS the public investment in Saskatchewan 
Crown corporations reflects an historic decision to 
maintain control of necessary public services within 
Saskatchewan to assure that those services are operated in 
the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan; 
 
AND WHEREAS in order to respect the reasons for 
establishing and maintaining Crown corporations, and the 
public interest and rights over their disposition, an Act of 
the Legislature is required to assure that a decision to 
privatize a Crown corporation reflects the will and the 
rights of the people of Saskatchewan; 
 
AND WHEREAS the public ought to be fully informed as 
to the terms, costs and benefits of any privatization of a 
Crown corporation; 

 
AND WHEREAS the legislative process is best served by 
a public debate before a decision to privatize a Crown 
corporation is carried out. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that the crux of this legislation is to make 
sure that any discussion around privatization of any Crown is 
done with transparency, with the opportunity for dialogue with 
the Saskatchewan people. And I find that interesting, that the 
Sask Party seemed to find it necessary to change that definition 
of privatization now, so that if they sell 49 per cent of the 
Crown then they don’t have that dialogue with the 
Saskatchewan people. 
 



1596 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2017 

That’s what’s going to happen, Mr. Speaker, and that’s frankly 
ridiculous. It completely changes the intent of this legislation. It 
completely changes the intent of the dialogue that 
Saskatchewan people expect to have. 
 
We’ve heard time and time again that the people of 
Saskatchewan do not want to see privatization, for example, 
SaskTel. The Premier seems to see that’s the case in the 
wording that he’s said though. He’s made it very clear that he 
. . . or he’s been very specific with his wording. He said, I 
believe, and I’m going to actually read it — and I know I have 
it in here somewhere — that the people of Saskatchewan are not 
on for selling SaskTel and that they’re not on for a referendum, 
which is what The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Act 
actually mandates. 
 
And it’s important to read section 3 of that Act into the record 
as well. So section 3 states, “No Crown corporation shall be 
privatized unless that privatization is authorized by an Act 
enacted after the coming into force of the Act.” And then the 
public ownership Act, Mr. Speaker, goes into the process for 
what would be required for that bill and the steps that would 
have to be taken when a bill comes to pass. Or for example, 
they may have to take that to the Saskatchewan people in an 
election before that can actually be done. 
 
Oh, I also wanted to read into the record . . . Oh no, I have that 
done already, sorry. My apologies, Mr. Speaker. I just want to 
make sure that I do, because I think it’s very important that we 
actually analyze the words of the Premier on Monday. I know 
I’ve spoken about it several times already this afternoon, Mr. 
Speaker, but I want to make sure I read into the record very 
clearly what he said because it’s quite obvious to me, Mr. 
Speaker, that he’s chosen his words extremely, extremely 
carefully. So I’m looking at a Leader-Post article from March 
the 7th, 2017 titled “SaskTel not for sale, says premier, but door 
still open to sell off portions of Crown corporations.” And that’s 
a clear link, Mr. Speaker, to Bill 40. So he said . . . and I want 
to get very, very clear here what he said. It might be actually 
pertinent to read the majority of this in: 
 

After months of speculation, Premier Brad Wall announced 
Monday the Crown corporation is not for sale. In May, he 
signalled he wanted to know more about the future of 
SaskTel and had a risk assessment done on the company. 
At the time he said any move to privatize the Crown 
wouldn’t happen without a public referendum. Now he 
says he has “the clearest sense from voters” that they are 
not interested in a sale of SaskTel. 

 
And then he quotes: 
 

“They’re not interested in a referendum. They’re not 
interested in a potential sale,” Wall told reporters Monday. 
[Interesting, Mr. Speaker.] Public outcry about a potential 
sale was swift, with the Opposition NDP and union groups 
launching campaigns aimed at telling the premier there was 
little support for privatizing SaskTel. 
 
“I don’t know where he got the idea beforehand that 
somehow he could advance a sale of SaskTel. This is 
ludicrous and really reflects how out of touch he seems to 
have become with Saskatchewan people,” said NDP leader 

Trent Wotherspoon. 
 
I’m quoting something, so . . . 
 

At the tail end of 2016, Wall told the Leader-Post he didn’t 
see a sale happening . . . 

 
I don’t know if I can’t read a . . . if I can’t say someone’s name 
inside of a quote. 
 
Okay. I apologize, Mr. Speaker. Members opposite seem to get 
all up in a flutter and I don’t know why. Sometimes I don’t 
know if it’s something that I’ve said or if it’s something that I 
said wrong. They’re just trying to throw me off my game, Mr. 
Speaker. I should know by now. I’ve been here for almost a 
year, and 99.9 per cent of the time they’re trying to just throw 
me off my game and there’s actually really no substance to 
what they’re yelling at me. So apologies, Mr. Speaker. I will 
continue with reading this article into the record: 
 

At the tail end of 2016, Wall told the Leader-Post he didn’t 
see a sale happening based on the public response he had 
seen so far. 
 
Monday’s announcement that the Crown wasn’t for sale 
and wouldn’t be sold took that notion a step further. 
 
There is, however, the chance up to 49 per cent of SaskTel 
— or any other Crown corporation — could one day be 
sold. 

 
A law — Bill 40 — allowing as much is working its way 
through the legislative process right now. 
 
Wall said the province could find a partner to create jobs 
and improve mobile coverage, while still maintaining 
control of SaskTel. [I find that very interesting, Mr. 
Speaker.] 
 
“To the extent there’s a chance to build a partnership with 
others, we would be open to it,” Wall said. “I think people 
were worried about losing control. If you lose . . . control 
of a company to another company, even if you have golden 
share legislation, do we lose the chance to have the head 
office? What about the jobs that are in rural Saskatchewan? 
What about the coverage issue?” 

 
Exactly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But Bill 40 is actually going to open up all of these concerns to 
actual reality, Mr. Speaker, and that’s what the problem is. It 
seems like the Premier has listened to the Saskatchewan people 
to the extent that it serves his narrative and he hasn’t listened to 
the full message. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan were very clear. We do not want to 
sell SaskTel. We value our Crowns. We want to see them 
remain in public hands. We want to ensure that their dividends, 
all of their dividends frankly, Mr. Speaker, stay with the 
Saskatchewan province. We want to make sure that jobs are . . . 
our important Saskatchewan jobs stay within Saskatchewan. 
We want to ensure that the Crown’s number one goal is not like 
it is in the private sector, which is the whole point of why we 



March 8, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1597 

have Crowns. So it’s not like it is in the private sector, which is 
for shareholders, which is maximizing profits. It is providing 
the best service to Saskatchewan people, which is the whole 
reason frankly, Mr. Speaker, why Crowns were created in the 
first place. 
 
I’m going to take you through a longer history lesson. So we’ve 
gone to Monday, what the Premier said about SaskTel, which 
has been significantly different frankly, Mr. Speaker, from what 
was said before. And I’m going to take you on a bit of a journey 
here, Mr. Speaker, because it’s been a fairly long journey in 
terms of the different types of trial balloons we’ve seen floated 
up and the different types of positions we’ve seen the Premier 
have with respect to that. 
 
And I think it’s important to know and to look at everything 
that’s been said, and it should all be taken into context with 
where we are today. And it helps to paint the full picture as to 
why this bill has been tabled in the first place. 
 
So in May 2010 there was an article with . . . Gordon Pitts was 
the name of the journalist, I believe, in The Globe and Mail. 
The Premier did a one-on-one interview with him and the 
journalist asked the Premier why he was resisting privatizing 
Crowns. And in that article the Premier said: 
 

It’s a practical lesson from the election of 2003 when we 
sacrificed the chance to implement the rest of this growth 
agenda. I was the Crown corporation critic and I helped 
write the policy, so mea culpa. We sacrificed the chance to 
make some long-term changes in the psyche and 
environment in the province for this one issue [Mr. 
Speaker]. 

 
So it’s clear at that time that he originally in 2003 was 
supportive of — well he wrote it — supportive of the position 
that the party had at that time with respect to Crowns. He’s seen 
that the people of Saskatchewan aren’t agreeable to that 
position. They lost the election. He felt at that time, as he said, 
that that one issue is what cost them the election at that one 
time. 
 
So he decided at that time, okay, well it doesn’t seem like I’m 
going to be able to advance this ideology full bore immediately. 
Maybe there’s a little bit more of a subtle, piecemeal way I 
could do it. It’s kind of funny. I didn’t think we’d actually get to 
where it’s literally going to be piecemeal, Mr. Speaker. It’s not 
funny. It’s actually horrible but it’s interesting, and that’s why 
it’s important to look at all of this in the whole context. It’s 
interesting to see where we were and where we’ve gone in 
terms of the comments the Premier has said. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Let’s jump forward a little bit. On March 15, 2016, this is a 
quote from the CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] with 
respect . . . And it was during the election. The Premier was 
pressed on the issue of privatization, and he said: 
 

There’s something we signed on to called the Crown 
corporation protection Act or to that effect. Basically it 
protects Crowns from being privatized, he said. If elected, 
we’ll make one change — that’s to the liquor retailing in 

the province — and we’ve already announced that. 
 
So here’s another one, actually. I should probably read the 
whole thing: 
 

With respect to the major Crowns, we will not be changing 
it if we are re-elected again. 

 
So here in this quote he specifically says he’s going to make 
this one change with respect to the Crown corporation 
protection Act — I think he meant The Crown Corporations 
Public Ownership Act but I’ll give him that slide — that the 
only change they were going to make was with respect to liquor 
retailing in the province. And they did make that change shortly 
after the election in 2016, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But to me this is a part of the piece of the strange question as to 
why to this definition is in The Interpretation Act instead of The 
Crown Corporations Public Ownership Act. It’s again another 
example of the Premier trying to twist reality while trying to 
make the argument that he’s keeping his promises. Well maybe 
if I change definitions or if I work . . . Again like I said, it’s 
creating a loophole for himself and for the Sask Party, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So he’s saying well, you know, I never . . . I said, I promised I 
wouldn’t change The Crown Corporations Public Ownership 
Act, but I’m changing The Interpretation Act instead. But it’s 
actually doing the same thing. You’re changing The Crown 
Corporations Public Ownership Act. 
 
So it’s not being . . . It’s actually not a correct statement to say 
that’s the only change that’s been made once this unfortunately, 
if this bill passes, is that the liquor retailing was the only one 
that was brought before the Saskatchewan . . . or that will have 
changed since the election of 2016. This actually creates a 
fundamental change to that Act and that was never brought, Mr. 
Speaker, to the people of Saskatchewan during the 2016 
election. 
 
Now after the election is when the Premier started throwing up 
these trial balloons with respect to SaskTel. I am looking now at 
a Leader-Post article on I believe it was May 2nd and the 
Premier said: 
 

Maybe that’s a discussion Saskatchewan people want to 
have. We wouldn’t be able to be in a position of 
welcoming private investment into SaskTel even if that 
was thought to be the right thing, because we didn’t 
campaign on it. If it was something Saskatchewan people, 
we thought, really wanted to at least talk about, there is the 
idea of a provincial referendum. 

 
So again we have the Premier saying specifically: 
 

We wouldn’t be able to be in a position of welcoming 
private investment into SaskTel even if that was thought to 
be the right thing, because we didn’t campaign on it. 

 
Mr. Speaker, so again he’s saying that he didn’t campaign on 
letting any private investment into SaskTel, but this bill is going 
to do exactly that. 
 



1598 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2017 

It’s upsetting, Mr. Speaker, because everywhere you look, you 
see the Premier trying to dance around promises that he’s 
clearly made to the Saskatchewan people, trying to dance 
around commitments that he made during the election, and 
essentially falling flat in terms of maintaining his commitments 
and maintaining his promises, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So another quote from the Premier, and now this one is moving 
a bit forward. This is June 20th, 2016, and he says: 
 

“If there’s going to be any privatization of SaskTel, the 
shareholders should have a say,” noting such a matter 
could only be decided in an election campaign or a 
referendum. 

 
Here’s another one. August 23rd, the Premier said: 
 

We may get an offer. If we get an offer and we think it’s 
one that generates a significant amount of money for the 
province, maybe enough to eliminate our operating debt, if 
it takes care of the jobs question in Regina, if it provides 
the opportunity for better coverage, we’re at least going to 
take it to the people. 

 
And similarly . . . So this is when the Premier starts floating up 
a bit more aggressively trial balloons about, here are all the 
reasons why I or the Sask Party might consider a sale of 
SaskTel. On August 26th he further reiterated his position 
through a Facebook post. And I’m going to read this also into 
the record, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Regarding any potential sale of SaskTel, there first has to 
be an offer, and one of significance — there is none 
currently. 
 
Second, as I’ve said, only a very significant offer that 
would include things like protecting jobs in Saskatchewan, 
keeping rates low, and improving rural coverage and 
allowing us to do something lasting like eliminating debt 
should receive any further consideration. 
 
By eliminating the debt, Saskatchewan would save roughly 
twice the amount in interest payments each year as what 
SaskTel currently averages in an annual dividend to 
government/shareholders. 
 
Were SaskTel to receive such an offer we do not have a 
mandate to accept it . . . to sell. That is not what we 
campaigned on. But neither would we have the right to say 
no without checking with the shareholders of . . . 
[Saskatchewan] — the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
That’s why I have said that a province wide referendum 
would be the only way to deal with such an offer. The 
people would have to decide not the government. That is 
consistent with election commitments we have made. 
 
SaskTel’s future became a focus with the proposed sale of 
MTS to Bell, as the sale would make SaskTel the only 
regional telecom left in Canada. 
 
The government commissioned a third-party report on 
SaskTel’s competitiveness, which found “there is a risk 

that SaskTel’s net income will be unable to support the 
level of dividends that have been returned to the province 
in recent years.” 
 
It is simply . . . 

 
It’s a long Facebook post, Mr. Speaker. Most people who are 
experts in social media usually say that you should have a pretty 
concise Facebook post. This one’s quite long, so I apologize. 
 

It is simply difficult for a small regional telecom to keep 
up with the necessary infrastructure investments and 
pressures from large carriers in a highly competitive 
market. 
 
SaskTel is a well-run company, a good employer and part 
of our history as a province. For now, there is no offer and 
nothing would take place without your say. 

 
And that was the Premier writing a Facebook post again, Mr. 
Speaker, to the Saskatchewan people. 
 
So it’s very clear both in the, frankly in the Premier’s Facebook 
post that I just read, as well you can tell by the hundreds of 
people who are protesting outside the legislature today and the 
thousands of signatures we received on a petition, that Crowns 
are very important, Mr. Speaker. They create thousands of jobs 
in the province, thousands of good-paying jobs, of 
appropriate-paying jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They provide important dividends to our province. And I 
actually raised this number in question period but I want to 
reiterate again that, in 2015-2016 alone, Crown corporations 
returned $297 million in dividends, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Crowns also provide very important essential services to our 
province. As an example, because I’m already using it, SaskTel 
provides phone and Internet coverage throughout the province, 
throughout a province that is geographically quite large but very 
sparsely populated. Although it’s not perfect, and it should 
definitely be improved, especially in the North — and in 
actually some of the southern rural regions, Mr. Speaker, the 
coverage isn’t ideal or great right now, Mr. Speaker — but it 
sure is better than coverage we would receive from any private 
corporation whose sole goal is to maximize profits. And a 
private corporation unfortunately won’t see a good profit-based 
argument for expanding any type of telecom services in the 
North, for example, Mr. Speaker.  
 
So that’s why these Crowns were created in the first place. It’s 
very important for us when we’re having this discussion about 
Bill 40 to remember why our Crowns were created in the first 
place and to realize that the reason for their existence hasn’t 
disappeared. And we still absolutely need those services present 
here today. 
 
The problem with this bill . . . Well there’s many, many 
problems with this bill, Mr. Speaker. One of the main ones, like 
I’ve said, is the concern what this will do in terms of the legal 
structure of our Crowns, Mr. Speaker. Right now the people of 
Saskatchewan are considered the shareholders of the Crowns. 
But we don’t actually have a share. I don’t have a share in my 
pocket, even though I’m a shareholder of SaskTel. You, Mr. 



March 8, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1599 

Deputy Speaker, don’t have a share in your pocket, but you’re a 
shareholder of all of these Crowns, Mr. Speaker. We receive 
our profits, so to speak, from our Crowns in terms of dividends 
that go straight to the government. 
 
So if we’re going to create a situation where 49 per cent of the 
Crowns can be sold, we’re going to have to create a new legal 
structure for these Crowns. And there hasn’t been any 
discussion from the minister about what this is going to look 
like, what this is going to entail, how much this is going to cost, 
what are the consequences of it. And there are consequences 
actually, Mr. Speaker, when you’re creating a share structure 
and when you’re selling shares or dealing with shares and 
shareholders that are different than what we’re used to in terms 
of our Crown corporations. 
 
And I’ve been speaking with a lot of people, like we said, about 
this bill. We’ve been speaking to constituents throughout 
Saskatchewan about this bill. But I’ve also been speaking to 
two lawyers, Mr. Speaker, about this bill and getting some 
feedback on what their thoughts are. I practised business law for 
like eight months seven years ago, so I’m not a business law 
expert. I was practising family law for about six years before I 
was elected, so I would not ever say I am an expert in corporate 
law or business law, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But I do have friends 
who I think are, and I have spoken with them about this. And 
the problem is, is we haven’t had any clarity from the minister 
as to whether or not The Business Corporations Act will come 
into play on these new legal structures of the Crown 
corporations. And I don’t see a reason, unless some sort of 
exemption is built in, but I have yet to see some sort of reason 
for why that would occur. 
 
I’m not too sure if an . . . If we’re going to run down the 
theoretical aspect of this, if an exemption is built in, I’m not too 
sure who would be willing to buy, for example, 10 per cent of 
shares in a Crown if they don’t have the rights and remedies 
and protections that are given to them by The Business 
Corporations Act. 
 
Typically what can happen when you’re selling shares is 
shareholders’ agreements are created and signed, and those 
usually afford actually a greater protection in addition to the 
protection that’s already provided them in The Business 
Corporations Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So when we’re talking 
about concerns with respect to some rights that minority 
shareholders may have in these new types of Crown shareholder 
situations where . . . When we’re talking about The Business 
Corporations Act, we’re talking about the baseline for what 
protections likely would be for minority shareholders because, 
as I said, typically shareholder agreements are negotiated in a 
way so that minority shareholders have a larger or have more 
security in addition to what The Business Corporations Act 
provided. 
 
And some friends that I’ve spoken to who are much more 
expert in this area pointed me to the oppression remedy that is 
afforded to minority shareholders through The Business 
Corporations Act and some concerns that he had that there’s the 
potential that a minority shareholder could use the oppression 
remedy to start an application in the court against their fellow 
majority shareholders — which would be us, the people of 
Saskatchewan — theoretically again. Still, we’re all talking 

theoretically. 
 
But these are serious, serious implications that we’d have with 
respect to legislation. And when we’re talking about legislative 
drafting and creating new legislation, it’s important to think 
about all of these aspects to make sure that there isn’t any 
unintended consequences of legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
So in no way is it fearmongering; it’s actually having a 
discussion about what the consequences are potentially going to 
be with respect to this bill. 
 
So the oppression remedy, like I said, gives the minority 
shareholders certain powers in certain situations. One situation 
that was particularly provided to me — and I’m going to read 
the whole section into the record, Mr. Speaker — is if the 
minority shareholder can prove that the majority shareholders 
are acting in a way that’s oppressive to the minority 
shareholder. An example could be if they are acting in a way 
where they’re going to harm the financial . . . I can’t think of 
the word, but the actual value of their shares, that’s going to 
significantly impact the value of their shares or impact the value 
of their shares. I shouldn’t say significant because I don’t know 
if that’s true. If they’re going to impact the value of their shares, 
that they can launch an oppression remedy which could 
potentially result in the winding up of a corporation. 
 
[15:15] 
 
So as an example, if we’re going to talk about SaskTel again, if 
a minority shareholder could potentially argue that . . . For 
example, say in the future, if say Bill 40 is passed and 49 per 
cent of the whole legal structure is changed, 49 per cent of the 
shares is sold to whoever. It actually doesn’t matter who in this 
instance. It’s not the people of Saskatchewan. And SaskTel 
decides that they want to start an initiative. They want to 
seriously invest in expanding telecom services in the North 
because the people of Saskatchewan see the value and the need 
to expand telecom services in the North. 
 
So the people of Saskatchewan as the majority shareholder are 
dealing with or living up to what their bottom line is, and what 
our bottom line always has been, with respect to the Crowns, is 
getting value while ensuring that we’re providing services to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
But the minority shareholder, for example, might see that as not 
the most financially beneficial decision for the corporation. 
Because as you know, typically in the private sector the 
minority shareholder’s bottom line is not going to be the same 
as the majority shareholders’ — so the people of 
Saskatchewan’s — bottom line will be. Their whole reason for 
having the shares and their whole goal will be to maximize 
profits, which is understandable. All the power to them. 
However, that’s why Crowns were created in the first place. 
 
So there is a legitimate concern that this could result in an 
application to the court and a use of the oppression remedy. 
And I’m going to read the whole section into the record because 
it’s very important, Mr. Speaker. And this is The Business 
Corporations Act section 234(1): 
 

A complainant may apply to a court for an order under this 
section. 



1600 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2017 

(2) If, upon an application under subsection (1), the court is 
satisfied that in respect of a corporation or any of its 
affiliates: 
 

(a) any act or omission of the corporation or any of its 
affiliates affects a result; 
 
(b) the business or affairs of the corporation or any of its 
affiliates are or have been carried on or conducted in a 
manner; or 
 
(c) the powers of the directors of the corporation or any 
of its affiliates are or have been exercised in a manner; 

 
that is oppressive or unfairly prejudicial to or that unfairly 
disregards the interests of any security holder, creditor, 
director or officer, the court may make an order to rectify 
the matters complained of. 
 
(3) In connection with an application under this section, the 
court may make any interim or final order it thinks fit 
including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing: 
 

(a) an order restraining the conduct complained of; 
 
(b) an order appointing a receiver or receiver-manager; 
 
(c) an order to regulate a corporation’s affairs by 
amending the articles or bylaws or creating or amending 
a unanimous shareholder agreement; 
 
(d) an order directing an issue or exchange of securities; 
 
(e) an order appointing directors in place of or in 
addition to all or any of the directors in office; 
 
(f) an order directing a corporation, subject to subsection 
(6), or any other person, to purchase securities of a 
security holder; 
 
(g) an order directing a corporation, subject to subsection 
(6), or any other person, to pay to a security holder any 
part of the moneys paid by him for securities; 
 
(h) an order varying or setting aside a transaction or 
contract to which a corporation is a party and 
compensating the corporation or any other party to the 
transaction or contract; 
 
(i) an order requiring a corporation, within a time 
specified by the court, to produce to the court or an 
interested person financial statements in the form 
required by section 149 or an accounting in such other 
form as the court may determine; 
 
(j) an order compensating an aggrieved person; 
 
(k) an order directing rectification of the registers or 
other records of a corporation under section 236; 
 
(l) an order liquidating and dissolving the corporation; 
 
(m) an order directing an investigation under Division 

XVII to be made; 
 
(n) an order requiring the trial of any issue. 

 
Mr. Speaker, as you can see, there’s quite a large power that the 
court has. And it’s quite a wide power that the court has that, if 
it’s found that an oppression remedy is appropriate, that a judge 
could order against a corporation. 
 
I also want to read, because it’s a bit of a companion section, 
Mr. Speaker . . . Any shareholder can bring this particular 
section in an application forward, and I’m going to read that in 
now. This is again The Business Corporations Act: 
 

207(1) A court may order the liquidation and dissolution of 
a corporation or any of its affiliated corporations . . . 
[under] the application of a shareholder: 

 
And the important one here I believe is . . . I’m just going to 
read them all, just to be safe: 
 

(a) if the court is satisfied that in respect of a corporation 
or any of its affiliates: 
 

(i) any act or omission of the corporation or any of its 
affiliates effects a result; 
 
(ii) the business or affairs of the corporation or any of 
its affiliates are or have been carried on or conducted 
in a manner; or 
 
(iii) the powers of the directors of the corporation or 
any of its affiliates are or have been exercised in a 
manner; 

 
that is oppressive or unfairly prejudicial to or that 
unfairly disregards the interests of any security holder, 
creditor, director or officer; or 

 
(b) if the court is satisfied that: 

 
(i) a unanimous shareholder agreement entitles a 
complaining shareholder to demand dissolution of the 
corporation after the occurrence of a specified event 
and that event has occurred; or 
 
(ii) it is just and equitable that the corporation should 
be liquidated and dissolved. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that this isn’t the most exciting 
legislation in the world, but it’s very, very important that when 
we’re making these important legislative decisions as legislative 
drafters, which is what we are, that we’re doing so with eyes 
wide open and that we understand all of the potential legal 
consequences of the decisions we make in this House because it 
will impact a lot of people and it will impact this province for a 
very, very long time to come. 
 
There’s one more. If that wasn’t alarming enough, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, there’s even one more provision in The Business 
Corporations Act that provides for another remedy that’s 
important that we make sure we talk about, and that’s the right 
of a dissenting shareholder. So on certain transactions, a 



March 8, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1601 

minority shareholder can dissent and then have their shares 
appraised and purchased. So I’m going to read that whole 
section into the record too, Mr. Speaker, because it’s just as 
important. 
 
And when we’re talking and when the Premier says that this bill 
won’t change the control of our Crowns or the direction of our 
Crowns, it’s actually not quite the case because there are quite a 
lot of remedies available to minority shareholders, as there 
should be, Mr. Speaker, as we see in the human . . . The whole 
reason why we have human rights legislation, as an analogy, is 
that democracy is very important, but sometimes the will of the 
majority can affect the will of the minority in a negative way. 
And we make sure that there is mechanisms in place for the will 
of the minority if they’re being, example, if their rights are 
being infringed on from the human rights perspective, or if 
they’re being oppressed in the business perspective. It’s the 
same thing; it makes sense.  
 
However, when we’re talking about our Crown corporations 
and having a discussion about ownership structure, we need to 
make sure that we understand what the real implications are. 
It’s alarming to me we have a lot of members opposite who say 
that they are business owners. I’m not too sure why they 
haven’t flagged this as concerns if they’re well versed in 
business structure, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to read section 184 
into the record of The Business Corporations Act.  
 

184(1) Subject to sections 185 and 234, a holder of shares 
of any class of a corporation may dissent if the corporation 
is subject to an order under clause 186.1(4)(d) that affects 
the holder or if the corporation resolves to: 
 

(a) amend its articles under section 167 or 168 to add, 
change or remove any provisions restricting or 
constraining the issue, transfer or ownership of shares of 
that class; 
 
(b) amend its articles pursuant to section 167 to add, 
change or remove any restriction on: 
 

(i) the business or businesses that the corporation may 
carry on; or 
 
(ii) the powers that the corporation may exercise; 
 

(c) amalgamate with another corporation, otherwise than 
under section 178; 
 
(d) be continued under the laws of another jurisdiction 
under section 182; or 
 
(e) sell, lease or exchange all or substantially all its 
property under subsection (2) of section 183. 

 
And then there is a longer section, Mr. Speaker, that I won’t go 
into completely because I’m cognizant of the time, but it is 
something that we need to be aware of as a potential hazard 
when we’re dealing with this. 
 
So these provide mechanisms and these, like I said before and 
I’ll say again, it’s the baseline mechanisms for minority 
shareholders so that minority rights . . . And then there’s the 

potential that this could result in minority rights standing in the 
way of major changes, or changes like I said, as an example, 
SaskTel. If SaskTel felt the need to, as they should frankly, 
expand service in the North or expand service in rural 
Saskatchewan and minority shareholders don’t see that as 
economically beneficial to SaskTel, there are mechanisms in 
place where they could potentially gain control over the 
direction of SaskTel or any one of our Crowns, Mr. Speaker. 
And as I said before, this is the baseline for what could be 
provided to minority shareholders. 
 
So I’ve pointed to a few different things already. I’ve pointed to 
the importance that our Crown provides. We will lose, we will 
lose dividends as shareholders change, as we lose shares. As the 
current shareholders of Saskatchewan, we will lose this 
dividend money because it will be flowing out to other 
organizations or private companies or out-of-province 
companies. Frankly, Mr. Speaker, we will lose them. 
 
And it’s strange to think that this is the appropriate time to lose 
those dividends, at a time when things are a little bit more 
tighter in terms of natural resource revenues. This is by all 
means the wrong time to be taking away our dividends and 
losing money that we are getting from our Crowns by giving it 
to other shareholders once those shareholders are created and 
these shares are sold, Mr. Speaker. There’s the concern, as I 
said, about the rights of minority shareholders and how that 
could play into all of this. There’s still a lot of questions with 
respect to that. 
 
There’s concerns about the simple fact that the Sask Party 
hasn’t taken this to the people of Saskatchewan. They did not 
run on this. They were very clear, and I’ve already quoted the 
Premier directly, that they would not make any changes to The 
Crown Corporations Public Ownership Act other than with 
respect to the liquor retail stores. But they are, and they haven’t 
taken this to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And there’s one more that I want to make sure that I get on the 
record. And I know other members on my side have talked 
about this. I know other members on my side will still talk 
about this. It’s this strange thing that I don’t understand why we 
haven’t really gotten a clear answer on it. It seems like they 
didn’t even realize that this was an issue. But this definition will 
actually be completely different than the Canadian revenue 
agency’s definition of privatization or privatize through the 
Income Tax Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The CRA’s [Canada Revenue Agency] definition of privatize 
states that if a Crown corporation has 10 per cent, at least 10 per 
cent of it sold to a private corporation . . . So if 10 per cent, at 
least 10 per cent of a Crown is privatized, that Crown is no 
longer considered a Crown. And I’m sure there was a much less 
convoluted way to explain that. And I know there was more 
simpler and direct ways of explaining that in the past by other 
colleagues, but I’m reaching the end of my time and I’m frankly 
starting to run out of steam, to be honest. But basically, I think 
I’ve explained it. But if 10 per cent of a Crown is privatized, it 
will no longer fall under the definition of Crown corporation 
under the Income Tax Act; therefore they will no longer have 
the exemption that’s provided to it under the Income Tax Act. 
 
Right now our Crown corporations are exempt from federal 



1602 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2017 

income tax. Once 10 per cent, at least 10 per cent . . . If 10 per 
cent of our Crown corporations are sold or privatized, those 
Crowns are going to be subject to federal income tax. We’re 
going to be sending millions of dollars to Ottawa. And I thought 
we had a Premier who was fighting against sending millions of 
dollars to Ottawa. I’m not too sure why he’s not standing up to 
his Minister of Justice or to himself saying, we are not sending 
more money to Ottawa. That’s exactly what this is going to do. 
We need to be alarmed about this. 
 
[15:30] 
 
I’m not too sure how this is going to . . . This is going to cost 
the people of Saskatchewan more money than it’s going to save, 
Mr. Speaker. And we’ve talked about this several times with the 
minister. We’ve had this concern come to us by lawyers who 
practice tax law, because again I would never consider myself 
an expert in tax law nor in business law, but we have had 
experts in that field approach us and tell us that this is 
something that’s very concerning. And we have yet to hear the 
Minister of Justice explain to us his logic for why he thinks we 
need to be sending millions of dollars more in tax to Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that there’s going to be a lot more 
conversation about this. Hopefully I’ll have the opportunity to 
add even more conversation about this. As I’ve said before and 
I’ll say it again, we had hundreds of people protesting against 
this bill outside the legislature today. We’ve heard from 
thousands of people throughout the province in terms of signing 
our petition. We, as a party, have been canvassing throughout 
the entire province with respect to this bill, still looking for 
someone who thinks that this is a good idea, other than the 
MLAs on the other side. I don’t want them to feel left out. 
 
We were canvassing quite aggressively for the seat in 
Saskatoon Meewasin, and I know our member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin can attest to this even more profoundly. We couldn’t 
really find anyone who thought that this was a good idea. We 
looked hard. Man, we scoured, we scoured every house. We 
looked under bushes. We looked in . . . You know, we were 
looking in cars, you know, I don’t know, pubs and churches and 
everywhere. Couldn’t find . . . 
 
We’ll keep scouring, you know. We’ll keep trying to find 
somebody to stand up for this bill, other than the MLAs on the 
other side. We need to help them out a little bit. I’m worried 
about them. We have a lot of people on our side standing up in 
the public against this bill. And we want to make sure that, you 
know, if there is someone on that side, we’ll try and find it for 
them. 
 
But it’s clear that the people of Saskatchewan are speaking out 
against this. We’re going to continue to fight against this bill. 
It’s the wrong move for the province of Saskatchewan and it’s 
alarming and it’s worrisome because as we know, once this bill 
passes, some very, very significant problematic changes will 
happen to our Crowns, without a referendum, without any 
discussion given to the people of Saskatchewan, without the 
people of Saskatchewan having an opportunity to have a say 
anymore. And that’s why we’ll continue fighting this. And 
that’s why we’ll continue talking about this. 
 
I do, before I adjourn debate, I do want to read in one quote 

from a good . . . a member of this House. I never had the 
opportunity to meet him, but it was former Premier Allan 
Blakeney, in his book. I think other members have had the 
opportunity to meet him, but I didn’t unfortunately . . . Quoted, 
and it’s his book, the history of the Crown corporations: 
 

. . . when deciding whether Saskatchewan needs more 
Crown corporations or fewer, one should ask for whose 
benefit the Crown corporations were organized; who they 
benefit now and in the future; and who would benefit if 
they were dismantled; and [ask] . . . the situation case by 
case. 

 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to adjourn debate on Bill 
40. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Douglas 
Park has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 40, The 
Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 43 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 43 — The 
Pipelines Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And as always it’s my honour to be able to rise in the Assembly 
here to address legislative enactments by this government, and 
this bill is no exception at all. As you know, Mr. Speaker, 
pipelines have been in the Act for, or in the news quite a bit 
recently, and it’s certainly a topic that is of interest to people 
across Canada and North America. And certainly this Act is all 
part of that larger picture of how we move our products, oil and 
gas products, to the market. 
 
This particular bill makes a number of technical changes to the 
existing Act which was drafted in 1998. Of course the Act has 
been amended over the years. It was amended in 2000. It was 
amended in 2003. It was amended in 2005, 2009, 2010, 2014. 
So it’s not the first time the Act has been before the Assembly 
and had some changes made to it, but it certainly won’t be the 
last time either. 
 
I guess the main feature in this particular bill, as we know and 
as the minister announced, is the inclusion now of flow lines 
within the licensing requirements. So there’s now . . . That’s the 
big change, I think, that this bill promises is a statutory change 
to require licensing of flow lines. We know there are many, 
many thousand flow lines in Saskatchewan. Certainly the 
number has exponentially boomed since the introduction of 
fracking in the Bakken area in the early 2000s, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And so with the explosion of flow lines, it’s natural of 
course that we would also need to ensure that they’re being 
properly monitored, properly regulated, enforced, and indeed 



March 8, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1603 

licensed. So I think we have to go back a little bit to understand 
where this bill came from, and I’m just going to talk a little bit 
about the auditor’s report in 2012. This is found chapter 5 in the 
auditor’s 2012 report volume 1, and it’s called . . . The headline 
of the chapter is regulating pipelines. 
 
So the auditor went through carefully in terms of how pipelines 
are being regulated here in Saskatchewan to date. And she 
identified six recommendations that the government should 
look at in 2012. This was brought in in 2012, and then she has 
actually revisited this chapter in 2014 and gave us an update. 
 
Also in 2016, just the recent Public Accounts, 2016 report 
volume 2, she indicated at that time that five of the 
recommendations that she made in her chapters and by the 
committee on Public Accounts . . . is that there are five 
recommendations that are not yet implemented. 
 
So I want to talk about those five. There’s actually seven of 
them, but I want to talk a little bit about those recommendations 
and whether or not in my view this bill actually addresses those 
recommendations. I think there’s some progress definitely, but 
there are some shortcomings that I don’t think have been 
adequately captured in the changes to the bill. And perhaps I 
will start maybe with that portion of my discussion, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
So the first recommendation . . . Some of these 
recommendations from the auditor are not related to legislation 
so I’ll just touch on those briefly. One of the recommendations 
is that the Ministry of Energy and Resources actually “Develop 
written policies and procedures to guide [their] staff when 
assessing pipeline design, monitoring pipeline construction, and 
evaluating pipeline operations.” Two years later we find out 
from the auditor that this has been partially implemented but 
there’s still work to be done. 
 
We don’t know for sure whether this has been done yet or not, 
but certainly we will be reviewing this chapter again in 
committee in the future, so we’ll have an opportunity to discuss 
that issue with the minister and his staff to determine whether or 
not these recommendations are in fact fully implemented. 
 
The auditor pointed out in 2014 that the ministry in 2013 
“developed and implemented a set of written policies and 
procedures to aid staff when reviewing a pipeline construction 
application and a ‘leave to open’ application . . .” And she 
found that the ministry also had incorporated significant 
application requirements under NEB [National Energy Board] 
requirements. So that she was okay with. 
 
But “the Ministry [she went on to say] has not established 
policies and procedures to guide staff on evaluating the 
completed self-assessments or . . . [conducting] any other 
monitoring of ongoing pipeline operations.” 
 
So we have still a gap here in terms of the ministry’s review and 
oversight of the development of pipelines, and I’m sure we’ll 
find out more in committee about where the progress of that 
would be at. But as of 2014 that’s the latest information that we 
have. We know that that is not fully implemented at this point 
in time. 
 

The second recommendation that she made in 2012 was in 
relation to . . . Here’s the recommendation: We recommend that 
the Ministry of Energy and Resources consider seeking 
responsibility in law to verify that pipeline operators clean up 
contaminated sites to an acceptable condition. 
 
And as of 2014 it was not implemented. Now there are some 
changes in the Act in terms of inspection and certainly fines and 
things like that, but I think we really want to drill down in 
committee to understand whether or not those changes in the 
Act — and I’ll talk about them in a bit, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 
whether or not those meet the requirements to the extent that the 
auditor was seeking and recommending. So we’ll be looking for 
a much more fulsome discussion on that particular area because 
this is one where the auditor recommended changes in law. And 
I believe the minister has indicated in his press release that all 
of the recommendations are now being implemented, so I guess 
that’ll be part of the discussion in terms of whether or not those 
recommendations are fully implemented or not. 
 
And I’m just looking at some reports that came in after the bill 
was introduced, and there was a quote from the minister himself 
that said: “These objectives allow us to complete the 
recommendations made in the 2012 Provincial Auditor’s 
Report. It will also address . . . public concerns . . .” 
 
It’s not clear to me how those sections actually meet those 
requirements, so again I think that’s a discussion that we’ll be 
looking for with the minister and his officials in committee to 
make sure that indeed the law is sufficient to verify that pipeline 
operators clean up contaminated sites to an acceptable 
condition. So I’ll talk about those changes in a minute, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The next one was actually implemented, and this is one where 
there was recommendation that the ministry “consistently 
document its assessment of pipeline license applications for 
compliance with the law prior to issuing pipeline licenses.” 
 
So of course this is for pipelines and not flow lines, and that 
there was insufficient documentation to determine whether or 
not the approval or the application was proper or not. So one of 
the comments the auditor made in her report was that none of 
the files that they reviewed indicated any evidence of on-site 
inspection. And you know, Mr. Speaker, much of pipeline 
inspection is done technically through machines that run 
through the lines. I think they call them PIGs [pipeline 
inspection gauge]. And there’s other ways of determining the 
healthiness of the pipeline itself, the strength of the pipe, and 
whether there’s any weaknesses in it. So there’s a lot of 
technical ways to do that. 
 
But certainly, as we know in the case of the Husky spill on the 
river, in the North Saskatchewan River, visual inspections 
would have determined that there was shifting occurring in the 
soil on the riverbank. And I think, based on what we’ve seen 
from the Husky report, that certainly those visible signs were 
there. So whether or not that pipeline was inspected, we’re still 
hoping to find that out through some freedom of information 
requests we made as well. 
 
So we have a lot of questions. We have a lot of questions about 
how inspections are taking place. And I think as the official 



1604 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2017 

opposition, it’s our duty to shine light on those questions 
because when we see things happen like the Husky spill, there 
are many questions that the public now are alerted to and 
saying, what is going on? How is this being inspected? 
 
Unfortunately we weren’t able to receive pipeline inspection 
reports on other pipelines from the ministry. And you know, 
we’re still waiting for the final report and hoping to see it soon 
— I understand, hopefully, during this spring session. So if we 
have an opportunity . . . It’s been a long wait, Mr. Speaker, and 
we’re certainly hoping that those reports come through and we 
can see what decisions this government has made in relation to 
that particular spill. 
 
But going back to the auditor’s recommendations, there was 
some other ones . . . I’ve just got to go back here. There was a 
couple others that were actually fully implemented in 2014. The 
other one was the recommendation that they assess the 
resources they require to fulfill their responsibilities under The 
Pipelines Act. We were told in 2014, in relation to that one . . . I 
have to find it. The ministry told the auditor that they had 
identified a number of potential resourcing issues in relation to 
its regulatory responsibilities for pipelines. So what they did is 
they hired one full-time pipeline engineer in January 2013 to 
fulfill some of its regulatory responsibilities, and some 
additional equipment was actually purchased as well — a laptop 
and a truck. 
 
Again I guess our question for the ministry is: is one person 
sufficient? We know we have now added licensing for 80 000 
kilometres of flow lines. So will there be additional resources? 
And that’s a question we are going to have for the ministry, as 
well as, what sort of additional resources will they have to not 
only deal with the new flow lines that are being added — and I 
think it’s a risk-based assessment system that will be applied — 
but also how will we look back? How will we look back at all 
those previously unlicensed flow lines? And I know there are 
provisions in the Act dealing with that through regulation, but 
again we have lots of questions about, when will those 
regulations be passed? How soon will we see these pipelines 
brought into the regulatory framework? So a lot of questions in 
relation to that as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Another one that wasn’t recommended at all as of 2014 was a 
recommendation that the ministry monitor pipeline operator 
compliance with integrity management and safety processes for 
existing pipelines. I just want to find the 2014 . . . Oh yes, here 
it is. At that point, that was part of the other recommendation in 
terms of written policies and procedures. And in 2014 we know 
that that wasn’t the case, that they hadn’t completed all the 
work, and that the ministry had advised they expect to amend 
the pipeline Act to include more substantive provisions 
regarding pipeline integrity and safety of ongoing pipeline 
operations. 
 
Again I’ll take a quick look today at some of the provisions that 
are in the new bill in relation to inspections and compliance. A 
lot of it is I think the out-front side of what the inspectors are 
required to do, but I’m not sure if it meets the strict requirement 
that the auditor had recommended for ensuring and monitoring 
pipeline operator compliance with all the safety procedures and 

integrity management. And this is for existing pipelines. And 
it’s not clear to me whether, as flow lines are brought in, will 
they be caught by the existing pipelines provisions and will 
those inspections then apply? So again a number of questions I 
think that are technical in nature that we’ll certainly want to ask 
at the time that the bill is reviewed in the committee, in the 
committee stages. 
 
So just speaking to the bill itself and talking about a few of the 
changes that are being added in terms of the definition section 
and the interpretation section in the Act, usually found in no. 2, 
section 2 of most Acts, there are a few new definitions being 
added. “Approved” is being added as a definition; it means it’s 
approved by the minister, so for what that’s worth. 
 
We’re also adding something called a directive. And I think this 
is something the public needs to pay more attention to, is a 
trend within these types of ministries to use directives rather 
than regulations to direct proper behaviour, I guess, or to direct 
expectations for pipeline companies. And there’s a good 
explanation of that in the explanatory notes that were provided 
with this bill. And again I wish these explanatory notes were 
available online, but . . . Or maybe they are. I just can’t find 
them. 
 
But the description of a directive is found on page 12 of the 
explanatory notes, and it’s talking about the repeal of . . . or a 
new section in the bill, section 21, I believe. Yes, and 21 is the 
actual directives clause. And I just want to share with the public 
on the record the explanation for that particular clause, and 
what it says is: 
 

This section is added to allow for the establishment of 
technical directives related to the construction, operation 
and abandonment of pipelines. Energy regulators in 
western Canada, including Saskatchewan, are increasingly 
relying on directives rather than regulations to establish 
rules and guidelines for the oil and gas industry. Directives 
are written in a technical rather than legal language and are 
more readily used by oil and gas operators for the purpose 
of the design, construction and operation of wells, facilities 
and pipelines. Pipeline directives will be approved by the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council. 

 
So we know that there will be some sort of regulatory review, at 
least by Executive Council. It won’t be reviewed in this 
Chamber which, as you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
something as a legislator that concerns me. I know the pull on 
the bureaucratic side where they’re always saying, it’s too hard 
to get these things through and, you know, we’re the ones that 
are monitoring these things and everything’s good. And I 
understand that pull from the regulatory side and certainly 
legislation is no piece of . . . It’s not an easy thing to do, to get it 
through all the layers of government and through cabinet and 
then onto the floor of this Assembly. 
 
But I worry about directives like S-10 and S-15 which are 
currently in place for the conservation of gases that are being 
vented or flared into the environment. And we know that the 
carbon dioxide emissions from those emissions are significantly 
high and have exploded basically since the Bakken oil play has 
been developed. So there’s a lot of concern in the public. And 
certainly, Mr. Speaker, I was down in Oxbow in January 



March 8, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1605 

speaking to people who are concerned about those particular 
issues. I know they’ve spoken to their MLA, who kindly 
referred them to me, but they are concerned about some of the 
flaring and venting that has been occurring in their area. 
 
Also SO2 [sulphur dioxide], which is deadly as you know. 
Sulphur . . . I can’t even say the word. SO2, so it’s hydroxide, 
sulphur hydroxide, which is very, very poisonous. Sour gas is 
the common name to it, and I’ve talked to people who are 
scared to even go . . . have their grandchildren over to their 
house because the one gentleman was actually knocked out in 
his yard in December and can’t even find the location of where 
this gas is coming from. So it’s quite alarming for people that 
have residences in the area. 
 
And certainly S-10 is supposed to reduce the amount of 
associated gases that are being vented and flared into the 
atmosphere, but I think we have many questions for the 
ministry in terms of how that’s being done, what progress is 
being made, whether or not the cap of 900 000 litres is a 
sufficient cap, what’s happening in Alberta in respect to that. So 
those are some of the things. 
 
When you see these directives being imposed like S-10 and 
S-15, it’s difficult to track the progress. And we’re doing what 
we can through written questions and through freedom of 
information requests and through talking to people on the 
ground. But this is a highly industrial area, it’s a highly 
technical area, and it is also a highly emitting area when you 
talk about methane and butane. And the amount of natural gas 
that is actually being vented into the atmosphere is quite 
concerning. 
 
And I think if we could use that natural gas for commercial 
purposes and find a way to capture it rather than just venting it 
into the atmosphere, that would go a long ways to reducing our 
carbon dioxide emissions here in the province. I know that’s a 
known concern, and obviously that’s why S-10 was brought in. 
But whether or not the limits are correct or whether the program 
is having any success, because it’s commercially difficult to 
make money off of these associated gases despite the fact they 
do have commercial value . . . But obviously transporting it, 
pumping it, all those things are difficult to realize if you don’t 
have the capital investment to do so. So we’re looking for 
leadership in that area for sure. And we’ll have a lot of 
questions about how S-10 is currently . . . whether it’s working 
or not, basically, and what’s being brought in. 
 
We know the minister issued some orders recently. I think 
Deputy Minister Laurie Pushor recently signed an order 
restricting venting and flaring on certain land descriptions. But 
it’s really difficult to understand exactly what well sites we’re 
talking about when there’s so many thousands of wells down 
there and so much activity which is, as we know, generating a 
lot of the economy that we see in this province today. So again 
it’s always the balance. 
 
Other changes to the bill . . . I kind of went off on a little rant on 
directives, but other changes: there’s a new definition of 
“document.” And in this case you can see modernization of the 
legislation because they’re just basically including electronic 
forms of documentation within the definition of “document.” 
And that shows up a few times in this bill, some of the 

cleaning up. 
 
The definition of “pipeline” is being changed. And in this case 
they’re adding a fifth material. The pipeline definition has four 
things that can currently be carried within pipelines, and it looks 
like the government wants to have a fifth category. And in this 
case, it’s any other prescribed substance. So it’s just allowing 
for an expansion of what is actually transported through 
pipelines. The only regulations is that it . . . stipulation is that it 
has to be prescribed by a regulation. So we don’t know what 
those substances will be, and we won’t know until we see 
regulations once again. 
 
So again it’s a bit of the chicken before the egg or vice versa. 
I’m not sure which one. Cart before the horse might be a better 
choice of metaphor, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But it is an issue 
where we don’t know what’s going to be prescribed, so it’s hard 
to comment with any certainty on whether this is an appropriate 
change being made by the ministry at this point in time. 
 
Section 3(2), I’m going to that change now. Just some, they’re 
striking . . . I guess I won’t get into detail on a lot of these 
because these are just sort of technical amendments that come 
out of the changes that are being made. They’re not really 
substantive. 
 
Section 5 is now being repealed, and there’s a new section 5 
being introduced. And this is where we’re talking about flow 
lines, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So in here we have a stipulation that 
at a certain prescribed date — and again prescribed meaning 
when the ministry decides to bring this into regulations — all 
the exempt pipelines must be subject to a licence. So to this 
date, the 70,000-odd flow lines that are actually in operation in 
Saskatchewan are not licensed. They will be described now as 
previously exempt pipelines. I assume this means that any new 
pipelines will have to be licensed, so that’s a go-forward thing, 
but at some point the government intends to bring all of the 
existing pipelines into this legislation. Obviously it’s a massive 
undertaking and will require government resources to do so. 
 
So we will see. Well we’ll be waiting with bated breath for the 
regulations to find out how the government proposes to bring 
all these flow lines into a licensing scheme, which is something 
that we are supportive of, Mr. Speaker, is to get those flow lines 
licensed. So again we’re holding on till the regulations come in 
to find out how. We know that it will happen, but we’re not sure 
how or when. 
 
A number of other changes that are being made, obviously 
section 4 is repealed because this is what exempted flow lines  
to begin with, so that’s being taken out. Section 6 is also 
repealed and that was about licences for exempt pipelines, so 
that isn’t needed anymore. Section 7 is being amended 
somewhat in terms of the requirements for application. Section 
8, there’s some technical changes. Apparently the drafters don’t 
like the word “where” anymore, and they want to use the word 
“if.” So instead of where an applicant has made an application, 
it’s now if an applicant has made an application. So sometimes 
those semantical changes are important, and obviously the 
drafter has taken opportunity to make those changes where they 
can. 
 
We see the reference to the directives being inserted now in 



1606 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2017 

several places in the Act, and one of the examples is changes to 
clause 8(2) where we see applicable directives being used and 
in the public interest. So this is expanding when the minister 
may actually issue a licence, but bringing those directives into 
the bill in this place makes sense because if the directives are in 
place, and if the applicants isn’t following directives, I sure 
don’t want them to get a licence. So that is important as well. 
So if the directives are driving the behaviour of the applicants, 
then we need to obviously incorporate the minister’s taking that 
into account when he approves the licence itself. 
 
There’s a new section in section 10 about transferring licences. 
If I understand correctly, that is to follow the provisions under 
The Oil and Gas Conservation Act. So I think they’re trying to 
bring some parallels between The Pipelines Act and The Oil and 
Gas Conservation Act. And in fact when I saw this, I thought 
well maybe, why are there two separate Acts? Like these Acts 
are intricately . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . intricately — 
thank you my colleague — intricately intertwined. That’s hard 
to say. Two “i” words. Anyways they are intertwined. Pipelines 
obviously are part of oil and gas production, and oil and gas 
production is obviously the reason for pipelines to exist. 
 
So I know there’s a lot of interplay between the two. And in 
fact I think in committee in 2013, there was a discussion with a 
former deputy minister that I’d like to talk about a little bit 
because I think there’s still some confusion about who was 
responsible for pipeline spills. And I’m not sure that this bill 
addresses the concerns of the auditor in that respect as well. 
 
So they’re talking about transferring of licence. They’re using 
transfer requirements found in The Oil and Gas Conservation 
Act. So the explanatory notes indicate that these changes ensure 
consistent treatment for all oil and gas operations. So I think it’s 
bringing that consistency in despite the fact that we have two 
different bills that regulate the — I’ve just got to watch the 
clock here, Mr. Speaker — that regulate the interplay between 
these two areas of oil and gas and pipelines. 
 
[16:00] 
 
Now section 11, again reference to the directives, so that’s been 
changed a little bit. Section 12, there’s some minor changes 
again adding “if” instead of “where” or the reference to the 
directive wherever there’s a reference to regulations. So that’s 
being corrected. Section 12 is . . . Sorry, section 13 is being 
changed. 
 
And this is interesting as well because when you’re constructing 
a pipeline, if need be, you can actually expropriate people’s 
lands. If you can’t reach an agreement for surface access on a 
pipeline, pipeline operators can actually apply for a licence to 
expropriate. 
 
It’s a very powerful tool that is reluctantly used. I think in most 
circumstances you would always hope that the surface 
landowner and the pipeline could come to an amicable 
agreement for accessing their land for that purpose, but I think 
it was recognized in law a long time ago that pipelines need 
proper access and they can’t be zigging and zagging all over the 
place to get from point A to point B. And it would give 
obviously surface rights holders considerable power if they 
were able to say no and deny access. 

So pipelines, obviously it makes sense for them to have 
expropriation power. Flow lines is another story, Mr. Speaker. 
And I think it’s for that specific reason that this particular Act, 
even though we’re including flow lines in the licensing, we are 
not allowing flow lines to be able to expropriate, or flow line 
operators. So they will have to find ways, and I think usually 
within the licence for the well itself there would be . . . Built 
into the lease itself, there would be provisions for flow lines to 
be built in as part of the well site. So perhaps the power of 
expropriation tangentially applies to pipelines through their well 
licence. But certainly I think the idea of this bill is for pipelines 
to have expropriation rights, that they would need to apply to 
the government to get those rights, and that that wouldn’t be 
available for flow lines at this point in time. 
 
That change is also seen in section 15, which is also the 
expropriation section, makes it very clear that pipelines are the 
only thing that can expropriate and not flow lines. So flow lines 
are exempt from that. 
 
A few changes to the service addresses again bringing in 
modern delivery. One thing I find interesting, and I would be 
curious to know from the officials why, if you’re sending an 
electronic document, the service is deemed to be received the 
next day. And I just don’t know why you would choose the next 
day when we know there’s pretty much immediate delivery. But 
that’s a picayune observation, so just found that rather 
interesting why we would choose the next day. I guess we want 
to be sure. 
 
Section 24.1 and section 24.2 are new sections, and these are 
the ones I talked about earlier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we 
talk about beefing up the ministry’s inspection and audit 
abilities. If you look at the explanatory notes, they explain them 
here. Section 24, I just have to find it. It says “Section 24.1 will 
establish a statutory official called an ‘inspector’ . . . ” So there 
will be a new position called the inspector, pipeline inspector 
“. . . whose duties will focus on ensuring that licence holders 
are in compliance with the Act.” The inspection powers include 
a number of things, including whether they’re in compliance. 
They have the power to conduct an audit on the operating 
practices of the licence holder, and they also have the power to 
determine the cause of an incident. And I think in the case of 
the Husky pipeline, we’ll see with the report that’s coming out 
soon whether or not that may indeed happen. 
 
Section 24.2 also appears in The Oil and Gas Conservation Act, 
and that section, that’s a new section that’s being included. It’s 
an immunity section which really says you can’t sue the Crown. 
We see that also in the new water security bill. So it’s 
interesting the different language that’s used to say the same 
thing. And I think immunity clauses, generally you can find a 
million of them out there, but I’m not sure why drafters would 
use different immunity clauses, and perhaps could clean that up 
a little bit. But anyways there’s an immunity clause now that’s 
similar to the one in The Oil and Gas Conservation Act, and it 
just provides Crown officials with statutory immunity. So I 
think that’s understandable as long as, you know, they’re acting 
in good faith. 
 
24.3 is now holding the licence holder responsible for 
addressing environmental or public safety issues that may arise 
after a pipeline is abandoned. And so I think this is a really, 



March 8, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1607 

really, really important clause, and I think it’s important that it’s 
here because — and I’ll read it for you, Mr. Speaker — it reads: 
 

24.3 The abandonment of a pipeline does not relieve the 
licence holder from the responsibility for further 
abandonment or other work with respect to the pipeline 
that the minister determines to be necessary to protect the 
public health or safety or the environment. 

 
And as you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are thousands of 
abandoned pipelines in the system right now. And abandoned 
doesn’t mean what we would think, you know, when you think 
of abandoning someone. It just means it’s not producing oil, 
and they’re not doing anything with it. And that’s my 
layperson’s, non-technical explanation of it. But really it’s still 
within the purview of that particular company. They have a 
lease that’s operating. They pay surface licence fees. All of 
those things are there, but they’re just not doing anything with 
it. 
 
And they can actually . . . A lot of companies can use these 
abandoned pipelines as writeoffs for tax purposes. So one of the 
things that we’ve seen Alberta do is actually require shutdown 
of some of these abandoned pipelines, that they can’t just let 
them sit there on their books anymore, and that they actually 
have to take action. If it hasn’t produced or the pipeline hasn’t 
been used — in this case pipelines — for 20, 30, 40 years, 
which exists in Saskatchewan, then perhaps they should be 
dismantled or reclaimed or decommissioned. I think 
decommissioned is probably the most appropriate term. But 
there should be something happening to these pipelines because 
they are going to become more and more of a liability. And as 
long as the law allows oil companies to simply abandon them, 
then of course the companies are going to do that because it’s 
financially advantageous for them to do so. But I think this 
section shows a signal at least that there’s a will to ensure that 
the responsibilities for abandonment continue and that it happen 
sooner than later. 
 
Section 25 is being amended as well: “. . . align with changes to 
section 3 related to exempting pipelines or classes of pipelines 
from the application of the Act.” 
 
It’s a little hard, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to focus on the comments 
I need to make because of an ongoing discussion between the 
Premier and some of my colleagues, which I’d like to hear, but 
I’m trying to talk and speak to the bill. So I will continue to try 
and follow along my own thought chain here despite the chatter. 
 
Okay, so again there’s changes to 25(1)(b). I’m going to go 
back to my regular Act here and find out what’s going on in 
25(1)(b). 
 
I hate missing a good discussion, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . It wasn’t that good? No, okay. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh, it was good. Oh, don’t listen to him. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Oh, my colleague thinks it was quite helpful. 
 
But anyways, section 25(1)(b). Where are we? Here we are. Oh 
yes. This is the regulation section, and there are a number of 
changes being made to the regulation section to facilitate the 

goals of this bill. So section (b) of section 25(1) is being 
amended to include pipeline or class of pipelines now instead of 
any person, any pipeline, or any portion of a pipeline. It’s just a 
minor change. 
 
There’s a new regulatory ability being added here in terms of 
financial assurance. Yes, and that’s “. . . to prepare regulations 
related to the provision of financial assurances for those 
pipelines that may pose a major risk to the environment or 
public safety.” This is a good clause. This is a good change, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, because if we get financial bonds that are in 
place when we know that a particular pipeline may be 
dangerous, then at least we’ll be assured that the cleanup will be 
in place. 
 
So if you think about the Husky oil spill, we know Husky has 
been a good corporate citizen and paid the money that it has 
been asked to pay. But if there was an event where a company 
was insolvent and wasn’t able to pay for damages, at least we 
know those financial assurances could be in place. So these are 
regulations that are going to be developed, and I think will be 
helpful to ensure that when disasters do happen that the 
companies that are responsible have the appropriate resources to 
look after it. So I think that’s a helpful change. 
 
There’s a new clause 25(h.1). It’s being added to allow for 
regulations to be prepared related to the preparation of 
emergency response plans. Again I think this is a lesson from 
the Husky experience. And we can see that every company 
should have an emergency response plan, and if there are going 
to be regulations relating to that, it will provide the direction 
that companies need to be able to do their advanced planning 
for emergency preparedness. So those are something we’ll look 
forward to see once those regulations are passed. 
 
Section 21 is a new clause . . . I’m going to go back to that. I 
think I’ll skip ahead here. Sections 27, 28, 29, I’m going to 
move on to that, Mr. Speaker. Oh again . . . I’m sorry. 21 is the 
new clause for directives. And if I look at the bill, it just says, 
“Subject to the approval of the Lieutenant Governor in Council, 
the minister may approve directives . . .” in relation to a number 
of matters. 
 
So I talked about that quite a bit earlier, but again this is a 
direction that I think is interesting in terms of industries like oil 
and gas. And the explanation that’s provided is that it provides 
technical language rather than legal jargon, so that companies 
understand what’s expected of them in terms of complying with 
departmental requirements. 
 
Then we go on to some of the clauses in terms of offences. The 
old offence clauses are being repealed completely. We have 
new offence clauses being substituted. These are more detailed 
obviously, and as the minister indicated in his comments, the 
fines are being increased. Currently they’re $50,000. Today 
we’ve added a zero. They’re now $500,000 a day — or up to, of 
course — for any time that the offences continue. 
 
So I guess we’ll see what the fines will be for something like 
Husky. I’m not even sure if this Act applies to Husky because 
of some other exemptions but . . . or yes, because that’s a spill. 
Anyways there is some questions I have around the application 
of this to spills, pipeline spills, because there are regulations in 



1608 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2017 

respect to pipeline spills. 
 
And I guess the other interesting new addition to this bill is 
something called the administrative penalty, which takes this 
out of the hands of the courts and puts it in the hands of the 
minister. There is concern about that, I think, when you think 
about the fact that the minister is also in a business relationship 
with these companies and now is being asked to administer the 
penalties to these companies. And I think it’s very difficult for 
any government entity to be able to be the regulator and the 
business development manager at the same time. It’s difficult to 
build the walls within the ministry, I think, to be able to do that 
effectively, and certainly I think courts and a third party would 
be maybe more appropriate. 
 
I’m not sure why the minister has decided that it’s his ministry 
that can assess the penalties. And those are certainly questions 
that we will have at the time when committee is convened, 
because that’s something I think that would be concerning to 
the public if they knew that the minister was now the judge and 
the jury and the businessman relating to the development of this 
particular . . . well, the administration of this pipelines Act. 
Although thankfully, and I have to point this out, that there is an 
appeal to the Court of Queen’s Bench for an administrative 
penalty. 
 
But I guess my question is whether or not there will be enough 
penalties assessed. I was told in the vernacular that some 
employees have left the ministry because they wanted to 
enforce and were let go. So that’s not something I’ve 
confirmed, Mr. Speaker, but it’s certainly questions we will 
have again for the minister and the staff when we get into 
committee. Because I think that’s a very serious allegation, and 
certainly we need to get the record clear on that. 
 
So I think at this point in time, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to just 
wrap up with a few comments. We know that this is in people’s 
minds. We know we’re waiting for the Husky report. We are 
anticipating that a number of laws have been broken in terms of 
that spill, and so what are the penalties going to be? We know 
that the auditor’s report is still . . .  
 
Oh yes, there was one other area I did want to touch on briefly 
if my colleagues are okay with that, and that’s back in 
committee in 2013. And I know my colleague from Saskatoon 
Centre talked about this the other day as well. But there was a 
discussion in committee where the former Deputy Chair — I 
have to find it — indicated that in his view this was all covered 
by law and that it was just a bit of ambiguity. And the auditor 
didn’t agree and still doesn’t agree. And that’s in relation to 
remediation under . . . when spills are to be cleaned up to an 
acceptable level. 
 
[16:15] 
 
And I haven’t been able to sort this through myself, Mr. 
Speaker, because we have The Oil and Gas Conservation Act 
and The Pipelines Act. The deputy minister of the day, on 
December 9th, 2013 said, “. . . that all remediation [should] be 
done in accordance with The Oil and Gas Conservation 
Regulations.” But it’s not clear whether the pipelines are caught 
by those regulations. And so he said: 
 

. . . from our perspective, the remediation requirements are 
covered under that Act . . . rather than The Pipelines Act. 
But we do take the point that there may be some ambiguity 
because it’s not referenced specifically under The Pipelines 
Act. 

 
And that is a problem. And I’m not sure that this bill actually 
deals with that issue. I think the ambiguity may still be there. 
And again this is something we need to have a more fulsome 
discussion with in committee. 
 
And Mr. Campbell, of the day, the deputy minister indicated 
that, he said, the point he was making, “. . . it should be more 
explicit under The Pipelines Act in itself, just to make sure that 
there’s no ambiguity.” 
 
I think it’s more than ambiguity. It may be a regulatory gap. 
And I think that’s something that I want to hear an explanation 
from the minister and his staff and his officials in terms of 
where that is dealt with, because I don’t see that ambiguity 
being dealt with in this new bill. 
 
And again Mr. Campbell suggested that there would be more 
regulations under the oil and gas . . . he said it’s under The Oil 
and Gas Conservation Act is where they’re enforcing clean up 
of contaminated sites for pipelines. But I’m not sure that that’s 
exactly the way it works. 
 
So we’re looking for the Husky report. We’re looking for some 
good explanations from the officials and the minister in terms 
of how this bill addresses all the points in the auditor’s report 
relating to the laws. We’re looking for, obviously, a rigorous 
pipeline inspection regime here in Saskatchewan. We see the 
Husky spill. We see the SO2 incidents that are happening. We 
also see . . . And that’s not just from pipelines but obviously 
from well sites. 
 
And also the Ocean Man spill, which creates a whole host of 
regulatory issues. And in fact I’m not sure whether it’s even 
clear at law whether the ministry has any right to enter the 
reserve to check those pipelines. I think the response was 
excellent. I think the cleanup was excellent and everybody 
made sure that the environment was protected. But there are 
definite gaps in terms of regulation when it comes to 
enforcement of provincial laws on First Nation reserve lands, 
and so I think that has never been addressed. 
 
And we know that in the Ocean Man situation, those are very, 
very old lines. There are very old leases. I’ve seen leases going 
back to the ’60s when I was doing work with the Ministry of 
Indian Affairs back in my day, to add some lands to reserve that 
had these old, old pipelines on them. And I do think there’s a 
whole host of questions that if things do go wrong, it could get 
really messy. As I said, the ministry and the officials from the 
company responded as quickly as they could, and the cleanup 
was appropriate as far as I know, what I’m told. 
 
But I think there’s a wide-open door there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
of where you could basically drive a truck through the gaps in 
the law when it comes to The Oil and Gas Conservation Act, 
The Pipelines Act, in its application to lands that are governed 
by the federal law under the Indian Act. 
 



March 8, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1609 

So that’s a whole discussion for perhaps a separate day, but I 
think when we’re having these discussions about pipelines, we 
need to ensure that there’s, well, the proper co-operation — not 
just in goodwill, but also in law — to ensure that Saskatchewan 
people are protected, and that includes the people living on our 
First Nations reserves. 
 
So I think I’ve gone on at length, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms 
of my views on this bill, and so at this point I would like to 
move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 43, An Act to amend 
The Pipelines Act, 1998. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 43, The Pipelines 
Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 44 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Moe that Bill No. 44 — The Water 
Security Agency Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is my pleasure today to 
stand in place and enter into debate on Bill No. 44, The Water 
Security Agency Amendment Act. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this of 
course is a very important Act and one that has very complex 
roots and refers to something that is fundamental to all people 
on the planet, but is particularly of importance to people in this 
province, and that is water, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My understanding is that this bill is an attempt to address some 
very long-standing, very significant issues in the province with 
regard to water, and specifically with regard to the issue of 
drainage on agricultural land, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to preface this by saying that I understand that this 
is a very complex issue. This is something that has huge 
importance to producers in this province, has huge impacts 
downstream to those . . . to our wetlands, to wildlife habitats, 
downstream effects to our lake systems and those very complex 
ecosystems, Mr. Speaker. So I want to preface my remarks by 
saying that I do understand there are some very significant and 
very strongly held views on this issue, and people have a lot at 
stake with regard to drainage in the province. So as I said, I 
wanted to preface my remarks by saying that. 
 
My understanding is Bill 44, the objective as stated by the 
minister is to streamline the process for resolving drainage 
disputes between landowners. And of course anyone who has 
spent time in rural Saskatchewan, anyone who has followed 
what’s gone on at the SARM [Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities] conventions over the years, anyone who 
has neighbours in rural Saskatchewan understands that the issue 
of drainage across agricultural land can be a source of very, 

very high tension for people. 
 
I know, speaking with RM [rural municipality] councillors that 
I know, that this is something that they receive the most calls 
about and the stakes are very high. The emotions are high. 
We’re talking about high stakes, monetarily high stakes, 
high-stakes relationships between neighbours on farms who 
often have found it very difficult to come to an agreement with 
regards to drainage projects. 
 
And certainly this is something that the government has 
struggled with for a long time, how to address the issue of 
drainage. I’m looking at articles going back to 2012 when the 
former Watershed Authority became the Water Security 
Agency. And back at that time, there were plans to crack down 
on illegal drainage activities, said the then minister about the 
new Water Security Agency. 
 
So this is something that has certainly roots before 2012, but 
that the government has put some effort in trying to resolve. 
And I think the fact that it’s five years later that we’re standing 
with this legislation in front of us is a testament to just how 
complex these issues are, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’m just going to rely rather heavily on the remarks of the 
minister in the second reading and also the remarks of my 
colleagues in their response to this bill because I do think that it 
is something that I don’t feel like I’ve had a sufficient amount 
of time to really delve into. But I know that there have been 
extensive consultations prior to this bill with a number of varied 
interests with regard to this bill, and I’d like to look a little more 
into what all of the issues were that were raised there. But with 
that I’ll move into some of my more formal remarks. 
 
This bill gives the Water Security Agency the authority to order 
the closure or alteration of any drainage works constructed 
before 1981. And I think that’s something I want to spend a 
little bit of time on talking about, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
This of course is a huge undertaking to look at: 
 

. . . pre-1981 drainage works without compensation to the 
owner of the drainage works or of the land on which the 
drainage works are situated for any losses or expenses 
sustained as a result of the alteration or closure. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is going to be a very difficult process to move 
through, I’m sure, and I’m very interested to hear more details 
about how exactly this is going to work. Certainly someone . . . 
1981 is probably longer ago than I care to admit, and you can 
imagine a lot of situations where the land has changed hands 
since then. These are long . . . You know, pre-1981 doesn’t just 
mean 1980. This can go back many, many years in the province 
and drainage works prior, you know, decades ago potentially. 
So I think it’s very interesting to see how . . . It will be 
interesting to see how that is navigated, and it will take a lot of 
goodwill and probably a lot of hard work to deal with that. So I 
think that’s interesting. 
 
Something that my colleague, the member for Nutana, 
mentioned was the immunity clause that was in the prior bill, 
the pipeline bill, but also is in this bill which provides immunity 
to the Government of Saskatchewan, Executive Council, and 



1610 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2017 

any former employee of the Government of Saskatchewan. I 
think that that bears some of our attention and our interest with 
regard to this when we’re talking about the closure of drainage 
projects going back that far and then taking away or providing 
immunity, and really talking away the ability of those impacted 
to take action against the government. I think that’s something 
that we’ll want to pay particular attention to, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
The water security amendment Act that is before us really does 
look at restructuring the complaints process for illegal drainage, 
Mr. Speaker. And I know that, as I said in my opening remarks, 
this is something that goes back a number of years. But one of 
the significant recent developments here was the report of the 
Ombudsman of Saskatchewan that came out in March of 2016. 
And in her report she had a number of recommendations for the 
minister with regard to handling of disputes. And I think some 
of the things that she found was that the dispute mechanism was 
not clear enough. It wasn’t being handled in a timely manner, 
and that it needed . . . Actually there were several pages of 
recommendations that were made. 
 
Just in a brief overview looking at her recommendations and 
looking at the bill, I don’t think that it directly addresses the 
recommendations, but I think perhaps approaches it in another 
way. So I’d be interested to see the opinions of those impacted 
by the spill in terms of their thoughts about this new complaint 
process, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Essentially, my understanding, what this proposes to do is 
remove a two-step process that was formerly in place where if 
you were looking to undertake a drainage project and there was 
a dispute with your neighbour, you would be asked to first try to 
resolve that dispute with your neighbour. Which as I mentioned, 
I understand that, you know, in some cases perhaps you’ve had 
good relations with your neighbours for many, many years. It 
can happen that these drainage disputes disrupted relationships 
that lasted for many years and were very, very difficult and 
caused some very heated disputes between neighbours, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. So in order to get to the formal complaint 
process, previously you would have to first have that 
conversation with your neighbour. And this bill would seek to 
replace that process. 
 
Just going to move to the explanation page here, Mr. Speaker. 
Moving away from that complaint-based process, this new 
process doesn’t include a formal complaint or formal decision. 
Instead it focuses on compliance with the approval process. So 
my understanding is, Mr. Speaker, that the Water Security 
Agency would move in and would make a decision based on, 
was there prior approval for the drainage project that was being 
undertaken or wasn’t there. 
 
[16:30] 
 
And there are some assurances that that process would take, at a 
maximum, 90 days, which certainly would be a reduction, Mr. 
Speaker. And there have been some pilot projects, I understand, 
testing this dispute mechanism, and some of them have been 
really focused in the southeast portion of the province. 
 
Of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there have been some very 
high-profile national news stories about the extent of flooding 

down in that southeast corner. And a lot of that, some of that 
has been caused by increased rain activity, increased runoff 
activity, but also it’s been exacerbated by a problem of illegal 
drainage. And it’s funny, when I was doing some research 
looking into this bill, I googled illegal drainage in 
Saskatchewan and the first five stories came up from Manitoba. 
So certainly they’ve been paying attention to this issue, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and that is my understanding, part of what is to 
be addressed here. 
 
But as I mentioned, this is an extremely complex and 
long-standing issue. There are the concerns of the agricultural 
producers. They have high stakes in terms of the amount of 
energy, the amount of inputs that they’re putting into their 
crops, and needed return on those investments. And sometimes, 
obviously, water on their fields impacts that. But also the needs 
of, the requirements of habitat for wetlands. That’s something 
that is important in this discussion as well, Mr. Speaker. And I 
don’t say it as an either/or. I say it as, you know, how do you 
come up with solutions that take into account the very real and 
very pressing concerns of all of the players here, Mr. Speaker? 
It is a very complex issue. 
 
Certainly we continue to lose wetlands in this province at a 
very, very high rate. It has impacts, of course, for habitat, for 
wildlife, for waterfowl, but it also has some other significant 
impacts. I’m just going to move to some more technology here, 
Mr. Speaker, and look up . . . Of course there was a campaign 
by Ducks Unlimited, one of the stakeholders that was noted in 
the minister’s remarks on second reading, talking about some of 
the costs of wetland drainage. Downstream flooding, as we’ve 
talked about, flooding both within the province and going into 
Manitoba resulting in flooded agricultural lands, of course. If 
someone drains onto someone else’s land it can continue 
downstream unless we have an effective mechanism to deal 
with, in a fair way and a transparent way, what is allowed for 
drainage and what isn’t allowed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It removes of course, as I noted, essential habitats for many 
species of wildlife in Saskatchewan, including many 
endangered species. And this really needs . . . That’s a voice 
that, an interest that often doesn’t make its way to the table, Mr. 
Speaker, and I think that we really, we need to put some 
highlight on that as well. 
 
As I said, it’s not an either/or. It’s a matter of looking at all the 
interests here and making sure that we have a balance, that we 
are being good stewards of the land, being good stewards of our 
economy. And I think it’s an issue like this that really 
underscores the complexity of bringing all of those interests to 
the table and trying to find good legislation that serves us well 
today but that will also serve us well into the future. 
 
Another point that is very timely, Mr. Speaker, is the draining 
of wetlands releases CO2 into the atmosphere, and that’s 
something that’s incredibly significant at this point in time, 
resulting in the loss of thousand of years worth of carbon 
storage, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So as I said, these are very high-stakes discussions. This is a 
very important piece of legislation that I think really should 
take into account a number of interests, a number of 
long-standing interests, and something that really, to this point, 



March 8, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1611 

has been difficult to deal with in a timely manner and in a way 
that takes into account the interests of all those who are at the 
table, Mr. Speaker. So it’s a fairly complex piece of legislation, 
this bill that’s before us. 
 
I’m just going to walk through some of the background here. 
Going back to 2012, as I said, when the Saskatchewan 
Watershed Authority became the Water Security Agency, there 
was an acknowledgement there was a need to get more 
aggressive on illegal drainage, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And there 
was also a 25-year water security plan that was put forward at 
that time regarding sustainable water supply, drinking water 
safety, water protection, dam safety, flood and drought damage 
reduction, and governance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I want to say that that type of a 25-year plan really does lend 
itself well to an issue like water. It’s a complex issue but really 
there isn’t anything more fundamental to life on this planet, 
frankly, to put it that way, than water. And it’s important today, 
and I think that’s one of the important roles here that we all 
play. I mean regardless of where we’re at, to make sure that 
we’ve got water for today, that we’ve got water for the future in 
this province. 
 
So this is maybe not the type of legislation that makes its way to 
the headlines, but it is something that it’s important to get right. 
And it’s important that the government, on their side, 
undertakes the consultation and listens to people and listens to 
all interests on this. And it’s important on our side that we make 
sure that we play the role of oversight, that we provide scrutiny 
and provide a bit of a spotlight, and make sure that the 
questions are being asked, that all of the stakeholders have been 
listened to, and that their concerns have been taken into due 
consideration, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I know that back in 2012, the member for Wood River held a 
different role. And he noted something that I said earlier, that 
RMs are often involved when neighbours complain about each 
other’s unauthorized drainage works. I’m sure he’s been privy 
to some discussions that can be very heated amongst 
neighbours. And it really is important to get this right. 
 
And of course I mentioned earlier, you know, neighbours, but 
also our neighbours, our provincial neighbours to the east of us. 
It’s important to get it right there, that we play our part to 
ensure that that drainage is working in a way that makes all of 
us good neighbours. 
 
And we have to ensure good waterfowl habitat, as someone is 
whispering in my ear here. It’s very important, that habitat. And 
of course, as I mentioned, those downstream effects and the 
nutrient runoff into water systems, the adequacy of our water 
supply — all of those things are of the utmost importance, Mr. 
Speaker. And again not necessarily the thing that gets attention 
all the time in the headlines, but really if we get this wrong, it’s 
one of the worst things to get wrong and that is the 
sustainability of our water supply in this province. 
 
A few other comments that I wanted to note, one of the themes 
that we’ve seen with this government is the risk-based 
programs. So that applied in this case would mean that lower 
risk drainage projects would have less scrutiny, less regulation. 
Of course those that are bigger and higher stakes would have 

more scrutiny. So that’s something to pay attention to. I know 
that’s something that’s sort of been rolled out in a number of 
areas, and I think we should be checking in to make sure that 
that is working as it is intended to. 
 
It also looks at . . . As I mentioned before, there were a series of 
pilot projects — one based near Stoughton and one near Canora 
— a provincial strategy where producers, watershed authorities, 
and the representatives in those areas now committing to 
working with the Water Security Agency to help bring existing 
drainage projects into compliance. 
 
And that’s something I’d be really interested to hear more of, 
Mr. Speaker. You’ve got a number of stakeholders there 
working to bring an existing project into compliance with the 
regulations. And probably it’s something we’re going to have to 
address more and more in this province: how do you remediate 
some of those projects, some of the damage that has already 
been done in a way that is effective, that is achievable, and that 
takes into account a number of sometimes competing interests. 
And I think that really is a problem that we’re going to have to 
learn how to tackle better in the province. So as I’ve said 
repeatedly, it’s really important that we get this right and that 
we give it the type of scrutiny that it really does deserve. 
 
I guess one of the other really significant aspects of this bill is 
the increase in the penalty. And the existing penalty has a 
maximum fine of $1,000 a day. With this bill, if passed, that 
bumps it up to an amount not exceeding $1 million per day, 
which of course is a huge jump, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I 
think something that a number of people across a number of 
sectors have really called for, that increased penalty which does 
provide some teeth to the penalties and certainly would provide 
a fairly significant deterrent to . . . or it would encourage, more 
strongly, people into compliance. 
 
I guess another question that I have then with regard to 
compliance would be enforcement. Do we have enough 
enforcement personnel to enforce that type of fine? You know, 
security of those people that are enforcing that type of very 
significant fine. I think those are questions that I will look 
forward to in committee, and perhaps my colleagues or perhaps 
members opposite will have some answers to some of those 
concerns. 
 
I’m just going to look back to the minister’s comments on 
March 6th with regard to this bill. He certainly had a lot to say 
at that point about this bill. As I said, it’s very complex, and 
there will be a lot of people in the province who are watching 
this very closely and making sure that we get this right. 
 
I spoke earlier of the Ombudsman’s report and recommendation 
that we have assertion by the minister that all of the 
recommendations were effectively addressed with the creation 
of the agricultural water management strategy even prior to the 
Ombudsman’s report. So that’s something I’d really like to 
delve into, and perhaps my colleagues will in committee with 
regard to this report. 
 
And again I mentioned the assertion that this new complaint 
process or compliance process that the Water Security Agency 
estimates that it can deal with a request for assistance within 90 
days or less, which certainly if that is the case, if that’s 



1612 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2017 

achievable, would be an improvement. So I would look forward 
to more information about how that’s going to work out. 
 
Another thing that I mentioned, and the minister made reference 
to it in his comments on March the 6th, was the online 
consultation that took place from October 2013 to April 2014. 
So certainly a rather lengthy consultation period, and the fact 
that it attracted nearly 500 participants who discussed various 
options for managing drainage in the province, again a 
significant and complex issue with a lot of interest. Five 
hundred participants really is quite a high level of engagement. 
 
[16:45] 
 
And then the minister noted that in 2015, the ministry met with 
15 agricultural and environmental and municipal groups, groups 
as varied as the Western Barley Growers Association, the Oat 
Development Commission, Western Canadian Wheat Growers, 
canola, the Saskatchewan Farm Stewardship Association, the 
cattlemen’s association, the stock growers, SARM, the 
Saskatchewan Association of Watersheds, Ducks Unlimited, the 
Saskatchewan Environmental Society, and the Saskatchewan 
Conservation and Development Association, as well as the 
Wildlife Federation, and SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association] as well. So this is a fairly varied 
list. 
 
They had a lot of conversation. so it’s a lot to distill down into 
one piece of legislation. And I’m sure that there were some 
points of agreement within that, but I would suggest probably 
also some fairly differing opinions on certain things as well. So 
I’d be interested in those conversations and transcripts of those 
conversations about the balance that we see here in this bill 
that’s before us. 
 
What the minister said on March 6 was that there was some 
“. . . broad agreement that drainage provides many benefits to 
agricultural producers but, if the negative impacts, the drainage 
cannot be mitigated, drainage activities should not be allowed 
. . .” So some acknowledgement that this is important to 
producers, but it’s important to get it right. 
 
Some more agreement on the requirement for more stringent 
oversight. So again I had some questions about the oversight 
piece. Certainly we have seen more in terms of the fine, which 
has jumped significantly up to $1 million a day. So that should 
get some attention I would think. 
 
There was some agreement around, as I said, the support for 
increased compliance and enforcement and the closure of 
drainage works in cases where a project has not received prior 
approval. And that’s going to be a very interesting process, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and a very difficult process. So I would be 
interested to hear impact on that, or input on that and to see 
exactly how that’s going to be achieved. It will be . . . As I said, 
some of these drainage works will be going back not to just to 
1981, but significantly before that. And that will be a very big 
challenge. 
 
The reports are . . . the minister noted some mixed support for 
the requiring of maintenance of some wetlands. Certainly for 
some of the reasons that I mentioned earlier, the need for the 
protection and the benefits of wetlands is something that I 

would like to draw some attention to. And the minister also 
noted that some producers feel that they should receive some 
sort of compensation to retain such wetlands. So that’s an 
interesting discussion too, Mr. Speaker, that I don’t think is 
fully addressed here, either in the legislation nor is it addressed 
in the minister’s remarks. So that’s perhaps something that 
some of my colleagues might have further questions about or 
may have questions about in committee. 
 
I suppose I do have more questions. I will be watching this 
debate very closely and with interest, but I think I have come to 
the end of my comments. And despite the encouragement of my 
colleagues here, I think I’m going to move to adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 44. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 44, The Water Security 
Agency Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that this House does now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:50.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Ruling on Points of Order 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1583 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1583 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1583 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1584 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1584 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1584 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1584 
  Bonk ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1584 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1585 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1585 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1585 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1586 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 International Women’s Day 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1586 
  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1586 
 2017 Women’s March 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1586 
 Countdown to Canada 150 Event 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1587 
 Saskatchewan Surgical Team Cares for Guatemalans 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1587 
 Celebration of India’s Republic Day 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1587 
 New Potash Production Shaft in Operation 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1587 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Land Transactions and Changes to Members’ Compensation 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1588 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1588 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1588 
 Intent of Bill No. 40 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1589 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1589 
 Funding for Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1590 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1590 
 Support for the Northern Teacher Education Program 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1590 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1591 
 Support for Saskatchewan Workers 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1591 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1591 
 Provision of Health Care Services 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1591 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1591 
 Funding for Court System 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1592 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1592 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 40 — The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’interprétation 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1592 
 Bill No. 43 — The Pipelines Amendment Act, 2016 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1602 
 Bill No. 44 — The Water Security Agency Amendment Act, 2016 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1609 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


