






















































Hansard: May 11, 2017


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 87A  THURSDAY, MAY 11, 2017, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 

 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 

Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 

 

 

 
 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 

Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 

Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 

Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 

Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 

Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 

Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 

Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 

Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 

Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 

Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 

Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 

Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 

D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 

Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 

Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 

Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 

Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 

Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 

Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 

Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 

Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 

Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 

Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 

Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 

Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 

Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 

Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 

Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 

Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 

Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 

McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 

Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 

Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 

Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 

Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 

Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 

Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 

Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 

Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 

Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 

Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 

Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 

Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 

Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 

Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 

Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 

Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 

Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 

Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 

Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 

Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 

Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 

Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 

Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 

Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 

Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 

Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 

 

 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 11 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2491 
 May 11, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
Clerk: — Members, I wish to advise you that Mr. Speaker is 
not present to open today’s sitting. 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would 
like to ask leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has asked for leave for 
an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister may proceed. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, in your gallery I 
would like to introduce some special guests. Joining us today 
are administration and faculty and staff from Sask Poly, which 
is celebrating a very special anniversary this weekend: 50 years 
of quality nursing education in the province. 
 
If you could give a wave — not all together — our friend, Dr. 
Larry Rosia, president and CEO [chief executive officer]; Dean 
Netha Dyck; Associate Dean Cindy Smith; Academic Chair 
Billy-Jo Howe; Academic Chair Christa MacLean; Academic 
Chair Chris Barlow; and interim Academic Chair Laureen 
Larson; also the program head, Kat Moyer; and Terri Genaille. 
 
There are a number of events being held over the weekend, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and I’m honoured to be attending the Saturday 
evening program in Saskatoon. Over 200 alumni, faculty, 
students, and guests are expected to attend this very special 
celebration. With 16 innovative programs across the province, 
the Sask Poly school of nursing boasts 230 internationally 
recognized faculty and staff who help prepare students for 
careers as registered nurses, nurse practitioners, registered 
psychiatric nurses, licensed practical nurses, diabetes educators, 
and much more. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government has been pleased to 
support Sask Poly and we consider them an important partner in 
post-education in this province. I would like to congratulate all 
former and current students, faculty, and staff on reaching such 
a significant milestone and for providing 50 years of quality 
nursing education. 
 
I invite all members to join with me in welcoming our guests to 
their Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to join 

with the Minister of Advanced Education and all of our 
colleagues in welcoming the folks from Sask Polytechnic, Dr. 
Rosia, Deans Dyck and Smith, and all of the folks who are able 
to join us today. 
 
Congratulations on the 50th anniversary. I just want to express 
our support as a caucus for all of the work that you do with all 
of the programming. But in particular as a family physician, 
I’ve had a chance to work with many of the graduates, the 
excellent quality work that the nurses do in this province, and 
know that a great deal of that success in their efforts comes 
from the efforts of Sask Polytechnic and the other institutions 
that train those great-quality workers. 
 
So thank you again and welcome to your legislature. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and 
Remote Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf 
of the Minister of Health and myself and the Government of 
Saskatchewan, I want to join in with the Minister of Advanced 
Education and the member opposite, welcoming these guests to 
your gallery, representatives of nursing education in the 
province. Having a daughter that graduated a couple of years 
ago from the nursing program, it’s just a real pleasure to have 
them here. So I ask all members to help me welcome them to 
their Assembly. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice 
and the Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. To you and through you, I’d like to introduce a 
number of guests in your gallery. 
 
Visiting us from Australia, Mr. Speaker, is my cousin Jack Lee 
Adams. Jack will give us a wave; there he is. So Jack’s retired 
from the government of Queensland, Mr. Speaker. He did 
student recruitment there. He’s also a Vietnam veteran, Mr. 
Speaker, serving in the 7th Battalion of the Royal Australian 
Regiment, Mr. Speaker. And in our family military service is 
held in pretty high esteem, so I wanted to make sure that I 
acknowledged him, and for being here and for visiting our 
country for a couple of days, Mr. Speaker. My wife and I hope 
to get down to Australia in September and visit that side of our 
family, Mr. Speaker. So I’m very happy to welcome him here 
today. 
 
With him today, Mr. Speaker, is my brother Peter and his wife 
Carole. Now I’m very thankful that my brother Peter and Carole 
live in Regina, Mr. Speaker, because I get a home-cooked meal 
every once in a while, as opposed to sitting with the Minister of 
Health having dinner with him every night. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some members of the House, Mr. Speaker, will 
remember my brother Peter. He has a long and distinguished 
career at CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan], retiring after being responsible for some pretty 
significant major projects in this province over the years, Mr. 
Speaker. But because of his retirement, Mr. Speaker, I think his 
wife was a little bit concerned about him spending some time at 



2492 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2017 

the house, so he’s taken a job at the Cancer Agency where he’s 
using his talent there, Mr. Speaker, and spending his time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve said this in this House a number of 
times: I have four heroes in this world, Mr. Speaker. They’re 
my brothers, and I’m very, very pleased to have my brother 
Peter join us in the House today. So I’d like to have the 
Assembly welcome Jack to the legislature and my brother Peter 
and his wife Carole to their legislature, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 
Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
office recently did a survey of Saskatchewan students and found 
the brightest students are in Moose Jaw. And in fact most of the 
brightest students are actually in A.E. Peacock Collegiate, and 
we’ve got 35 of them in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’d like to welcome the A.E. Peacock social studies 30 class 
to their legislature. Along with them is Ms. Carrie Kiefer and 
Collette Stuart. Ms. Kiefer is . . . I just mentioned to visitor 
services this morning if she comes here any more often, I may 
have to put her on payroll because she’s here just about every 
year. Very interested in the democratic process and brings her 
classes every year, so I ask all members to welcome them to 
their Legislative Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Today I’m 
rising to present a petition opposed to the Sask Party plan to 
scrap and sell off the Saskatchewan Transportation Company. 
 
The individuals who have submitted this petition wish to bring 
to our attention several points, basically that the Sask Party did 
not inform Saskatchewan people prior to the 2016 election 
about their plan to scrap STC [Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company]. This closure leaves 224 people out of work and 
communities across the province are now isolated from each 
other. Even a year ago the then minister said that STC is a 
needed service and that it was safe from sale. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately stop 
the plan to scrap and sell off the Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company, and to resume transportation 
services to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 
And the folks who have signed this today, Mr. Speaker, are 
from Yellow Grass, Regina, and Bromhead. I so submit. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Good call, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition concerning pay equity here in the 
province. And I’ve talked a lot about that, so I’d like to just read 

the prayer today: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan eliminate 
the wage gap between women and men across all sectors 
where the Government of Saskatchewan has jurisdiction, 
provide a framework under which this can be done within 
the term of this Assembly, and that the Saskatchewan 
government call upon workplaces within Saskatchewan 
within the private sector to eliminate the wage gap between 
women and men. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
the city of Regina. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
pleased to rise today to present a petition from citizens who are 
opposed to the federal government’s decision to impose a 
carbon tax on the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by citizens of Ogema, 
Glasnevin, Bengough, Pangman, Weyburn, Ceylon, and 
Saskatoon. I do so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition to ensure job security for victims of domestic 
violence. Saskatchewan has the highest rates of domestic 
violence amongst provinces. And Manitoba has already enacted 
legislation similar to our private member’s bill that we tabled 
several weeks ago, and Ontario is on its way to enacting 
legislation to ensure job security for victims of domestic 
violence. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan enact 
legislation that requires all employers to provide a 
minimum of five paid workdays and a minimum of 17 
weeks unpaid work leave with the assurance of job security 
upon return for all survivors of domestic violence in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing the petition today come 
from Saskatoon. I do so submit. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Meewasin. 



May 11, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2493 

Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition calling on 
the government to restore funding to post-secondary 
institutions. Mr. Speaker, our post-secondary institutions, 
colleges, and universities have a very important influence on 
our economy and on the future of our young people, yet we’ve 
seen a cut of 5.6 per cent across the board to all those 
institutions, alongside cuts to the wages being paid to people at 
the Sask Polytechnic and regional colleges. 
 
Alongside that we’ve seen cuts to student aid and cuts to the 
rebates on tuition and books, Mr. Speaker. All of these make 
programs less accessible, resulting in elimination of jobs, 
elimination of programs, and rising of costs for students, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately restore 
funding to Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions and 
stop the damaging cuts to our students. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing the petition today are from 
Saskatoon and include student and faculty leaders from the 
University of Saskatchewan. I do so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central 
Services. 
 

Mothers’ Day Tribute 
 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In my own words, 
Mr. Speaker: we all know a person who puts all others before 
themselves, someone who provides love and support without 
ever being asked to, one who makes decisions based on their 
love for others, who believes that commitment lasts a lifetime, 
someone who stands strong in the face of adversity and finds 
the funny in most everything, chooses laughter instead of tears. 
 
We all know a person who fiercely advocates for those who are 
unable to fight for themselves, someone who provides care to 
someone who doesn’t always want it, who takes life in stride 
and adapts to life’s challenges with poise and grace, who never 
gives up even though it’s tough to keep going. 
 
We all know this person. This person is whom we call mom, 
grammy, friend, aunt, sister, and wife. For these women we 
hold dear, I encourage you to love her, hug her, give her 
friendship, and it will be returned tenfold. The selflessness of 
these individuals is unparalleled, though for those who know 
them, far from surprising. To my mom and to all of those 
women who positively influence those around them, those 
mothers still with us and those who remain in our hearts, Happy 
Mother’s Day. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 

Birthday Celebration for Petit Triplets 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

rise today to recognize the Petit family of Buffalo Narrows, 
Saskatchewan. Last weekend I had the opportunity to attend the 
50th birthday celebration for Wendy, Wanda, and Wesley Petit. 
These triplets were born on May 7th, 1967, to parents Dorothy 
and Norman Petit at St. Paul’s Hospital. Wesley was the first 
born, followed by Wendy, and then finally Wanda. 
 
Dorothy spent three months in the hospital leading up to the 
birth of these triplets. And, in Dorothy’s words, she told me: “It 
was very difficult because after I left the hospital, I had to work 
10 days later. I had two babysitters that helped, and with no 
running water at Kiezie Channel, which is a section of Buffalo 
Narrows, we had to do diapers by hand and wash them every 
single day as there was no running water in those days and no 
Pampers.” 
 
[10:15] 
 
Dorothy also wanted to make sure that we recognized her 
congratulatory letter from the Prime Minister Trudeau and her 
recognition by the president of the Métis National Council, Mr. 
Clem Chartier. 
 
The father, Norman Petit, passed away in April of 2010, and I 
know that Dorothy and the children would want me to mention 
him today. Mr. Speaker, I was very honoured to attend the 
celebration and share in the joy of the family and the 
community of Buffalo Narrows in celebrating the birth of these 
triplets. 
 
Again the words from Dorothy, the mother, that she was very 
thankful for the good turnout and all the donations of food. Mr. 
Speaker, I want all members in the Assembly to help me in 
recognizing the Petit triplets and the Petit family of Buffalo 
Narrows in achieving this amazing birth of three children at 
once. Thank you very much. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood. 
 

Saskatoon Teacher Receives National Award 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 
confident that each of us in this Assembly has a teacher we can 
look back to and see the impact they had in our lives. One of 
these teachers is Andrea Regier, a science teacher at Bishop 
James Mahoney High School in Saskatoon. This teacher was 
recently presented with the Prime Minister’s Award for 
Teaching Excellence. In winning this prestigious award, she is 
one of only 11 teachers across the entire country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Regier’s approach to teaching has been described 
as refreshing, engaging, and innovative. She always plays music 
in the background and understands the importance of 
motivational tools and games to teach complex concepts and 
theories. As a result, her students stay organized and have 
shown a great deal of improvement in study and time 
management skills. 
 
Everyone seems to have great things to say about her, from her 
past and present students, to school and division administration. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, she is even getting the coveted five-star 
rating on the Rate My Teachers website. 



2494 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2017 

Teachers are a significant part of what makes Saskatchewan’s 
education system great, and our government values teachers’ 
efforts in educating our young people. I would ask all members 
to join me in congratulating Andrea Regier on receiving the 
Prime Minister’s Award for Teaching Excellence and thanking 
her for investing in our kids and the province’s future. Thank 
you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 

Saskatchewan Literacy Awards of Merit 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, on Thursday, May 4th, I, 
along with several government members, was pleased to attend 
the Saskatchewan Literacy Network’s 2017 Literacy Awards of 
Merit hosted by Her Honour, the Lieutenant Governor of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Each year, the Literacy Awards of Merit honour the dedicated 
professionals, programs, projects, volunteers, and adult learners 
whose accomplishments have supported essential skills 
development in learning and literacy within our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year four awards were presented to 
individuals and organizations who displayed an outstanding 
spirit of dedication to literacy in Saskatchewan. 
 
Local volunteer literacy organization READ Saskatoon received 
the Outstanding Literacy Project Award for making a positive 
impact on learners in their community with their innovative 
financial literacy program. 
 
Tina Winsor of Maple Creek, a family advocate for Chinook 
School Division, was recognized with a Professional 
Leadership in Literacy Award for creating inclusive learning 
environments that support literacy in her community. 
 
And Kay Luttmer of Regina received the Volunteer Service 
Award for her support of literacy and commitment to serving 
her community as a volunteer with Mother Teresa Middle 
School. Finally Reem Dandal, a volunteer with Regina Open 
Door Society, was recognized with the Cameco Literacy 
Learner Award and a $1,000 bursary for demonstrating 
exceptional growth in literacy and using her skills to show 
leadership and give back to her community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask all members to join me in 
congratulating this year’s Literacy Awards of Merit winners 
and thanking them for their commitment to literacy and lifelong 
learning in our province. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Westview. 
 

Saskatchewan Association of Architects 
Annual President’s Dinner 

 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I was 
fortunate to attend the Saskatchewan Association of Architects 
annual president’s dinner on May 6th. This event was an 
opportunity for architects, engineers, contractors, 
manufacturers, and suppliers to come together and celebrate 

each other’s accomplishments. 
 
The theme of this year’s conference was Building Community, 
reflective of our past, our present, and our future as a society. 
The conference held various panels over the weekend, as 
visionary groups were able to collaborate on where they see 
architecture in Saskatchewan going, reflecting on past practices 
as well as new technologies, as our province continues to grow. 
 
The dedication each architect has in bringing visions to reality 
while considering safety, longevity, and overall benefits for the 
community, is a true testament of craftsmanship and expertise. 
Each day in this province we are seeing state-of-the-art business 
centres, living complexes, schools, and retail spaces rise from 
the ground, adding beauty and advancement to the architectural 
landscape of Saskatchewan. 
 
As we walk through the historic halls of this Legislative 
Building, we must never forget to attribute the absolute beauty 
of this monument which was envisioned by our first premier, 
Walter Scott, and the architectural society of the day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join in congratulating the 
Saskatchewan Association of Architects on a successful 
president’s dinner. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from The 
Battlefords. 
 

Aquatic Invasive Species Awareness Week 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Saskatchewan is 
blessed with thousands of lakes and rivers, and is a popular 
place for tourists and residents to enjoy fishing and other 
water-related recreational sports such as water skiing and 
wakeboarding. 
 
However, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our lakes and rivers are at risk 
from zebra and quagga mussels, and other invasive species that 
would disrupt the natural ecosystem. 
 
That is why this week, May 7th to 13th, has been proclaimed 
Aquatic Invasive Species Awareness Week by the Government 
of Saskatchewan to continue educating and raising awareness 
about these mussels and other aquatic invasive species and to 
help raise awareness to keep them out of our province. Once 
introduced and established, they can spread and reproduce very 
rapidly, and can be impossible to eliminate. They can also clog 
water intake structures and increase costs significantly for 
agriculture irrigation, power generation, and water treatment 
facilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, education about these invasive and destructive 
species and prevention is the most effective solution to aquatic 
invasive species. This week, and all year long, we want to raise 
awareness and educate boaters and other recreational water 
users to clean, drain, and dry their boats, watercraft, and related 
water equipment, and bring awareness of the good work our 
government has been doing to prevent the spread of invasive 
species. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is so important for everyone to recognize 
Aquatic Invasive Species Awareness Week. All boaters should 



May 11, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2495 

clean, drain, and dry watercraft and equipment to ensure it is 
free of invasive species. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon University. 
 

Saskatchewan Polytechnic School of Nursing 
Celebrates 50th Anniversary 

 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. On April 
29th Saskatchewan Polytechnic celebrated its 50th anniversary 
for the school of nursing. We are proud of the 50 years of 
opportunities the school of nursing has offered to students to 
advance their skills and careers in a field that is not only in 
demand, but also makes a difference in the lives of others. Our 
government recognizes the need for high-quality nursing 
education. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, nurses are an integral part of our health 
care system. There are nearly 16,000 nurses of all designations 
calling Saskatchewan home — over 3,000 more than 2007. A 
lot has changed over the past 50 years in the field, but some 
things haven’t changed. Nurses remain compassionate, caring, 
and the foremost providers and coordinators of care. 
 
This anniversary is a time to celebrate the high standard of 
nursing education that has benefited students and citizens of 
Saskatchewan for the past 50 years, and I’m confident that it 
will continue to do so for years to come. To mark this 
milestone, Sask Polytechnic is establishing a legacy trust which 
will provide nursing students with various sources of financial 
assistance for many years to come. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating Sask Polytechnic 
on celebrating 50 years of providing quality nursing education 
and for their ongoing commitment to nurses in our province. 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Details of Land Transactions 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — In 2012, a deal was brought forward for 
one Sask Party supporter to sell land to the GTH [Global 
Transportation Hub]. When the deal hit cabinet, red flags were 
raised because the seller was a numbered company. 
 
The deal was stopped there, but a year later a deal for the same 
land came back to the cabinet table. This time another Sask 
Party supporter’s name was on it, and the price tag had gone 
way up. That was fine because the GTH had just picked up 
some cash by selling land, that SaskPower didn’t need, to 
SaskPower. So the Sask Party approved the deal. The cabinet 
approved the deal. 
 
According to the Premier yesterday, he found none of this fishy 
and he never asked the minister — who was plagued by 
scandal, who was also responsible for both the GTH and 
SaskPower — anything about the identity of the original seller, 
who of course made millions. 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier says that he only learned who it was 
when it hit the media. Mr. Speaker, does the Premier really 
want to stand by that claim? And if that’s the case, how could 
the Premier have stood by that minister, who still sits in his 
caucus here today? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Of course I stand 
by that because it’s exactly the truth, Mr. Speaker. Moreover, 
we’ve seen this sort of drive-by smearing by the Leader of the 
Opposition, characterizing business leaders in the city as . . . 
sort of writing them off as Sask Party supporters, inferring that 
there might be insiders to the party. 
 
Here we have . . . He’s talking about people who are business 
people in the . . . He knows them well. They’re business people 
in Regina. The one in particular, the transaction preceded his 
. . . a business person in Regina, who’s come to, who’s attended 
Sask Party dinners. So, Mr. Speaker, I know that doesn’t quite 
fit the narrative that my hon. friend wants to continue to 
present, but those are the facts. 
 
And I understand that he might also be a friend of the member, 
the leader who’s just asked the question — this particular 
business leader — and certainly someone that he has an 
acquaintance with. That would be about the extent of the 
relationship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of these questions . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . Well, is it the truth or not, I guess? They’re heckling from 
their seat now, Mr. Speaker, because they don’t want to deal 
with that. All of what the member has just said, all of it was the 
subject of the reviews that have happened, including by the 
Provincial Auditor, an independent officer of this Assembly. 
 
The member also took another run at the former minister. 
Here’s what the auditor had to say about that in her report. And 
I would just ask him to clarify for the House if he agrees with 
what the auditor said, who looked at all of this. The auditor 
said: 
 

For Board members and key employees we sampled, 
including the Board Chair [that’s the minister, the member 
for Kindersley] . . . we did not find any evidence of 
conflict of interest. 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Security of Personal Email Account 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, of course to be clear, who 
the official opposition, who I, and who the people of 
Saskatchewan are questioning is the Premier of Saskatchewan. 
And it’s simply not believable, or entirely irresponsible, that the 
Premier would take such a hands-off approach with such a 
questionable deal. It raises even more questions about the 
answers we get from that Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have an FOI [freedom of information] from 
Executive Council that shows an email was sent from the Sask 
Party’s Republican lobbyist to the Premier, but the Premier’s 



2496 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2017 

email address, including the domain name, has been redacted. It 
was a personal account, Mr. Speaker. In the Premier’s own 
words, the communications are about “diplomatic interests and 
commercial interests.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday he nonchalantly said that he uses his 
personal accounts when he’s out of office. First, he can use, 
have access to his secure government email from home or 
anywhere. Second, the email we have is from November 8th, 
2016, midmorning, and the Premier was in the legislature that 
day. So why does the Premier not use his secure government 
email for this sensitive information, sensitive communications 
about diplomatic and commercial interests? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s such a secret email 
account that the member’s reading from an email that came 
from the address. It’s completely part of the FOI process. The 
reason that that member has this email to build his latest 
conspiracy theory, Mr. Speaker, which is laughable, is because 
it’s subject to FOI. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this has been exactly a reasonable practice. The 
server is secure that we use. We take steps to ensure the server 
is secure. 
 
If anything that is FOI’d relative to those emails — for those 
watching, that’s a freedom of information request that anyone 
might make — of course they’ll receive that as long as there’s 
not confidential information that might, Mr. Speaker, work 
against the interests of a private party or a private sector 
company who we’re trying to represent when we are engaged in 
Washington with respect to trade issues. 
 
And that did happen on this last occasion. When we went down 
there, I met with a number of cabinet secretaries that 
Ambassador Wilkins helped us to arrange. We were there 
advocating in one particular interest for a company that should 
be of import to members opposite. They’re a company locating 
here, and they employ hundreds of people that are, by the way, 
now at risk if there’s a chance that his party actually wins the 
election in British Columbia. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the interests of that company should 
be considered confidential so that we can conduct the business 
of the province and represent them effectively. But the email’s 
available through FOI so long as that kind of confidential 
information’s not a part of it. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to 
answer any more questions on the matter. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
[10:30] 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — You know, it appears that the Premier’s 
gotten a little too comfortable in that chair over there, and 
certainly arrogant on front after front. We’re questioning here 
the actual security and integrity of a system here, the sensitive 
and certainly confidential information. And this information, 
this work that the Premier’s undertaking, is supposed to be on 
behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. It belongs to them, not to 

him. It belongs on secure government servers that we can trust, 
not on some sort of personal server. 
 
If the Premier stands by the use of this server and this email 
account, why is he unwilling to open it up to the scrutiny of the 
Privacy and Conflict of Interest Commissioners for review as I 
called for yesterday? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Because, Mr. Speaker, you know, in the 
efforts to represent the province of Saskatchewan over the last 
number of years, it’s not a five-day week proposition. It doesn’t 
just happen here at the legislature. And so we’ll use, I’ll 
continue to use this account. I’ll continue to make sure it’s 
available for FOIs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can assure members of the House that the work 
that happens on that account is very much in the interests of the 
province of Saskatchewan. It’s communications with fellow 
cabinet members. It’s communications with MLAs [Member of 
the Legislative Assembly]. It’s representations to other parties 
that are in the interests of the province. Maybe the member 
doesn’t trust the fact that I would be careful and secure in this 
work, but he can, notwithstanding his questions this morning, 
and I don’t intend to change the practice. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Role of School Boards and Intent of Bill 63 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, it appears that that Premier’s 
arrogance is spreading across the Sask Party cabinet. Last week 
they ignored the concerns of teachers, parents, and school 
divisions, and ploughed ahead with their takeover of education 
with Bill 63. They’re silencing local voices and have taken the 
power to override locally elected trustees. 
 
Now, instead of respectful dialogue with the minister, school 
divisions are hearing about changes to their division through the 
media. The Northern Lights School Division board Chair said, 
“The government has held secret meetings that will affect 
northern education.” 
 
Why is the Sask Party showing so much disrespect for local and 
northern voices in education? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
raises the issue that we should consult. That’s exactly what we 
said we were going to do. The consultations haven’t started yet, 
so there’s been no secret meetings. What we have heard, Mr. 
Speaker, is from the community of La Loche that has concerns 
about the relationship they have with the school division, that 
they want to do things differently, do things better. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we want to work with the school division. We want to 
work with the community of La Loche to see them do that. 
 
I’ve heard from Lorna Black; the Chair of the Northern Lights 
School Division has asked for a meeting. And, Mr. Speaker, 



May 11, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2497 

we’ll make sure that that meeting happens. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, that’s a little late in the game when 
we’re expecting changes by next fall. And this is a massive, 
massive power grab by that minister, and it has so many 
worried about our kids’ classrooms. Bill 63 gives the minister 
the power to issue directives to school divisions and forcing 
them to do, or stop doing, anything at all. 
 
The board Chair and trustees of Northern Lights School 
Division are doing their job, serving the people who elected 
them. They’re standing up to the Sask Party’s cuts and speaking 
up for their students and their teachers. Will the minister 
commit today that he won’t use his new powers to silence these 
local voices in Northern Lights or any other school division 
around this province? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the legislation that’s 
contained in Bill 63 is exactly the same legislation and same 
provisions that were provided in the legislation that created 
regional health authorities. Mr. Speaker, we want to have the 
local operations carrying on as they have for years. We want to 
make sure that there’s some provincial oversight to make sure 
the things that go astray can be repaired. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite talks about Northern Lights 
School Division. That’s a school division that for two years in a 
row was not paying holiday pay as they were . . . or statutory 
pay as they were supposed to. Mr. Speaker, that’s the type of 
thing that we will go ahead and override . . . [inaudible] . . . to 
make sure that employees get paid, to make sure that resources 
stay in the classroom, to make sure that we listen to the 
students, to make sure that we listen to the parents and the 
teachers in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 

Support for Post-Secondary Educational Institutions 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, we move from silencing local 
voices in K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] education to 
crippling colleges and universities. We’re now starting to see 
the damaging consequences of the cuts to our post-secondary 
institutions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this last week the University of Regina released its 
budget outlining the deep cuts they’ve been forced to make to 
their institution, to their students and programming, and they 
didn’t hesitate to say that these were directly a result of the $7 
million cut by the Sask Party. Tuition fees are going up again. 
We’ve seen cuts to the nursing program. There have been 
layoffs and there are more to come. 
 
These are short-sighted cuts. They put the quality of our 
education at threat. Mr. Speaker, we should be investing in 
education, not undercutting it. How does the minister justify 

such deep cuts to such an important sector? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — A number of questions in that question, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, but let’s take U of R [University of Regina] 
and the tuition issue first. Of course universities are 
autonomous. They set their own fees. The U of R’s tuition 
increase is actually the lowest since ’08-09, and undergraduate 
arts tuition still ranks in the lower half compared to other 
comparable institutions across Canada, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
When the next leader of the NDP [New Democratic Party] 
made a run for leadership in 2013, he called for evidence-based 
policy. Well the U of R’s own tuition and fees decision item 
this year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, states: “Research continues to 
show that tuition fee levels are not a major factor in 
post-secondary education accessibility and participation.” 
 
According to a 2015 survey of U of R undergrads, nearly half 
had no education-related debt at all, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As 
well, the Sask Advantage Scholarship, according to the U of R, 
is “expected to provide our students 3 million in tuition 
discounts in 2017.” The member opposite left the clear 
impression to students that our Sask Advantage Scholarship had 
been cancelled, when in fact it’s going strong. And let’s not 
forget that under the previous NDP governments, from 1990 to 
2007, tuition rates ballooned 227 per cent, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, sunshine and just fine. But the lines 
don’t match the reality. We’ve seen a precipitous drop in the 
number of low-income students accessing higher education in 
this province under this party’s government. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we’re also seeing job losses. The University of Saskatchewan 
has already cut 10 positions since the budget, and Sask 
Polytechnic has reduced their workforce by 65 positions, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And these job losses don’t even account for the 3.5 per cent that 
Sask Polytechnic and regional colleges have been told that they 
need to reduce from their compensation. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister informed committee that they would be looking for 
$6.5 million more in pay cuts from these schools, and that’s on 
top of the job losses that have already happened. If the Sask 
Party’s at all interested in investing in our future, why do they 
continue to undercut and remove funding from the institutions 
so necessary to educate the people that will build that future? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Let’s talk 
about Sask Poly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we have these fine 
members of the institution here with us today. Any time there 
are layoffs it’s of course regrettable, and we certainly 
sympathize with those affected by the staffing changes. On an 
annual basis Sask Poly makes adjustments to its complement of 
faculty that reflect program offerings for the coming year, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And this includes allocating resources to 



2498 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2017 

provide student-centred, industry-driven programming that 
responds to labour market needs. 
 
This year our government provided 20 per cent more in 
operating funding to Sask Poly compared to the NDP’s last year 
in government, Mr. Speaker. And on Sask Poly’s website, just 
in the last couple of days, it has added about 21 job postings, 17 
of which are for instructors. As of yesterday, there were over 40 
total job postings on its website for various instructor positions, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. Sask Poly is working with us to find 
solutions during these fiscally challenging times, and we 
appreciate its grace under pressure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 

Carbon Pricing and Carbon Capture and Storage 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, even though the Sask Party had 
already admitted that they had created their own price on 
carbon, the Premier didn’t seem too happy about it. He and his 
Environment minister tried to slough off this 30-year expense as 
a one-time investment. Really, Mr. Speaker? The $1.5 billion 
was just the beginning. Since then it has been cost increase after 
cost increase with this project, penalties paid to Cenovus, and 
growing and growing costs for amine. 
 
There’s no way this is a one-time cost; ratepayers will be 
paying for this for decades. And it will be much, much more 
expensive if they expand it to BD4 [Boundary dam 4] and BD5 
[Boundary dam 5]. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Energy stand up and explain 
the facts to the Premier, the Environment minister, and the 
Minister Responsible for SaskPower? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, we hear criticism constantly 
from that member, Mr. Speaker. And what we should know is 
any time we look at reducing our emissions in our electrical 
sector, Mr. Speaker, that takes capital investment. It took capital 
investment in other jurisdictions where that’s happened, and 
it’ll take capital investment here in new technology and new 
knowledge like the carbon capture and storage facility, which is 
the first of its kind. Now 22 CCS [carbon and capture storage] 
plants operating around the world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, time and time again, Mr. Speaker, we hear 
criticisms from that member when we know what she would 
actually like to do is shut down the coal industry here in the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We have the 
presumptive leader here that applauds, I think is the word he 
used, the federal government’s carbon tax, Mr. Speaker. Why 
doesn’t the opposition members put forward a credible plan, 
Mr. Speaker, on the infrastructure that’s necessary to lower our 
carbon footprint here in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan businesses and 

farmers, families are already paying through their nose for 
power bills. Now on top of that, because the Sask Party refuses 
to do anything constructive, Saskatchewan people will have 
Ottawa’s carbon scheme forced on us too. 
 
The Premier can huff and puff, but it’s the Sask Party’s 
mismanagement, failure, and refusal to act that got us here. Is 
suing the feds the only plan the Sask Party is considering for 
dealing with their lack of a plan to implement a price on 
carbon? Does the Premier actually think that suing them will 
work? It will cost millions of dollars, and we’re wondering if he 
will share any legal advice that he might have that this actually 
might work, any estimates on the millions of dollars that it will 
cost and the years it will take. Mr. Speaker, why doesn’t the 
Premier admit that he has no real plan? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is we 
have the member that stands up and criticizes us for taking 
action in investment, Mr. Speaker, in Boundary dam 3 and 
carbon capture and storage project at that particular site, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I’ve heard the member opposite refer to it as a boondoggle, Mr. 
Speaker. I wonder if she would also extend that to a company in 
Texas, Mr. Speaker, with Petra Nova, with the latest carbon 
capture and storage facility in the world, the 22nd to come 
online, Mr. Speaker, and invested in by private industry in the 
United States, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, it’s this government that 
has invested in lowering our carbon footprint in the province of 
Saskatchewan with the very latest knowledge and technology at 
Boundary dam 3. It’s this government . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — And the fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, is 
there has been the highest per capita investment, Mr. Speaker, 
in a carbon mitigation technology in the province of 
Saskatchewan at Estevan. I’m going down there later today, Mr. 
Speaker, to speak at a summit, to precisely the importance of 
that knowledge and that technology. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s also this government that will continue 
to stand up for Saskatchewan people in opposition to a federally 
imposed carbon tax, Mr. Speaker, a federally imposed, 
provincial NDP carbon tax, Mr. Speaker, which is supported by 
the critic. Mr. Speaker, it’s supported by the presumptive 
leader. And it’s time for the interim leader to stand up and tell 
Saskatchewan people where he stands on the carbon tax . . . 
[inaudible]. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 

Implementation of Recommendations 
Regarding Death in Custody 

 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, Shauna Wolf was a young 



May 11, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2499 

Saskatchewan woman and a mother of an eight-year-old girl. 
Her struggles with addiction led in part to her arrest, and while 
she was in custody on remand — so not convicted of a crime — 
just after Christmas in 2015, Shauna Wolf died at the Pine 
Grove Correctional Centre. 
 
The pains of withdrawal hit Shauna hard, and yet she was 
denied the basic care she needed. The coroner’s inquest recently 
concluded, and the jury made 17 recommendations to improve 
conditions at Pine Grove to prevent future tragedies like 
Shauna’s. The jury called for more medical beds, more nurses, 
better training for staff, and better access to detox facilities. 
 
[10:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, Shauna is not the first young woman for whom the 
system has failed so tragically. My question to the minister is, 
what is his plan to implement these recommendations and make 
sure that she is the last? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice 
and the Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, certainly our thoughts and 
prayers are with the family at a very difficult time, Mr. Speaker. 
And I do want to thank the coroner, the jury for their very, very 
hard work and the recommendations that they have brought 
forward. 
 
My ministry is taking those recommendations and having a 
very, very careful look at them, Mr. Speaker, to see what can be 
done within the institution and within the system to ensure that 
these kinds of tragedies don’t continue to . . . or don’t occur 
again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Certainly the jury made some significant recommendations, Mr. 
Speaker. It is going to take some time for my ministry to review 
those recommendations and decide how we’re going to move 
forward with them, Mr. Speaker. But we do thank the jury very 
much for their very hard work, and our sympathies and 
compassion is with the family. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad to hear the 
minister’s reviewing the recommendations, but the jury’s 
findings call for more resources to prevent future deaths, and 
this system cannot wait another day. 
 
The Sask Party’s budget doesn’t give more resources to address 
these issues. In fact it takes them away. And the incoming cut to 
3.5 per cent of nursing staff and correctional workers, just to 
name a few, is going to put even more stress on an overworked 
system. How will the Minister of Justice take action on these 
recommendations when he’s actually cutting the budgets for the 
services the jury wants to see improved? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice 
and Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well again, Mr. Speaker, my ministry is 
going to take these jury recommendations very seriously, and 

will give some consideration to how they can be implemented. 
 
As the member knows, one of the significant issues that we 
have in our facility, Mr. Speaker, is remand. In some of our 
correctional institutions we have up to 60 per cent of people 
who are on remand. My ministry is working very, very hard, 
Mr. Speaker, with our stakeholders to work to reduce the level 
of remand in our correctional facilities. That’s going to allow 
for more time. It’s going to allow for more resources to be used 
— reallocated within our institutions to help deal with some of 
these issues, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re very excited and we’re very interested to see the progress 
in that remand strategy to reduce those population numbers, Mr. 
Speaker. And with the additional resources that will be 
available by reducing the remand numbers in our institutions, 
Mr. Speaker, we’ll have some resources to apply to look at 
some of the recommendations and institute some of the changes 
that have been recommended by the jury. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 

Drainage Issues and Water Management Strategy 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, there has been no shortage of 
concern about Bill 44, An Act to amend The Water Security 
Agency Act. SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities] delegates raised serious concerns about this 
bill’s impact on productivity and the rights of landowners, and 
every major crop organization passed a resolution to rescind or 
delay the implementation of this bill. Mr. Speaker, on top of all 
that, this bill strips all of these producers and landowners of 
their legal right to challenge the government. It’s yet another 
overreach from the Sask Party. 
 
Earlier this week, the Minister for Government Relations 
backed down and removed a clause in Bill 64 that prohibited 
municipalities from legally defending themselves. That same 
clause was included in Bill 44, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to be fair, the minister has signalled it isn’t too 
late to make changes. So will he do the right thing and remove 
that clause that strips landowners of their right to defend 
themselves? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 
thank the member opposite for a very important question in 
rural Saskatchewan, and a question with respect to our ag water 
management strategy that was asked for by our rural and 
agricultural residents across the province for a number of years, 
Mr. Speaker, and which we’ve consulted widely on over the last 
few years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we moved forward with regulations in September 
of 2015 and we since introduced legislation to support those 
regulations here this session. We’ll continue to consult, I might 
add — and have consulted throughout this process — into the 
future with an advisory board, Mr. Speaker, which will be 
representative of agricultural groups, conservation groups, and 



2500 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2017 

municipal groups, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Specific to the member’s question with respect to, I think it’s 
clauses 70.4 and 5, Mr. Speaker, what that is and what the bill 
is, is it’s supportive of those regulations. And it’s to do with 
ensuring that we permit all drainage across the province, Mr. 
Speaker, whether that drainage is pre-1981 or post-1981, Mr. 
Speaker, as those networks need to be permitted as a network so 
that we’re able to control and organize our ag water, our rural 
water here in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, so 
that our agricultural water management strategy, I think it will 
become very much regarded as part of the solution in 
controlling and organizing the water movement throughout our 
systems in the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ll continue to consult with members across the province 
through our advisory board and other organizations as we move 
forward, Mr. Speaker. And we look forward to moving forward 
with this bill to control and organize water in our province, Mr. 
Speaker, the first substantial bill in about three and a half 
decades. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Legislation Regarding Political Donations 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and I appreciate the opportunity to enter into this debate and 
move this motion. It’s a very important one, considering all the 
issues that we see happening. We see the BC [British 
Columbia] election that of course will really see big money get 
out of politics. And so we will be probably the last province to 
deal with this issue, and it’s a very, very important issue. So I 
think it’s fitting that as we wrap up this session that we talk 
about this motion, and if we get a chance before the end of the 
session that we can actually vote on Bill 602. 
 
But of course what this motion . . . I’ll read the motion at the 
end of my remarks and I’ll hand it in, but I just want to say that 
this motion right now that I have before the House calls on us to 
put forward legislation, pass that legislation that would ban 
political donations by registered lobbyists and corporations 
receiving government contracts. And of course this illuminates 
and gives more detail to Bill 602, which really bans big money, 
gets big money out of politics in all its forms. And that’s a very 
important, very important issue, and it has been one . . . And I’ll 
make the case that this is very, very important in my remarks as 
we go forward. 
 
But of course I just want to make sure people at home know 
what we’ve been talking about since November when the bill 
was introduced. That’s 602, An Act to amend The Election Act, 
which would provide fairness and accountability in election 
fundraising. At that point we called on banning union donations 
and corporate donations and how that would improve the 
credibility and transparency of our election fundraising and our 
party financing because the public is very interested in this, not 
only in the transparency part of it but because of course there 

are tax implications, you know. 
 
And at that time we had a Premier who was taking a top-up on 
his wage, and since then has stopped that. And we recognize 
that; we think that’s a good thing. That’s a good thing because 
that was just creating more questions, more questions about 
who was financing that. And of course there is the whole issue 
that of course there is the taxpayer interest, because of course 
we know you get a significant recognition for any political 
donations that you make. 
 
But of course we were often compared to BC and Ontario, and 
we see Ontario’s making headway with this issue. We see now 
with a minority government in British Columbia that of course 
this issue has come right to the front and centre because while 
the Liberals out there were reticent to making any significant 
moves, of course the Greens and the NDP were. And we hope 
they all come together as an all-party committee and resolve 
this issue because I think it’s in all our interests, but particularly 
the government interest because . . . And we’ve seen, and we’ve 
seen questionable actions and choices on that government that 
in the times of hard times like this . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . And we have the Premier chirping in. I’m glad that he’s 
here. I’m glad that he’s here because I know he’ll appreciate 
many of the comments. And he seems to have walked in fired 
up. He seems to work fired up. 
 
But I want to say that this is a very, very important motion. You 
know, and of course I just want to talk about some of the 
discussions the Premier and I have had, and of course many 
members over there have had about this, and of course we’ve 
had a story last summer about several loopholes in the 
Saskatchewan’s lobbyist registry. And of course we’ve worked 
together on that. But our side produced a minority opinion on 
that, and we will talk more about that. And of course it’s always 
in our interests to see how can we make things even better. And 
this was from Canada’s Democracy Watch, saying that the 
Saskatchewan new lobbyists registry is full of loopholes. 
 
And of course then we talked about union and corporate 
donations. But, Mr. Speaker, I want to highlight one editorial 
that came out shortly after we had discussed this in the fall that 
I think it’s important to put on the record here. And I will quote 
extensively from this because I’m not sure if the members 
opposite have read this. 
 
So this is from the StarPhoenix. It’s the editorial board, and it’s 
back from November 5th. And this is what it said, and I quote: 
 

There’s a certain tone-deafness to Premier’s Brad Wall’s 
insistence that he has no plans to change Saskatchewan’s 
rules for donations to political parties, especially when it 
comes to allowing contributions by out-of-province 
corporations, unions and individuals. 
 
The province’s political party funding rules that permit 
virtually unlimited donations from interest groups are 
among the weakest in Canada, a fact that should resonate 
more with a populist . . . [Premier] like Mr. Wall, who 
should appreciate the fact that his defence of the status quo 
decidedly puts him at odds with the strong sentiments of 
Saskatchewan residents.  

 



May 11, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2501 

End of the first paragraph. Mr. Speaker, I just want to read that 
first sentence because I know the Premier’s in here and this is 
an important point. I’ll say it again: 
 

There’s a certain tone-deafness to Premier Brad Wall’s 
insistence that he has no plans to change Saskatchewan 
rules for donations to political parties. 

 
Now this is what’s interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

A Mainstreet poll released Friday shows that 69 per cent of 
the 1,673 respondents were opposed to out-of-province 
money flowing to political parties. This poll almost mirrors 
the finding of an Angus Reid poll this spring that indicated 
66 per cent of . . . [residents] in Manitoba and 
Saskatchewan wanted corporate . . . donations to provincial 
parties and candidates banned. 

 
So clearly there is a public sentiment that this needs to change, 
clearly needs to change. And this is a very, very important 
thing. And we talk about other provinces. We know in 
Manitoba they banned all corporate union donations in 2000, as 
did the federal government in 2006, and Alberta did the same in 
2015. And we’re waiting to see what happens in British 
Columbia. 
 
And I just want to read this last quote: 
 

Even though Mr. Wall points to the newly created lobbyist 
registry as a safeguard to keep the government 
accountable, surely he must understand the very real public 
concern about the influence of big money on politics. 
Saskatchewan needs to join Canada’s leaders when it 
comes to ensuring that its democratic processes are beyond 
[and I need to underline that word beyond] reproach, and 
do all it can to shed its image as the “wild west” of politics. 

 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have a lot of work on both sides of 
the House. This is an important thing that we do. And I think 
it’s important as we come towards the end of the session that 
we do think about this, we do think about this. 
 
And as I was preparing for this it really reminded me of . . . I 
came across an article about groupthink, groupthink. And I look 
across the way over there and I really do see, I do see evidence 
of groupthink happening by that political party. And I just want 
to say for the folks at home, and I’ll quote from this: 
 

Groupthink, a term coined by social psychologist Irving 
Janis, occurs when a group makes faulty decisions because 
group pressures lead to a deterioration of “mental 
efficiency, reality testing, and moral judgment.” Groups 
affected by groupthink ignore alternatives and tend to take 
irrational actions that dehumanize other groups. 

 
[11:00] 
 
Dehumanize other groups. And we just see that right now. And 
we see the member from Moose Jaw, you know, we’re talking 
about dehumanizing and this is their very action. We can’t even 
have a good conversation about this and they start heckling. I 
mean this is something we need to have a serious debate. 
There’s serious editorials about this. So let me continue: 

A group is especially vulnerable to groupthink when its 
members are similar in background [and you look over 
there], when the group is insulated from outside opinions 
[they don’t want to hear that], and when there are no clear 
rules for decision making. 

 
And we do wonder about how they do make decisions over 
there. 
 
Now he goes through some symptoms of groupthink, but one of 
the things . . . And I know time is limited here, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, but we have, I hope members have heard about this. 
This is a condition that all groups are very vulnerable to and we 
all need to be sure that we take time to reflect and make sure we 
listen to outside opinions, opinions that we don’t often normally 
would take into account. 
 
But I think there are some really important symptoms that we 
need to talk about. One is: 
 

Illusion of invulnerability — creates excessive optimism 
that encourages extreme risks.  

 
And we see this with this government actually with the tax 
hikes that we’ve seen over there and then the tax hikes: 
 

Collective rationalization — Members discount warnings 
and do not reconsider . . . [other] assumptions. 

 
Their morality: 
 

Members believe in the rightness of their cause and 
therefore ignore the ethical or moral consequences of their 
decisions. 

 
Stereotyped views of out-groups — Negative views of 
‘enemy’ make effective responses to conflict seem 
unnecessary. 

 
Direct pressure on dissenters — Members are under 
pressure not to express arguments against any of the 
group’s views. 

 
And it goes on and on. Now what’s interesting, this groupthink, 
is some of the examples in the world history of groupthink. And 
of course we could pick up Cuba’s Bay of Pigs. We can think of 
the escalation of the Vietnam War, the Pearl Harbor, and 
examples go on and on of this. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we are here today about a very, very important 
issue. And we can take a look at some of the examples, 
particularly seeing now that we have the bill that, in their mind, 
defines privatization; in our mind, allows for privatization, 
greater privatization. And there’s great concern in the public 
about how strong, how rigorous our legislation really is to 
protect that. They’d say of course, don’t worry about that. But 
we look at some of the loopholes in our lobbyist registry that 
really create big question marks, big question marks, and we 
need to address those questions.  
 
And we can’t address them just by heckling. That’s no answer 
at all. It may solve some of their frustration over there, some of 
their pent-up frustration over there that they’re really wanting to 



2502 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2017 

take out on us, but really, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need to work 
to resolve this issue. It is a big issue. 
 
And I think the StarPhoenix editorial said it well when they say 
people are asking about it. Well over 60 per cent of people are 
aware of this, and I would bet, I would bet that number is much 
higher since the budget came in in the spring and people are 
wondering about what’s happening. 
 
People are wondering about what’s happening with the Crowns. 
And we’ve seen answers that don’t seem to match up, where 
we’ve had ministers say that they have had no meetings, and of 
course then we do hear of some meetings, 11 meetings 
apparently with SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance], 
SGI officials. And then we’re having ministers step away, 
saying that’s not my responsibility, I don’t have . . . That’s not 
in my realm; my people are meeting and so that’s not my 
responsibility. But we know that it is, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And we have questions about the lobbyist registry. And I do 
want to say — and I want to make sure this is very clear — we 
have good people working at our lobbyist registry, but there’s 
only so much they can do because of the nature of the 
legislation that guides them. 
 
And we need to have better lobbyist registry, and we need to 
make sure that there are situations that if people are making 
significant, significant donations to either party, either party, 
any political party, that they should be — and I just want to be 
clear on this — that they should not be receiving corporate 
contracts. So people who want government contracts should be 
clear. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to read the motion: 
 

That this Assembly call upon the Sask Party government to 
enact legislation that would ban political donations by 
registered lobbyists and corporations receiving government 
contracts. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 
has moved: 
 

That the Assembly calls upon the Sask Party government 
to enact legislation that would ban political donations by 
registered lobbyists and corporations receiving government 
contracts. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
from Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I stand here 
today to tell you that I am not in support of the motion. I believe 
that we have a fair and transparent system for our political 
donations, and we do not need any changes. Mr. Speaker, I 
believe that restricting or eliminating union or corporate 
funding will only put more of a tax burden on our taxpayers. 
This is what happened in other provinces, and we do not want 
that to happen here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the last 10 years, the Sask Party has received 

90 per cent of its donations within Saskatchewan. The 10 per 
cent of the out-of-province companies, most of them have 
locations or employees that work and live and run and pay taxes 
here in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the conflict of interest launched the lobbyist 
registry on August 23rd, 2016 to show more transparency. 
People now register to an independent office. This register 
reports to the Legislative Assembly and not to the government. 
This method makes it transparent, so that one can see who’s 
meeting the government, and there’s a new online registry to 
allow the Saskatchewan citizens to check individuals and 
organizations lobbying the public office holders. The Lobbyists 
Act is now in effect, and under the Act, individuals who are 
paid to lobby the Saskatchewan officials on behalf of the 
organizations and groups will be required to register online. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 2016 the Sask Party donations were $2.9 
million from 13,600 individual donors, at about $217 per donor. 
Sask Party received $2.6 million in corporate donations from 
1,600 different corporations, an average of 1,584 per 
corporation. Saskatchewan’s largest single donation was 
$50,000 to the party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP actually received several union donations 
larger than that: 98,000 from the UFCW [United Food & 
Commercial Workers]; 68,000 from the United Steelworkers; 
55,000 from Unifor; 37,000 from CUPE [Canadian Union of 
Public Employees]; and 35,000 from the Canadian Labour 
Congress. Does this mean that the unions are buying influence 
of the NDP? 
 
The Saskatchewan NDP also received $7,500 in 2016 from the 
BC NDP, who want to stop the Kinder Morgan pipeline and kill 
hundreds of jobs at Evraz Place. Is this what the members 
opposite want? 
 
When the 2016 election was being held, the NDP expenses 
were used for . . . [inaudible] . . . the following companies out 
of province: C-Street Campaigns of Toronto, website and 
advertising, 83,789; Now Communications out of Vancouver, 
for advertising, $236,642; Direct Leap Technologies from 
Toronto again, telemessaging, for 3,065; IDS Systems of 
Ottawa, database support, $1,633; Netfore Systems of Ottawa, 
election support, for $5,933; Project X Productions, Ottawa, 
sound and lighting, which we, I guess, have in Saskatchewan, 
for 33,104; Psephos Canada, Toronto, polling and focus groups, 
$118,650; Research Now from Toronto, online service, $8,400; 
Strategic Communications from Vancouver, elections 
consulting, $61,019; and a Paper Chase Communications from 
Mississauga to plan tours in Saskatchewan — so we have to get 
somebody from Mississauga to plan our trips in Saskatchewan 
— for $7,345; for a total of $559,580. 
 
And then we had staffers that were hired from out of province 
in 2016: Layne Clark from Burnaby; Jody Burkholder from 
Montreal; Wendy Daku from Ottawa; Angella MacEwan from 
Ottawa; Ryan English, a writer from Toronto — I guess we 
don’t have any writers in Saskatchewan; Katherine Bougard 
from Ottawa, a researcher — I guess you guys need a little 
more researching too; Theresa Kiefer, Alexandria Laine from 
Toronto, database development; Jonathan Orr from Vancouver, 
a coordinator; George Soule, communications — spent $10,000 



May 11, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2503 

on communications out of province; Hannah Watt, a 
coordinator; and that total of 19 staffers for a total of $71,197 
spent out of this province, 8.2 per cent. 
 
The total spent on consultants and staffers was $630,777 out of 
province — 72.5 per cent. Mr. Speaker, you’d think that the 
NDP could find a little more local talent in our province 
especially on planning on touring our province. And they want 
the support of the Saskatchewan people and they don’t even 
support them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to tell you a little bit about my 
constituency where I was running and seeking donations from 
most . . . All of my donations came from rural Saskatchewan 
farmers, small businesses, and individuals. Mr. Speaker, I’m not 
sure if the NDP understand this, but a lot of small businesses 
and farmers are incorporated. Of course you guys wouldn’t 
know that because you guys are not in touch with rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the question, is it okay for Jennifer Bowes 
from Saskatoon Westview or Greg Olson from Yorkton to run 
and be assisted by Unifor activists and Unifor leadership, and 
for me not to get help from my farmer friends and small 
businesses just because they’re incorporated? 
 
Mr. Speaker, here’s a breakdown of the union and corporate 
donations that the NDP had from 2006 to 2015. In 2015, they 
got union donations of $210,391 and corporate donations of 
144,870; 2014, they got union donations of $47,783; and 2013, 
they gave 137,108 and corporate donations of 24,044; 2012, 
73,977 and corporate donations of $25,055. And the list goes on 
and on for a 10-year total of 1.108 million for union donations 
and 1.924 of corporate donations. Mr. Speaker, many of these 
donations over the past 10 years came from unions and 
corporates that were out of province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here are some NDP donations from the 2000 
election candidates. The BC government gave $2,000; CUPE 
gave $6,095 and $45,522; CUPE Ottawa gave $750; CUPE 
Saskatchewan, almost $11,000; the Ironworkers gave 75,387; 
Sask Federation of Labour gave over 12,000; Sask building 
traders association gave 75,000; UFCW gave 22,000 and their 
union workers gave another 16,000. And the list goes on and on 
for a total of 37 unions giving 300,000 and $88,000 in personal 
donations. 
 
[11:15] 
 
The corporate donations that year: there was Cowan Imaging 
Group gave 7,346; Crystal Lake Development fund, which they 
sold some land in our area and it’s from my constituency, gave 
$5,500; Lone Star Hotel; P.A. [Prince Albert] Plaza; and the list 
goes on and on for 16 corporate donations of 24,801. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I look at some of the donations from 
Athabasca, zero for individual donations. Prince Albert 
Northcote, zero donations. All of it’s coming from unions, and 
they want to put new rules to hurt our taxpayer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing, I would like to say that I will believe 
that this government has a fair and transparent system in 
political donations and doesn’t need any changes, and I will not 

be supporting the motion. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
just want to start off by thanking the member from 
Canora-Pelly for highlighting some of the reasons why we’re 
having this motion here today. And it actually supports the 
position that we’re making, is that it’s very important to have a 
political contribution field that can be as neutral as possible, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we know a number of commentators have raised concerns 
about this in the last year or so, and unfortunately, 
Saskatchewan’s being described as the wild west when it comes 
to political contributions. We saw that with the situation where 
our own Premier was getting a $50,000 top-up from a political 
party for the work he does as the elected leader of the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And those kinds of contributions 
really can raise questions in the minds of the public about an 
ability to remove any reasonable apprehension of bias when it 
comes to making decisions that impact the people of 
Saskatchewan, the taxpayers, the ratepayers, and certainly the 
citizens who vote in the elections. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and you know, I guess one of the most important 
things that we’ve been talking about is that it would really be 
important for people who actually have voting rights here in 
Saskatchewan to have the ear of our elected officials. And when 
people who come from outside of the province and want to 
contribute, then we worry sometimes that that may cause a 
situation that would make it difficult for our leadership to be 
able to separate their responsibilities to the electors and those 
who are supporting their political party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I took a look at the . . . I know the Minister of Justice has talked 
a lot about the Office of the Registrar of Lobbyists, and I’ve had 
an opportunity to go through it. Since the lobby registry in 
Saskatchewan was created, we have 163 registrations in the 
lobbying registry. 
 
Now it’s interesting . . . You know, they were all very upset 
about union money, Mr. Speaker. What they fail to realize is 
that if we pass this bill, that’s exactly what’s going to happen — 
we’ll deal with their concerns. We’re going to deal with their 
concerns, you know. And if you haven’t looked at the bill, it’s 
in the bill. The . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
They certainly get excited about the wording in the motion. But 
if they just pass the bill . . . Obviously we’ve already had that 
discussion on the bill, and they haven’t bothered to even take us 
seriously when it comes to enacting the bill. So if they want to 
get all excited about what the wording is in the motion, Mr. 
Speaker, perhaps they should pass the bill. If that’s what’s 
really concerning members opposite, just pass the bill. It’s that 
easy. It’s simple. And then this discussion is over, and 
Saskatchewan is no longer regarded as the wild west when it 



2504 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2017 

comes to political contributions. If they’re so excited, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, about the scary unions, well then maybe they 
should pass the bill. 
 
And that might really help us get over this discussion and 
restore our reputation across Canada because right now, our 
reputation is quite scarred. We have a Premier who is accepting 
$50,000 top-ups on his salary from his political party. We know 
that some of their largest contributors are from out of province, 
Mr. Speaker, and the message that that sends to the people who 
vote, the people who expect their leadership to represent them, 
is something that raises serious concerns. 
 
And certainly my colleague from Saskatoon Centre showed an 
editorial which says there’s a lot of problems, not just with the 
way political contributions are happening but also with the 
lobbyist registry. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to point out some of the people 
who have registered in the lobbying registry, and there’s a lot of 
legitimate companies, in-house lobbyists. And that’s exactly the 
reason why this lobbying registry was created, was to provide 
legitimacy to the people who are advocating for their clients, if 
they’re hired consultants or of course if they’re in-house 
consultants. And there’s a number of them. If you go into the 
registry and take a look, there’s a number of in-house 
consultants. That’s their job. Most of them would have a job 
title of something like government relations. So their job is to 
plead their case to the relevant minister, to have an audience 
with the minister. And the role of the registry is to make that 
transparent. 
 
So there’s three tabs here on the registry. The one I’m looking 
on right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is called the citizen tab. And 
what it does is it allows anyone to go in and look at who is 
registered. 
 
The very first person that shows up on the list is Tim McMillan, 
Mr. Speaker. And as we know, he’s a former minister of the 
Crown here in Saskatchewan. He’s been gone for a couple of 
years. He’s an out-of-province consultant, lobbyist. He’s a good 
guy, absolutely, and I think he does a great job for the Canadian 
Association of Petroleum Producers, the people that he 
represents. So that’s a legitimate activity where a legitimate 
lobbyist is actually consulting, and I’m sure the ministers 
opposite hear pleas from him, from his constituents, which is 
the petroleum producers here in Saskatchewan. 
 
We have other folks that are familiar to members in the House. 
For example there’s a woman named Terri Harris. Now she 
shows up as representing six different companies, so I believe 
she has her own independent consulting company now. She’s 
showing up as a consultant, and she’s now representing Great 
Western Brewing Company; the Massage Therapist Association 
of Saskatchewan; Agrium Inc.; Berkshire Hathaway Energy 
Canada, which is a Canadian renewable energy company; and 
EDF EN Canada Development Inc., which is a wind and solar 
energy company. 
 
Now again, Mr. Speaker, what happens when we get confusion 
with the contributions, political contributions, is that when 
individuals who register in a lobbying registry also provide 
political contributions, then the lines start to blur a little bit. 

And I think that’s what our bill is attempting to do, is to clear 
up those lines and make them clear. Mr. Speaker, that’s all the 
bill’s trying to do. 
 
And of course with this motion, it’s the same idea. First of all, 
we’re asking to pass the bill. But secondly, we need to make 
sure that registered lobbyists aren’t providing political 
contributions. So that’s a new part of the discussion today, Mr. 
Speaker, and that’s the concern. If individuals like Terri Harris 
are making political contributions to a political party and also 
appealing for her clients to the government, through the, you 
know, legitimate lobbying activities, it creates a concern. 
 
And I think the thing we call . . . This has been discussed a lot 
with political actors and government officials over the years, 
Mr. Speaker, and it shows up in the practice of law under a 
phrase called “a reasonable apprehension of bias.” And this is 
where, I think, a bill like we’ve proposed and this motion would 
help just remove that. It’s very simple. It’s very clean. And I 
think it would solve a lot of the problems that members 
opposite are showing as their concerns with the situation that 
we have here today. 
 
So of course we know that when people are donating money, 
there’s an expectation of at least some sort of attention, some 
sort of connection, some sort of affirmation of that generous 
donation, Mr. Speaker. And so the question is, what are those 
expectations? What are the expectations that people have when 
they donate money to a particular political party? And those 
expectations are the ones that bring the whole situation into 
disrepute if we don’t have clear rules about who can lobby the 
government and who are the political contributors to the 
government, Mr. Speaker. It’s a very dangerous ground to be 
entering in upon. 
 
We have the lobbyist registry. It’s up and running. We also 
have someone like Mary Donlevy-Konkin who was a 
ministerial assistant here in the building for many years, Mr. 
Speaker. She’s now registered as a consultant lobbyist. So I 
think those individuals should take a look at their own political 
contributions and ensure that they’re above reproach. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, if we had the legislation in place, if we had 
this motion passed — we have an opportunity here today to 
pass this motion — then we can set the wheels in motion to fix 
the problem and ensure that this is not something that clouds 
people’s judgment. It’s not something that creates expectations 
by people making political contributions, and the public will 
have the confidence they should have in the lobbying registry as 
well as in the political system. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m very glad to be able to speak 
to this motion today. I’ll certainly be supporting it, and I would 
encourage all government members to consider the importance 
of this motion and the importance of supporting it. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Bonk: — The motion presented by the member from 
Saskatoon Centre seems to suggest that there’s something 
untoward in the province of Saskatchewan. And although I may 
not share, or definitely do not share his ideological point of 



May 11, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2505 

view, Mr. Speaker, I do have the ability to look at the overall 
picture and say with complete confidence that while 
Saskatchewan political donation procedure may not yet be 
perfect, it’s built in transparency and accountability and make it 
the envy of systems across Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it does however point to the basic truth about our 
political system, and that is, we may have the greatest 
motivations and noblest of principles when becoming involved 
in the democratic process, but in order to bring our ideas and 
plans into reality, we must first get elected. And getting elected 
of course requires a healthy bottom line. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the greatest pleasures of my duties as 
MLA are the occasions I get to visit with the good people of 
Moosomin constituency to talk about their hopes and dreams 
for themselves and their families, to discuss any obstacles that I 
might help them with, and to generally stay in touch with the 
grassroots folks who depend on me as their representative. 
 
I’m always thankful for their generosity when it comes to 
helping out with our constituency finances. But you see, Mr. 
Speaker, the good people of Moosomin constituency like to 
show their appreciation for the work that the Sask Party has 
done to make their hometowns, their constituency, and their 
province a better and more prosperous place to live. 
 
I know it’d be wonderful if we meet with our constituents, we 
could spend all of our time listening to their viewpoints and 
concerns and looking for solutions to their challenges, but, Mr. 
Speaker, the bottom line is always there. So fundraising 
becomes an integral part of the daily chores in our lives, and the 
motion by the member from Saskatoon Centre seems to suggest 
that there is something sinister going on in regards to certain 
political donations. 
 
I suppose we could just follow in the footsteps of some 
jurisdictions in Canada and the US [United States], where 
funding by corporations and unions has either been restricted or 
eliminated. And by the way, notice that I included unions in that 
statement, Mr. Speaker, a point that I will certainly bring up 
later. 
 
So in place of these corporate and union donations, many of 
these jurisdictions have put the burden of political fundraising 
on the taxpayer; in other words, making subsidized political 
parties the order of the day. So the taxpayer, no matter what his 
political allegiance may be, if any, is expected to divvy up his 
hard-earned dollars evenly among the competing parties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we in the Saskatchewan Party do not believe that 
taxpayers should be compelled to cover the cost of political 
campaign expenditures except, of course, on a voluntary basis. 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, we see nothing sinister about 
personal choice when it comes to political donations, whether it 
be from individuals, corporations, or registered lobbyists. 
 
Now the lobbyists are a good case in point. Just last August, 
Mr. Speaker, the Conflict of Interest Commissioner, a highly 
respected, independent officer of the legislature, launched the 
lobbyist registry. It requires an individual who accepts payment 
to communicate with a Saskatchewan public-office holder in an 
attempt to exert influence to register with the Registrar of 

Lobbyists. 
 
This Registrar of Lobbyists is an independent entity who reports 
not to the government but to the Legislative Assembly. This 
registry is online and searchable by anyone. Not only are the 
names of lobbyists available, but all their activities must be 
disclosed. Mr. Speaker, the commitment to transparency and 
accountability is clear. 
 
This now brings us to another point that might mitigate the 
misconception that there is something ominous about the 
political donations of individuals and corporations. But before I 
get to that, I promised to include unions in the list, as the 
motion conveniently leaves them out. So I ask, how ominous is 
the fact that the recent electoral campaign in British Columbia, 
the largest political donation in the province’s history, nearly 
$700,000, was donated by the United Steelworkers to the BC 
New Democrats? Not only that, they hired and paid two 
high-level political organizers, then lent them to the New 
Democrats for this year’s BC election campaign. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, these are called in-kind donations, 
as there is no actual exchange for money from the donor to the 
political party. In-kind donations, Mr. Speaker, the same sort of 
arrangements which we saw many political organizers, 
canvassers, and other election workers participate as NDP 
staffers in last year’s Saskatchewan election at no expense to 
the NDP, as they were paid with union funds. But unions are 
not included in the motion. 
 
[11:30] 
 
As an example, Mr. Speaker, in the recent Saskatchewan 
election there were six employees of the NDP’s campaign in 
Batoche constituency who were paid with union funds. But 
unions are not included in the motion. 
 
But if we look closely at the final 2016 election reports we find 
a number of constituencies where the NDP had organizers, 
canvassers, and other campaign workers who were paid by 
CUPE. How ominous is that, Mr. Speaker? But unions are not 
included in the motion. 
 
In fact in the constituency of Moosomin, which I have the great 
privilege to represent, the NDP candidate, who I have the 
highest personal respect for, in the last election received 93 per 
cent of her campaign funding from union donations. The total 
union donations to the Saskatchewan NDP for the 2016 
provincial election: $2000. That was $2000. The total union 
donations to the Saskatchewan NDP for the 2016 provincial 
election campaign totalled over $462,000. But unions are not 
included in the motion. 
 
The irony is not lost on me when the members opposite stomp 
around in their place and shout that we need to get big money 
out of politics. At the very least the statement could be 
construed as being somewhat hypocritical. Mr. Speaker, here’s 
a quick breakdown of just some of the union donations to the 
Saskatchewan NDP in the 2016 annual returns: $98,000 from 
the UFCW; 68,000 from the United Steelworkers; 55,000 from 
Unifor; 37,000 from CUPE; 35,000 from Canadian Labour 
Congress. 
 



2506 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2017 

Aside from being by far the largest donors and the major source 
of income for the NDP, labour groups have a permanent seat on 
the Saskatchewan NDP board. Does this mean that union bosses 
are purchasing influence with the NDP? But unions are not 
included in the motion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my mother, a retired health care professional, was 
a union member not because she wanted to be, but because she 
had to be to work in her chosen field. How was it fair in any 
way that her union dues, her money, was used to fund a party 
that she didn’t support and never will support? But unions are 
not included in the motion. 
 
And of course one of the favourite taunts of the members 
opposite is the supposed massive amounts of money that our 
government showers on out-of-province businesses and 
individuals. This is from a party that spent over $600,000 on 
out-of-province consultants in the recent election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to give some context how out of touch the 
Saskatchewan NDP really is, they had to hire a firm from 
Ontario to organize a tour of rural Saskatchewan because it was 
off of Highway 11, only to turn around and demonize 
Saskatchewan farmers, who are by and large incorporated, as 
corrupt corporations look to buy influence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the past 10 years the Saskatchewan Party has 
generated over 90 per cent of its donations from Saskatchewan 
sources. And most of the 10 per cent of the out-of-province 
sources are companies with a Saskatchewan office and local 
employees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a registered party in this province, the 
Saskatchewan Party is required to publicly report all of its 
donations and expenses. The party’s annual report is open and 
available to anyone. There are no loopholes. There are no 
hidden agendas, Mr. Speaker. The Election Act requires all 
donations over $250 to be publicly reported. 
 
And when the figures are in, you realize that the amounts of the 
Sask Party’s coffers is made up of relatively small donations. In 
fact, Mr. Speaker, in 2015, the last full year of which we have 
numbers, the Saskatchewan Party received donations from over 
13,000 different individuals for an average of those donations to 
be $176. That same report, Mr. Speaker, identifies 1,377 
corporations who gave donations to the Saskatchewan Party 
with an average donation of $1,233. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the Moosomin constituency, the vast majority 
of the corporate donors the NDP like to vilify are farmers. I’m 
not sure why the NDP has their sights set so squarely on 
farmers. They are the backbone of our economy. They are the 
people who believe in freedom. They believe in the freedom of 
religion; freedom to chose which school their children are 
educated in; and freedom of which political party they chose to 
support. I once again, I repeat once again, Mr. Speaker, the vast 
majority of the corporate donors that the NDP are so adamantly 
opposed to are Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the motion by the member from Saskatoon Centre 
seems to suggest that something sinister is afoot in the realm of 
Saskatchewan political donations. Well the only sinister aspect I 
can see, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that the motion does not 

include unions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party receives financial support 
from a wide range of its citizens, small businesses, and 
corporations. It fulfills strict guidelines of The Election Act and 
makes a full annual report of its finances, a report that is open 
for anyone to view. Mr. Speaker, our party believes that the 
system does not need reform as it’s not broken. The 
transparency is obvious. All pertinent information is available 
and clear. Accountability is not a problem. Mr. Speaker, for 
these reasons and many others, I’m not able to support the 
motion put forward by the member from Saskatoon Centre. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well this 
afternoon we’re talking . . . We’re not actually talking about 
donations. We’re not really talking about the companies 
involved or even the unions involved, although we’ve heard 
long lists of donations. We’re talking about something much 
more serious. We’re talking about trust. 
 
We’re talking about the way that the public views us in this 
profession. Do they trust us to do the right thing? Do they trust 
us in our interactions with companies, in our interactions in 
handing out contracts, to be objective? To be objective about 
our dealings with which company is the right company to deal 
with, to be objective in the development of policy. And to be 
subjective in a different way, to be subject to our commitment 
to serve the needs of the people of this province, Mr. Speaker, 
because it is really important that we maintain what is our 
primary goal. 
 
Our primary goal is not to help any particular business or any 
particular company. Our primary goal is to achieve the best for 
the people of this province. And I always go back to the way we 
define that the most clearly, which is the best health outcomes. 
And I reference that in particular because there are some pretty 
important lessons for us from the health field. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you well know, I, prior to being in this work I 
was practising as a family physician. And in that field, in the 
field of medicine, there’s a long-standing practice whereby 
pharmaceutical companies have a practice of giving gifts to 
physicians. And sometimes those are simple things like a pen or 
a mug, a pad of paper, or it could be a pair of socks. Or it could 
be something bigger, a golf trip, a fancy dinner. Or something 
even bigger like payments directly to that physician for 
prescribing the drug in question. What’s clear is that the greater 
the degree of connection, the greater the degree of gift, the 
greater size of the gift, the greater the influence. 
 
But it doesn’t actually have to be that big of a gift. Even just 
that pen, that pad of paper, the logo on an anatomy poster, that 
influences — studies have shown very clearly — that influences 
behaviour. That affects the decisions they do, and of course it 
does. That’s why they do it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the pharmaceutical companies aren’t giving 
doctors mugs because they want them to have a good hot cup of 
coffee. It’s because they want them to prescribe their drugs. 
And the same is true, the same is true for Crescent Point. The 



May 11, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2507 

same is true for Cenovus. The same is true for Encana. The 
same is true for any of the companies that are giving money to 
the Sask Party. They’re not doing it because they believe in the 
beautiful vision of this cabinet. They’re not. They’re doing it 
because they believe that that will influence their opportunities. 
 
The donors. The reason the donors give money to your party . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Yes. The reason the people give 
money to . . . Absolutely I say it . . . [inaudible] . . . and I’ll say 
it again . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. 
The member from Saskatoon Meewasin has the floor. Order. I 
recognize the member. 
 
Mr. Meili: — And the same is true for donors to political 
companies, political parties. There’s no reason that these 
companies would give these large amounts if they didn’t want 
to have some influence over your behaviour and your thinking. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this is a practice that has been investigated 
quite seriously within the medical profession, and there’s been 
efforts to root that out. They’ve been expected to root this out, 
and we’ve seen a big movement in the right direction where we 
no longer have those golf trips and other things being allowed 
in that profession. And certainly it’s something that I’ve 
avoided doing myself. I’ve avoided having those discussions 
with pharmaceutical companies in my office. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s in one of the most trusted professions. 
Physicians are up there with the pharmacists and the firemen for 
the most trusted professions. You know who isn’t among those 
most trusted professions — politicians, and there’s a good 
reason for that. 
 
Physicians realize that trust is our greatest asset, with the public 
and with our patients. If we want our patients to actually take 
our advice and change their behaviour we need to have their 
solid trust. We need to have no indication of any influence, any 
outside influence. And that . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I’d like to remind the front 
bench that this is private members’ day and we have a private 
members’ debate. I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m concerned I might 
have hit a little too close to home here. But the reality is that we 
want to be trusted as a profession. We want people to look at us 
as political leaders and be able to trust that we are not being 
influenced. And there’s a reality. The studies show it very 
clearly. The members across are very upset about this 
description, but the reality is you can’t avoid — the psychology 
is real — you can’t avoid being influenced by who donates to 
your party. You won’t be. 
 
And even if you could, even if you could set up this perfect 
barrier that preserves you from any influence from the people 
who donate to you, the public would still think that the 

influence is there. Whatever the reality is, the perception is very 
clear, Mr. Speaker. Even if you could make that barrier, the 
public doesn’t trust this profession and they don’t trust it for 
some very clear reasons. 
 
What are those reasons? We have public institutions. We have 
universities, libraries donating to political parties. We have big 
gala dinners where people pay extra money to have closer 
access to members of the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have, up until a very recent past, big dollars — 
you know, up to half a million dollars in the last decade — of 
top-ups to the Premier’s salary directly connected to those 
donations. Mr. Speaker, we have contracts. We see in today’s 
motion, and today’s motion is driven by the realization that 
people who donated $1 million, 53 companies who donated $1 
million to the Saskatchewan Party wound up with $100 million 
in contracts. Mr. Speaker, whether that was influenced or not, 
the perception is there, and the trust of our profession is 
damaged by that, is damaged by that. And we see that . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — There will be ample opportunity for 
government private members to enter into the debate. Currently 
the member from Saskatoon Meewasin has the floor. I would 
ask members to respect the member’s right to participate in this 
debate. I recognize the member. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It does seem unusual to 
have had to sit down three times in a 10-minute speech. I expect 
we’re hitting a bit too close to home. 
 
Because the public knows about this: 81 per cent of the 
Saskatchewan public says no public institutions should be able 
to contribute to political parties; 69 per cent said we shouldn’t 
have out-of-province donations; and 74 per cent said no money 
from charities. 
 
But this party persists in insisting that that behaviour is 
absolutely fine despite the fact that it is damaging our 
reputation as a profession, Mr. Speaker. When this happens, 
when we see this happening, people . . . [inaudible] . . . seeing 
us differently. 
 
And I wish you would listen because this is really important. 
This is about you and me. It’s about all of us. When people look 
at this House and they say, they’re in there for money and 
power, when they say that you’re in there and you’re influenced 
by big corporations, it cheapens all of our work. 
 
And this work is important, and it distresses me no end to see 
this sort of a resistance to even a consideration of the way we 
present ourselves. To see the party across the way point fingers 
and say, well you do the same things. You take money from 
unions. You take money from companies. Do you think the 
public looks at us and says, oh, they’re pointing fingers and say, 
you did it too or you started it — what mature people; oh, we 
can really trust them even more? Of course they don’t. Mr. 
Speaker, this cheapens our very work. 
 
When the Premier doubles down on this practice, when he 
further entrenches the idea that we are all in this for money and 



2508 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2017 

power, he cheapens the work of every one of us. Mr. Speaker, 
when you have this kind of activity, it hurts the reputation of the 
province and of the profession. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Allan Blakeney described this as a noble 
calling, and I fully believe that it is. I fully believe . . . I had 
some members across there shouting, saying that I was 
indicating they were bought and sold. Absolutely not. I know 
that you’re in here for good reasons. Every one of us is in here 
for reasons of decency. But, Mr. Speaker, this sort of behaviour 
makes it look like it’s the opposite, makes it look like we’re in 
here for money and power, and that’s why this needs to be 
changed. 
 
[11:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need to get off this drug. We need to get out 
from under the influence and catch up with the rest of the 
country. Everyone else in the country, with the exception of BC 
— and we may very soon see them headed in a similar direction 
— has been limiting corporate and union donations, has been 
moving away from this direction. 
 
So that’s what we need to do, Mr. Speaker. We need to enact 
this motion and stop having any connection between 
corporations that lobby or donate, and contracts. We need to 
ban corporate and union donations. We need to set a reasonable 
personal limit so we don’t have individuals with outsized 
influence and outsize ability to contribute to who wins 
government. We need to absolutely eliminate out-of-province, 
charity, and public institution donations. And we need to have a 
good look at the internal party finances as well. 
 
And in the process, Mr. Speaker, we have an opportunity. We 
have an opportunity that I really wish . . . I know my members 
will embrace and I really wish the members across would 
embrace as well. But we have an opportunity to restore trust, to 
remove the real and perceived influence of corporate donations 
that corrupt reputations and the actions of this House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And that’s why I’m happy to support this motion and happy to 
support any motion that removes this greater influence of 
corporations and wealthy individuals on our public process. 
Thank you so much. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now we’ll make the 
trip back from never-never land.  
 
Mr. Speaker, this motion says more by what it left out than by 
what it says. The NDP wants laws against the big, bad lobbyists 
and the monster corporations. They want laws to stop lobbyists 
and corporations from donating to political parties. But what 
they leave out is the biggest donor to the NDP. They leave out 
the unions. Yes, Mr. Speaker, they leave out the unions. 
 
The NDP had 43 union donations for a total of $462,617.07. 
Mr. Speaker, this they don’t mention. They don’t count. This is 
okay just as long as you’re not a corporation or a lobbyist. 
There’s also no reference to out-of-province workers coming in 

to work the election, Mr. Speaker. Are there no workers, party 
faithful willing to work for the NDP that they had to bring in 
outside help? 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are constituencies that did not raise any 
money. They just used their union cheque. There are seven — 
seven, Mr. Speaker — NDP constituencies that had zero 
donors. 
 
What would the NDP campaign look like without their union 
money? Mr. Speaker, the following is a list of the NDP election 
campaigns that did not raise any money, other than, of course, 
their union cheque. They are: Athabasca, Cut Knife-Turtleford, 
Kindersley, Martensville-Warman, Melfort, P.A. Northcote, and 
Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland. Mr. Speaker, where do your 
loyalties lie when you only have one donor? Where do you lean 
on in any issue? The NDP talk about a level playing field, but 
they want it tilted in their direction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just to prove what can happen with union 
donations, we needn’t look any farther than this past week’s BC 
election. The largest donation in BC’s political history was paid 
to the BC NDP by the international steelworkers. The total 
amount was — are you ready for it? This is like Telemiracle. 
Bring up the numbers: $672,576.38. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan NDP don’t think we need to 
include union donations. Let’s look at donations, dollar for 
dollar. The Sask Party’s largest single donor was 50,000. The 
NDP actually received several union donations larger than that: 
98,000 from the UFCW; 68 from the United Steelworkers; 55 
from Unifor; 37 from CUPE; and 35 from the Canadian Labour 
Congress. Does that mean those unions are buying influence 
with the NDP? 
 
The Saskatchewan NDP also received 7,500 from the BC NDP, 
who wanted to stop the Kinder Morgan pipeline, and kill jobs 
and kill work at Evraz in Regina. Is that why we don’t hear 
much support for the Kinder Morgan or any pipeline? Mr. 
Speaker, could this be the reason they are weak on their support 
of pipelines? The Saskatchewan NDP not only gets money from 
BC; they get campaign workers from BC. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to speak on lobbyists. The 
Conflict of Interest Commissioner launched a lobbyist registry 
in August of 2016. Who registers? All those who accept 
payment to communicate with a public-office holder in attempt 
to influence government decision or policy. As an independent 
officer, the Registrar of Lobbyists reports to the Legislative 
Assembly and not the government. Mr. Speaker, that point has 
to be very clear. It’s to the Legislative Assembly, which is both 
sides of the House, and not just to the government. This makes 
it transparent, and one can find out who is meeting with the 
government. An online registry will allow Saskatchewan 
citizens to search individuals and organizations lobbying for 
public-office holders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you have just heard, the lobbyist registry has 
been set up very carefully using a base that is in practice in 
other provinces. It’s not something that is totally new and 
untested. It makes me wonder why it does not satisfy the NDP. 
 
The NDP claim to be a grassroots party that is very loyal to 



May 11, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2509 

Saskatchewan, yet they use companies and staff from out of 
province. The NDP used consultants from Ottawa, Toronto, 
Mississauga, Vancouver. The grand total of these consultants 
was $559,580. 
 
They also brought in out-of-province staffers. They were from 
Burnaby, Montreal, Ottawa, Toronto, London, Ontario; 
Vancouver. When the election was done and the smoke cleared, 
the NDP spent 72.5 per cent of their entire, entire budget on 
outside consultants and staffers. Now that’s supporting your 
province. 
 
Were there no people in Saskatchewan that could do these jobs? 
Nobody who was qualified? Were the people of Saskatchewan 
just not qualified? Or were their political leanings just not far 
enough to the left? Mr. Speaker, if that’s the case, and I suspect 
it is, this tells me a very interesting story. It says our business 
community can see the direction our province is going and it is 
very pleased with what the Saskatchewan Party is doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I must say, I’m not against unions. What I oppose 
is union control, union control of a political party. When you 
look at this motion, I mean really look at what it doesn’t say — 
not what it does say; what it doesn’t say — you can see what 
the NDP are trying to accomplish. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I 
will not be supporting this motion. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And it’s interesting, the similarity in comments from these three 
speeches, Mr. Speaker. And I kind of wonder why they aren’t 
focusing on the actual motion itself, which talks about paid 
lobbyists and contractors. So my question is for the member 
from Batoche. What in the motion is offensive to you when 
we’re talking about paid lobbyists and contractors who are 
getting contracts from the Government of Saskatchewan? That 
is what the motion’s about . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Oh sorry, sorry. We’ve had some 
problems with the clock, so I thought that there was a bit more 
time left for debate. The member has already spoken, but the 
time has expired. The 65 minutes for debate has expired, and 
now we will start with a 10-minute period of Q & A [question 
and answer]. So I will recognize a member from the 
government side, seeing that it’s the opposition motion today. 
And I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the member from Saskatoon Centre. With the recent $7,500 
donation from the BC NDP to the Saskatchewan NDP, did any 
Saskatchewan NDP staff and union-sponsored workers go and 
work for the BC NDP in their recent provincial election 
campaign? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And this is 
the type of question that we get when we really should be 
discussing and debating things . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

they want deflect. This is what groupthink is all about — 
deflect, not address our own issues in our own House. 
 
You know, and she knows better than that. She knows better 
than that. Here we have a situation where we should be 
addressing issues of credibility and trust here in this province. 
And I frankly think that is a terrible question. I would ask her 
that she should go back and tell her researchers, can you do a 
better job. There you go. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
could ask this of anyone because we all had the . . . We heard 
three of the same speech, but I’ll focus on the member from 
Canora-Pelly, just at random. To the member, we just heard this 
question which was about whether or not a BC NDP donation 
might have influenced our behaviour. So what you’re saying in 
there is that donations can influence behaviour or . . . So which 
is it? Do donations influence behaviour or do they not? Pick a 
side. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Yes. Thank you for the question and randomly 
. . . And I guess we all think alike on this side. That’s why 
we’re on this side. And I’m far away from your side . . . 
[inaudible] . . . Anyway, donations come from people 
personally, you know, and I accept them from my personal 
farmers who are corporate, small businesses, and that, and I 
don’t think it, I don’t think it should matter. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In his speech, 
the member from Saskatoon Meewasin indicated that he thinks 
there should no longer be dinners or galas, as he put it, to 
fundraise for parties. My question is to the member from 
Saskatoon Meewasin. If you become leader, will you commit to 
ending your leader’s dinner that your party held as recently as 
last fall? Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — I would really have liked to have heard an 
answer to the previous question. Does it influence behaviour or 
doesn’t it? Because it seems that you think it influences our 
behaviour, but not yours, which is a very strange sense of 
holiness, but I’ll . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. We heard the question. I 
would now like to hear the answer. I recognize . . . Order. 
Order. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, we were very clear. We want to 
eliminate union and corporate donations. We have legislation in 
front of us to do exactly that. Let’s pass the bill. Let’s get it 



2510 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2017 

done. Let’s resolve this problem with our own reputation. Your 
reputation in the back of the front benches is weakened by your 
commitment to accepting corporate and union donations. Let’s 
all get in this together and remove all of those donations. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
listened with interest to the member from Moosomin and he 
made some interesting comments about our lobbyist registry 
and our laws around political donations don’t need reformed. 
But you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have seen the polls, 
whether they’re Mainstreet and others, that clearly in the eyes 
of the public they are broken, they are broken. So he went on to 
say that, in fact, our institutions are the envy of others. I’m 
curious. Could he tell us who is envious of our lobbyist registry 
and our political fundraising laws? 
 
[12:00] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Bonk: — Mr. Speaker, I find it so ironic the NDP even 
brings up this motion. They’re always yelling and stomping that 
we need to get big money out of politics. Mr. Speaker, the 
largest donation in 2015 to the Saskatchewan Party was 
$50,000. The largest donation from a union to the NDP was 
double that. They have more than three other donations that 
exceed the amount that the Sask Party brought in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party receives financial support 
from a wide range of its citizens, small businesses, and 
corporations. Most of those corporations in fact are our good 
Saskatchewan hard-working farmers. Mr. Speaker, I do not see 
how they can even stand up with a straight face and put forward 
a motion like this. The irony is just amazing. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Lloydminster. 
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The members 
opposite talk about getting big money out of politics, but I’d 
like to re-share, which we’ve already heard, some of the 
donation numbers from the NDP in 2016: 98,000 from UFCW, 
68,000 from United Steelworkers, 55,000 from Unifor, 37,000 
from CUPE, and 35,000 from The Canadian Labour Congress. 
 
All of these are unions that support policies that would have a 
detrimental effect on Saskatchewan. So to the member from 
Saskatoon Centre: will you admit that your party is bankrolled 
by organizations that advocate for policies that would result in 
shutting down Saskatchewan industry? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And I find it very interesting they spend so much time talking 
about unions. We could have a really quick solution to this, a 
really quick solution to this. 
 

Let’s all vote in favour of Bill 602 in just a few minutes. Why 
not do the right thing? Do the right thing. They raise issues 
about unions, and they won’t answer the question about trust. 
They won’t answer that question at all, Mr. Speaker. Let’s do 
the right thing today. Let’s vote in favour of 602. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — To the member from Canora-Pelly: given the 
Sask Party’s top 53 corporate donors received more than $100 
million in contracts from government and Crown corporations, 
does he agree that this looks a lot like pay to play? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Yes, well I find that hard to believe coming 
from a party who got over 72 per cent . . . spent 72 per cent out 
of the province . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Pardon me? 
Seventy-two? Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member opposite 
criticizes our party for the donations we receive and somehow 
forgets who donates to their own party. An example is a 
donation of 7,500 from BC NDP who would like to see Evraz, a 
local employer and employs over 1,000 people, shut down. 
 
My question is to the member from Meewasin. How can you 
justify taking money from the brunt of their political party and 
want Saskatchewan people put out of their work? The people of 
Saskatchewan deserve answers. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — I explain that by saying that this is a brilliant 
piece of psychology you’ve come up with. Somehow donations 
to your side have no influence on behaviour. Even the mention 
of it makes members get up and leave and freak out. But if 
there’s donations to us, it absolutely influences our behaviour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an astounding bit of psychology. Somehow 
we have the absolute furor and fear on that side, but we are foul 
and foul. Well let’s eliminate it for everyone . . . [inaudible] . . . 
Let’s eliminate out-of-province government donations or party 
donations. Absolutely fine with that. If we’re so corrupted, let’s 
get rid of that. Let’s get rid of it all. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 
Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
member from Moosomin, in his remarks, he referenced that 
he’s against any public money in the electoral process. So when 
can we expect that member returning his election rebate to the 
people of Saskatchewan? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Moosomin. 



May 11, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2511 

Mr. Bonk: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t remember saying that in 
remarks. I’m quite sure what was in my speech. But, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m wondering why the members opposite are so dead 
set against the farmers of . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The time for the 75-minute debate 
has expired. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 3 — Mining Investment in Saskatchewan 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Ms. Carr.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Steele: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to stand before 
you here in this government and the people of Saskatchewan to 
speak about the diverse mining industry in our province. The 
mining industry in Saskatchewan contributes to Canada’s 
economy and the economies around the world. Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan is a leader in mining, in the mining picture, and a 
prominent player in the global mining scene, ranking number 
one in Canada, number one globally out of 104 jurisdictions, 
according to the recent Fraser Institute’s report. This report 
named Saskatchewan the most attractive place in the world for 
mining investment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a wealth of mineral resources being 
developed in Saskatchewan: potash, uranium, coal, diamonds, 
gold, copper, zinc, nickel, just to name a few. Mining is a 
significant contributor to our economy, a key contributor to the 
growth sector, and has a significant impact in our province. 
 
In the world, Saskatchewan has the highest quality minable 
deposits, with the largest reserves in potash and uranium. In 
fact, Mr. Speaker, potash reserves in Saskatchewan alone could 
supply the world with the current levels of potash demands for 
the next several hundred years. There are few jurisdictions in 
the world that have the high-quality, economically minable 
deposits of both potash and uranium. 
 
Mr. Speaker, mining has a big impact on everyone in the 
province, urban and rural. Mining companies contribute 
revenue annually to the provincial government through royalties 
and business taxes, plus untold amounts in taxes from 
employees and spin-offs of economic benefit. The revenue that 
comes in from the mining companies supports health care, 
education, social services, infrastructure, and other government 
programs and services. Globally, Saskatchewan’s mining 
companies are feeding and fuelling the world. 
 
Potash was discovered in 1917 in the Weyburn area and has 
contributed to providing Saskatchewan with further discoveries 
and numerous deposit finds. Potash is used to improve crop 
quality, using it to fertilize the crops and create more quantity to 
help feed growing populations around the world. Potash is used 

to help increase important crop yields in fields of corn, coffee, 
and rice. 
 
Uranium provides a source of non-GHG [greenhouse 
gas]-emitting energy to countries around the world. 
 
Estevan, Bienfait, Coronach coal mines provide almost 50 per 
cent of the power load for Saskatchewan electrical energy. In 
addition to coal mines, we have world-class clean-coal 
technology in the form of carbon capture and sequestration 
facilities at Boundary dam 3. This technology is an amazing 
example of how Saskatchewan’s innovation is changing the 
world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the mining association has a quote: “If it can’t be 
grown, it was probably mined.” However true, mining benefits 
and surrounds us every day. Cars, computers, cellphones, 
medical treatments, toothpaste — all contain mineral 
components of some kind. Environmental stewardship is very 
important to the mining industry, employing environmental 
professionals to manage agriculture and wildlife habitat so that 
it is sustainable now and for the future. 
 
The total amount of land mass that mining uses in the province 
occupies only point one per cent — smaller than Saskatoon — 
which is significant considering its economic impact. 
Reclamation and decommissioning plans are put into place, 
reviewed before any mining takes place. As part of their 
operating licence, all mines need to provide financial assurance 
to the government showing that they have the money in place 
for reclaiming mine sites, and these plans are reviewed 
annually. Extensive tree planting programs are in place for 
shelterbelts and wildlife habitat. 
 
The past product of potash, commonly known as salt, is reused 
for agriculture and industrial purposes as well as being used to 
de-ice highways. There is zero discharge into streams or lakes 
from the potash mines. 
 
Mr. Speaker, prior to mining, the topsoil is removed to contour 
lands to revegetate the land to minimize wind and water 
erosion. Reclaiming the land provides wildlife habitat and 
promotes carbon sequestration. As soon as it is particularly 
coal-mined, the areas are reclaimed to productive farm land, 
pasture, wildlife habitat, and/or recreational use. Mr. Speaker, 
the water management plans that are being used by the mining 
companies minimize the impact it has on the surface or 
groundwater resources. 
 
Uranium mines issue a licence only if an activity is safe for the 
health and safety of the people, wildlife, and environment 
which is living near and around the mine. They ensure that 
lakes, streams, rivers that are downstream from the uranium 
mines are running projects that are safe for people, vegetation, 
fish, and wildlife. Potash mines provide benefits to the province 
in many ways — providing jobs for people in the province, 
meeting the agriculture needs to help feed people in the 
province and the world, helping support government programs 
through payments of taxes and royalties. 
 
Ninety-five per cent of the potash production is used for 
fertilizer. The remaining 5 per cent is used for manufactured 
products or a variety of chemical uses. Mr. Speaker, potash 



2512 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2017 

plays an important role in meeting agriculture needs and is an 
important mineral in Saskatchewan’s economy. 
 
After five years of construction, K+S Potash Canada celebrated 
a grand opening of their new potash mine May 2nd, 2017. The 
new potash mine will not only create more than 400 job 
opportunities for the province, it will also generate taxes and 
royalties for Saskatchewan for many years to come. Mr. 
Speaker, we are glad that K+S is investing again in 
Saskatchewan, especially after a history that their parent 
company and the mines they operated were nationalized by the 
government led by the members opposite. 
 
And further, for the fourth year running, K+S Potash Canada 
received acknowledgement for being an exceptional workplace 
for the employees. Our government looks forward to having a 
strong relationship with K+S, creating more jobs, opportunities 
in our communities, contributing to the growth of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, there are other companies that are 
considering construction and new potash mines in 
Saskatchewan, BHP Billiton being one of these companies. 
 
Saskatchewan is making history in the mining world. Encanto 
Potash Corp. and First Nations Muskowekwan Resources Ltd. 
have established a mining agreement that will develop on First 
Nations land a great opportunity to provide more jobs and 
support for their community and the province. The potash mine 
belt lies directly on Muskowekwan First Nation’s land. 
 
Our government continues to offer a competitive tax regime, 
scientific support, clarity around land claims, and efficient 
permitting, making Saskatchewan a great province for business 
to invest in. 
 
[12:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the industry employing approximately 3,900 
people in 2015, it was forecasted that uranium will be bringing 
in 115 million in royalties in 2016 and 2017. Mr. Speaker, 
mining is fundamental to our economy’s well-being. Mining 
resources continue to be a large contributor to our economy. 
Our government is willing to continue to work together with the 
mining industry to build strong relationships to benefit 
Saskatchewan for many years to come. 
 
Saskatchewan’s world-class mineral deposits continue to 
provide a diverse range of career opportunities, prosperity, 
innovation, and growth for the province, providing the 
foundation for prosperity for our future. Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan is a wealth of exploration opportunities. Mining 
is the only natural resource being used across the province. 
Although it is not extracted through mining, it is relevant 
because of our government working to make sure that 
Saskatchewan is a great place to live, work, and invest, Mr. 
Speaker. Helium, oil, and gas are other resources being 
explored. Communities and schools expand when these 
opportunities are explored and jobs are created within our 
communities. 
 
Southwest Saskatchewan has a history of helium wells being 
operated in the Swift Current area since 1963. We are happy to 
announce that Weil Group Resources from Virginia have been 
doing some exploration development in the province and have 

found helium concentrations in the Mankota region. With their 
findings, they have decided to continue investing in our 
province and have opened up a helium facility near Mankota 
last year.  
 
The facility will supply and refine industrial-grade helium for 
science . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, right. The facility 
will supply refined . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Keep going, 
Steele. Yes, we’re good to go . . . helium for science, 
preliminary MRIs [magnetic resonance imaging], and 
manufacturing industries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Cypress Hills may be sparsely populated but 
makes up for it in strong, resourceful energy resources within 
the region. 
 
Oil has been the world’s major commercial energy source for 
many decades and will maintain this leading role for many 
more years to come. Oil and gas is necessary for everyone. It 
heats our homes; allows us to drive our vehicles; travel by bus, 
ship, train, and air. Petroleum products are also used to make 
the materials found in everyday household items such as 
toiletries, electronics, and clothes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 2015 the oil and gas industry accounted for an 
estimated 33,000 direct and indirect jobs and years of 
employment. Production of oil and gas in 2015 was a combined 
value of 8.3 billion. Industry investment of oil and gas in new 
exploration and development in 2016 is estimated at 3.6 billion. 
There are approximately 300 oil and gas companies that operate 
wells in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, industry also contributes revenues in the form of 
corporate income tax, resource surcharges, sales tax, fuel tax, 
personal income tax, property tax, royalties, and surface lease 
rentals. Oil and gas sector contributes to Canada’s gross 
domestic product and fees to the government. In addition, 
industry generates significant profits for SaskPower and 
SaskEnergy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, clearly a sound investment strategy must be built 
upon a solid base that underlines the need for market order and 
stability today and reasonable prices . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . . We got to go to 4 o’clock? You’re kidding me . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . He’s full of . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . You can do it, yes. I need a drink of water. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan has a significant interest in 
ensuring that the Saskatchewan oil and gas industry maintain 
and lead its competitive position amongst Canadian energy 
products in the province while ensuring that development 
occurs in an environmentally responsible manner. Although 
slumping oil prices have had an effect on Saskatchewan’s 
economy, apparently Saskatchewan is in a unique position to 
weather the effect due to our diversified economy when 
compared to other resource-driven economies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan government has been doing 
their part to minimize the impact of the oil prices falling. 
During the oil price downturn, producers implemented steps to 
reduce costs in drilling, operating, and servicing of wells. This 
makes operations profitable at prices lower than before the 
downturn. The overall improvement in the oil industry will 



May 11, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2513 

begin before prices fully recover. 
 
Saskatchewan is the number two oil producer and the number 
three gas producer in Canada. In 2015 Saskatchewan produced 
177.6 million barrels of oil. The oil and gas contributed 23.3 
billion over the last five years in taxes, royalties, fees to the 
government. The revenue helps to support public pensions, 
provide health care, and build schools, as well as hospitals, 
housing, and highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the oil and gas is a proud part of our history. With 
the discovery of an abundant supply of oil, of crude oil and 
natural gas in the west, Canada’s oil and gas industry began 
expanding in the vast pipeline network in the 1950s. This 
expansion contributed significantly to the development of 
domestic and international markets while propelling the 
Canadian economy forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, energy and resources is fundamentally our 
personal and economic well-being. The Canadians rely on 
natural gas and products made from crude oil to meet more than 
two-thirds of their energy needs each year and every day. 
Ninety-four per cent of the Canadian transportation energy 
comes from petroleum products — the vast majority of 
passenger vehicles on the road using gasoline and fuel, while 
most freight transportation trucks use diesel. 
 
We need some papers, boys and girls . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to support the motion put forward by the member from 
Estevan: 
 

That this Assembly commends the Government of 
Saskatchewan for having very active mining policies 
which has led Saskatchewan to be ranked the most 
attractive jurisdiction for mining investments in the world. 

 
In the world. In the world. According to just-released Fraser 
Institute 2016 annual global survey of mining and executives, 
they gave Saskatchewan a gold star in declaring the most 
attractive place in the world for mining companies to invest. 
They attribute Saskatchewan’s competitive tax regime and their 
efficiency in permitting production, and certainly surrounding 
environmental regulations and land claims, as some of the key 
reasons for outstanding rating. This moves us up from the 
environment position being ranked second in the same category 
in 2015. 
 
I believe the Minister for Energy and Resources summarizes it 
well as he says: 
 

We are gifted with a variety of resources, and as a 
government we are doing our share to encourage the 
industry and to make sure we are competitive and friendly 
to . . . [invest]. We have maintained a stable royalty 
structure over the last number of years, supported by clear 
government policies [More paper, buddy; keep ’er coming] 
that have helped Saskatchewan remain . . . [in a situation] 
of choice for investors and business. 

 
He also added, “Aside from having high-quality geoscience 
information, we place a high priority on collaboration with our 
stakeholders in the industry to . . . reduce red tape wherever 

possible.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, making it easy to do business provides investment 
opportunities for the residents of Saskatchewan. We will dive 
into the value of opportunity in a minute. However, we must 
also note that poor policy also results in reduced opportunities. 
 
Unfortunately our fellow province to the west of us seen their 
mining attractiveness rating become severely downgraded after 
their policy change. They were once listed at 14 on the index 
and have slid significantly down to placing 47th overall on the 
attractiveness index, placing them with Russia, Colorado . . . 
[inaudible] . . . California, based on different difficulties 
companies have existed and attempted to develop new projects. 
Mr. Speaker, policy matters. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan recognized the 
potential since before the province was signed into 
Confederation. Bear with me as I provide a little historical 
perspective on Saskatchewan’s mining advantage. In 1880 the 
first commercial coal mine was opened near Roche Percee. 
Commercial clay was produced in 1886 in Estevan, Bruno, and 
Claybank areas. The Bienfait coal mine, of course, mine, started 
producing in 1905. Copper and zinc was discovered in 1910, 
gold in 1916, nickel and copper and platinum and gold and 
silver in 1923, uranium in 1935. 
 
Potash was found in the Radville area in 1942, with the first 
attempt to mine potash actually occurred in Unity area in 1951. 
Actually, long-term potash production became the heart of the 
Melville-Saltcoats constituency in Esterhazy in 1961, which 
ushered in the great potash rush of Saskatchewan with the 
mines being built in Belle Plaine, Saskatoon, Allan, Lang, 
Vanscoy, Colonsay, and Rocanville, all beginning in 1960. 
 
Uranium began to be aggressively mined in early- to mid-’70s 
in the Athabasca Basin, found in northern Saskatchewan. 
Diamonds have been found throughout the 1900s, but active 
stakes were taken out in 1980 in the Sturgis Lake area. 
Exploration of the rare earth elements began north of Uranium 
City in 1990. Chinese clay was a product in 2008. 
 
Mr. Speaker, rounding out the broad range of commodities 
mined in Saskatchewan also includes potassium sulphate in 
Wynyard, sodium sulphate in Chaplin, salt in Saskatoon and 
Esterhazy and Bienfait and Wilcox. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the benefits of mining are all around us every day. 
For example, approximately 50 per cent of the power generated 
in Saskatchewan comes from coal and mined in the South. 
Okay, got that, in the south. Coal produced, over 9.3 million 
tonnes of coal in 2015 from Poplar River and Estevan mines. 
Virtually everything around us, from computers, jewellery, cars, 
windows, cellphones, wall board, cosmetics, medical 
treatments, vitamins, toothpaste all contain some kind of 
mineral, a mineral that was brought up from underneath our 
Saskatchewan soil. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we do not grow into . . . If we do not grow it, we 
probably mine it. Saskatchewan is the largest potash producer 
in the world accounting for over 30 per cent of the total world 
product, 40 per cent of our production goes into the US. 
Saskatchewan uranium powered about 1 in 15 homes in the US. 



2514 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2017 

The Seabee gold mine operation produced over 77,000 ounces 
of gold in 2016. Big Quill Resources in Wynyard is Canada’s 
number one producer of potassium sulphate, used in everything 
from lawn fertilizer to glass manufacturing. Canadian clay 
production in Wilcox, Canada leading clay producer. We will 
find it in everything from stucco products to drilling mud. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is a world leader in a lot of 
categories and resource extractions. This makes it all more 
incredible that we have the opposition of members who . . . 
There is no longer an excuse for building new infrastructure 
projects that lock us into increased extraction decades into the 
future. That applies equally to oil and gas pipelines and 
Canadian-owned mining projects and the world over, and where 
does that . . . You’ve got to be kidding me. 
 
[12:30] 
 
Information quotes come from the . . . Come from what? 
Nothing else than three of the . . . While other government 
works hard to promote growth and economy, the NDP focus on 
policy that would send Saskatchewan back — back to the days 
when our young people had no choice but to look for jobs 
elsewhere. Back to when Saskatchewan was the last in 
population growth and had the unfortunate distinction for 
having the highest unemployment in the country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to expand on what makes this 
province such an attractive place to invest. And in the mining 
sector means that this province and what is also meaning the 
local area like the constituency of Melville-Saltcoats . . . This 
must be yours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, although the . . . [inaudible] . . . space taken up by 
all of the mines in Saskatchewan would fill the space covered 
by the city of Saskatoon. I think I said that. 
 
Although resource sectors are down in 2016, project and 
mineral sales are projected to be 6.5 billion . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Yes, why? They had been a high as 8.2 billion 
in 2015. 
 
In 2012 the mineral industry in Saskatchewan contributed 860 
million to the provincial and federal government directly into 
royalties and taxes. Current estimates for 2016 are that the 
mineral sales in Saskatchewan will add up to 6.5 billion, down 
from 8.2 billion in 2015. However, 6.5 billion respectfully 
contributes to GDP [gross domestic product] of 12 per cent to 
the provincial economy. 
 
Over 226 million was spent — this better not be a joke — in 
2016 on mineral exploration in the province. In the three years 
previous, over 200 million was spent per year, with a high of 
323 in 2012. Mr. Speaker, from the period of 2008 to 2028, it is 
estimated that the Saskatchewan mineral industry will invest 
over 50 billion in expansion and in mining new mines. 
 
The world translating into a new investment rates — 
approximately 6 million a day. According to Saskatchewan 
Mining Association website, mining could generate a further 28 
billion in provincial revenues in a 20-year window, continuing 
to contribute to significantly to our GDP. These revenues are 
here to support the government programs and service such as 

health care, education, infrastructure, and infrastructure 
development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to provide some examples of where 
some of the investment would come from. K+S Potash Canada 
is going to begin to bring their 4.1 billion mining into 
production virtually any day now. This is the first greenfield 
mine built in Saskatchewan over the 40 years. Finish it off here. 
I think this was planned. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Mr. Steele, we would never treat you 
this way, on this side. 
 
Mr. Steele: — I’m beginning to believe that, I’m telling you. 
 
It is actually, quote, ironic that the company that built or that 
builds the first new potash mine in Saskatchewan is 40 years in 
the same company that helped build the last new potash mine in 
the province in the 1970s before it . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Was nationalized. Here, there’s two 
pages. 
 
Mr. Steele: — Want that one back? Okay. Was nationalized by 
the NDP government to become Potash Corp in the 
Saskatchewan Lang mine. 
 
In an article published in the Leader-Post June 20, 2012 where 
Bruce Johnstone, he noted that the irony, and I quote, of course 
it fits that K+S should be building the first new potash mine 
since the 1970s since it procedures company built the 
province’s last new . . . since process the company built the last 
province’s last new mine. When the mines was acquired, some 
would say, nationally by the government-owned Potash Corp of 
Saskatchewan in 1976, the company left Saskatchewan with a 
bad taste in its mouth. But K+S is back in Saskatchewan again 
and with no hard feelings. 
 
Canadian president and CEO of K+S is quoted as saying in an 
interview that day, what brought them back was a change in 
government, a provincial government with an open-for-business 
philosophy. K+S sod turning, no hard feelings about the forced 
sale of the former . . . Your lines here, Warren, are all over this 
page. He was also quoted, musing however: “Even more than a 
generation later, you can hardly believe that such an act could 
happen to a country belonging to the western world. [You’re 
kidding me.] However, after so many years we are not looking 
back in anger anymore.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a number of other companies who have 
belief in the Sask Party open-for-business philosophy and are 
planning to have plans in place to build in Saskatchewan. BHP 
is one of the world leaders in mineral development and is 
continuing to with their 3.5 billion greenfield project, hoping to 
have it near completion by 2020. Yancoal, Southey, 3.6 billion 
solution mine; western Milestone, 1 billion solution mine; 
Mosaic, 3.5 billion; Canada Gold Fortune Potash, Broadview, 
Grenfell; first potash ventures, Muskowekwan. None of these 
were on the drawing board when the NDP were here. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this government believes in encouraging 
business to build and expand in Saskatchewan. We have created 
an environment that encourages growth, development, not 



May 11, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2515 

living with ideologies that formed the leave-in-the-ground 
policy of the previous decade of the NDP rule. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you just have to look at the blank page of the ’90s 
and early — keep her coming there, big guy — early 2000 . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — He can only do so much. 
 
Mr. Steele: — He’s going to tag in shortly . . . 2000 when there 
was little to no interest in developing resources in 
Saskatchewan. Why? Because the companies were afraid to set 
up shop here, still remembering the pain of the ’70s when the 
NDP said, we could do it better ourselves. Trouble was, nothing 
happened. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the mining industry in Saskatchewan created 
direct and indirect employment for approximately 30,000 
people in the province over roughly 6 per cent of the workforce 
over 16 jobs. The Saskatchewan mining industry spent over 3 
billion annually on wages, goods, and services. A large 
percentage of these employees live and work in the rural 
northern Saskatchewan. Northern Saskatchewan alone had over 
2,000 people employed in resource mining and over 50 per cent 
of these employees have Aboriginal ancestry.  
 
Reported in The Battlefords News in March 7th last year: “. . . 
English River First Nation and Peter Ballantyne Cree Nation 
acquired 30 per cent of JNE Welding, a company that 
manufactures steel vessels for mining companies.” With these 
types of partnerships, it’s not a surprise that the mining sector is 
the largest private sector employer of Aboriginal people. 
 
Also found in the Fraser Institute’s mining companies survey 
was the fact that Saskatchewan is considered to be one of the 
only jurisdictions in Canada where uncertainty of surrounding 
disputed land claims is not a significant barrier to investment in 
the mining sector. In fact — give me another page — 
Saskatchewan has the highest percentage of respondents across 
all Canadian jurisdictions that view the situation dealing with 
the disrupted land claims is an encouragement to invest, and or 
not a deterrent, and rated over 80 per cent. This is a significant 
improvement. Do we need the lines?  
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the minister on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, with leave, to 
introduce a guest please. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Finance minister has asked for 
leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister may proceed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
thank you to colleagues. I want to introduce today a young lady 
that’s joined my office as a summer student here in the 
building, Mr. Speaker. Her name is Alexi Rowden. Alexi’s 
sitting up there. Give us a wave. 

Alexi is from Prince Albert. I have had the opportunity to meet 
her parents in the past. Her father is the deputy chief of police 
for the Prince Albert Police Service, and her mother is a civilian 
member at the police service up in Prince Albert. And my 
brother-in-law happens to be the chief of police up there, so I’ve 
gotten to know her mom and dad through friendships with my 
brother-in-law and what have you. 
 
Now Alexi is a basketball player, and she plays for the 
University of Regina Cougars basketball team here at the 
University in Regina, just returned from a trip to China, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, where her and her teammates went over there 
thinking they were going to be playing some equivalent-type 
teams from university. They ended up playing the Chinese 
national team. They ended up playing some former division I 
United States college basketball teams where they . . . I think it 
enhanced their game and their skills by competing against that 
calibre of teams over in China, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So Alexi will be joining our office as an intern. She’s studying 
at the University of Regina. We’re delighted to have her here in 
my office for the summer, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we look 
forward to Lexi learning about the political process and gaining 
some experience here in the legislature during the course of the 
summertime, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I would ask all members to join me in welcoming Alexi 
Rowden to her legislature, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress 
Hills. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 3 — Mining Investment in Saskatchewan 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Steele: — Mr. Speaker, there may have been some 
inappropriate language in the comments here. I apologize for 
that. 
 
Saskatchewan has the highest percentage of respondents across 
all Canadian jurisdictions that believe that the situation dealing 
with the disruption of land claims as an encouragement to 
invest, and or not a deterrent and rated at over 80 per cent. This 
is a significant improvement from 2012, when belief was only 
held by 70 per cent. This is a stark comparison to BC where it is 
believed by just over 30 per cent of the respondents that 
disputed land claims are not a deterrent to invest. But there is 
more work to be done with our First Nation partners. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier and the policies of the Saskatchewan 
Party, the Sask Party, has made this province a have province. 
We now have our young people staying in the province because 
of opportunity. Our population numbers have recently released 
and provided  that. The NDP said it was impossible for 
Saskatchewan to grow by even 100,000 people in 10 years. This 
government has exceeded the goal of . . . Our 16 Saskatchewan 
cities saw their populations increase from 2011 to 2016 by 
almost 10 per cent. 
 



2516 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2017 

An Hon. Member: — Read that last part. 
 
Mr. Steele: — The bottom part? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Steele: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to spend a little time 
to provide some examples of what the resource sector means to 
one constituency, the one constituency of Melville-Saltcoats, 
Mr. Speaker. We are extremely proud of the Mosaic company, 
exceptionally, the Esterhazy division. 
 
Just a few days ago I had the pleasure of standing in the east 
legislative to brag a little over our last achievement: Mosaic K3. 
This is the first new production shaft built in the province in 40 
years. 
 
I do like to speak a bit about the K3 expansion at the Mosaic 
potash mine in Esterhazy. K3 demonstrates Mosaic’s 
commitment to the long-term sustainability of their operation 
and their vision. They have the future of their potash mine 
operation in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mosaic has 50 years of legacy in the Esterhazy area. Today 
marks the next 50. K3 is a major part of the future of potash 
industry in Saskatchewan. These new production shafts are the 
first to be sunk in nearly over 50 years. Upon completion of K3, 
Mosaic yesterday . . . operation is expected to be the largest, 
most competitive underground potash mine in the world. 
 
[12:45] 
 
Mosaic invests generously into the communities near their 
operations, whether it is St. Anthony’s Hospital in Esterhazy, 
STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society] ambulance, new 
Mosaic Stadium, or a new children’s hospital of Saskatchewan. 
They are committed to being good neighbours and helping 
Saskatchewan people thrive. 
 
Saskatchewan plays a major role in the global food story. Here 
at home we’re an agriculture powerhouse, growing a variety of 
crops and contributing to food security. Our potash is used to 
help grow crops in other regions of the world like China, India, 
and Brazil. As the world continues to grow, so will the need for 
increased food production. Saskatchewan potash will be in a 
position to play a big role in the filling of these needs. Canada 
is the number one exporter of potash in the world. 
 
The potash at K3 is 365 million years old. The north headframe 
soars 384 feet into the air, making it the tallest building between 
Calgary and Winnipeg. The headframe houses two massive 
hoists: Blair with skips that will bring potash to the surface 
from more that 3,350 feet underground. The hoist will move 
60-ton skips, compatible and lifts 10 million short tons of 
potash per year. 
 
Mosaic uses state-of-the-art technology, like 3-D seismic 
exploration drilling to study the geologies and the formation 
posed in the new K3 mine for years. To reach potash, 
20-foot-diameter shafts were constructed. Freezing technology 
is used to control water flow. To sink the shaft, drilling and 
blasting is to be used. As the shaft sinks, it is lined accordingly, 
depending on the geological accounted.  

The Blair hoist will carry a cage of people and equipment. The 
distance between the two shafts is 400 feet. Twenty-four ropes 
will be used to six Blairs and eight Koepes to 3,800 feet in total. 
Fully designed production capacity is 6.3 million tonnes of 
production or 19 million tonnes per year. Are we in fast time? 
 
Mr. Speaker, mining is a major industry in the province. The 
industry has continued to grow because we have an attractive 
business climate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me read some of the mining facts into the 
record. Saskatchewan is a leader in the Canadian global mining 
scene. In 2013 it continued to be the world’s largest producer of 
the export of potash, supplying almost 30 per cent of the 
world’s supply, and the second-leading uranium producer, 
providing almost 16 per cent of the world’s supply. 
High-quality . . . [inaudible] . . . minable deposits of both potash 
and uranium are currently produced in relatively few 
jurisdictions in the world. 
 
Canada, Russia, Belize together count for just over two-thirds 
of global potash production. Kazakhstan, Canada, and Australia 
produce two-thirds of the world’s uranium. Saskatchewan has 
the largest high-grade reserves in the world of both potash and 
uranium. Saskatchewan hosts almost half of the world’s potash 
reserves and 8 per cent of the world’s unknown recoverable 
uranium reserves. 
 
Canadian mineral production is valued at a robust 44 billion in 
2013. Potash, coal, and iron ore were the leading commodities 
by value and production. Saskatchewan was Canada’s 
third-leading mining jurisdiction in 2013, the mineral 
production value of 7.2 billion. Mining companies operating in 
Saskatchewan produce 16.4 per cent of Canada’s total mineral 
production value in 2013.  
 
Potash was Canada’s leading mineral by the value of production 
in 2013 at 6.1 billion. Uranium was one of Canada’s leading 
minerals by the value of production in 2013 of point seven 
billion. Saskatchewan produces over 90 per cent of Canada’s 
potash production, and one of additional potash mines in New 
Brunswick. 
 
In 2013, 15.8 million tonnes of potash, KCl, was produced from 
the 10 potash mines in Saskatchewan, including eight 
conventional underground mines and two solution mines. 
Potash Corporation owns and operates five mines: Rocanville, 
Allan, Lang, Cory, Patience Lake. 
 
Mosaic company owns, operates mines in Esterhazy — K1 and 
K2 — Colonsay, Belle Plaine; Agrium owns, operates one mine 
at Vanscoy. 
 
All brownfield potash mines have invested in expansion 
projects totalling over 13 billion in the past five years. New 
production headframes and potash corporation at Rocanville, 
Scissors Creek, and Mosaic Esterhazy and K3 are in progress. 
 
Mosaic Esterhazy mine complex is the world’s largest potash 
mine. K+S Potash Canada KP is developing the first new 
greenfield potash mine built in Saskatchewan in nearly 40 
years. Production from the solution mine is targeted for 2016. 
BHP Billiton continues to advance the underground Jansen 



May 11, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2517 

potash project and potential initially production for 2020. 
 
In 2013, Saskatchewan produced 100 per cent of Canada’s 
primary uranium, representing 16 per cent of the world’s 
production from two operating mines: McArthur River and 
Eagle Point. This is a decrease from 2005 when Saskatchewan 
production was represented by 28 per cent of global production. 
In 2014, Cigar Lake uranium mine, commercial production with 
a first shipment of ore being developed in . . . [inaudible] . . . 
lake mine . . . mill. 
 
McArthur River, Eagle Point, and Cigar Lake uranium mine are 
all operating by Cominco corporation, however they all have 
separate ownership structure. The Eagle Point mine is 100 per 
cent owned by Cameco. McArthur River mine is operated by 
Cameco and it’s 69.85 per cent. Areva Resources Canada 
Incorporated is . . . 30 per cent of Cigar Lake mine is owned by 
Cameco. The McArthur River mine is the world’s largest and 
highest grade uranium mine. In 2013, it produced 20.2 million 
pounds, accounted for approximately 14 per cent of the global 
uranium produced. Cigar Lake mine is the world’s 
second-largest uranium mine. When it is in the full production it 
will produce 18 million pounds, 308 per year. 
 
Saskatchewan coal mine in Estevan, Bienfait, and Coronach by 
a coal company represented the primary source of energy in 
Saskatchewan, accounting for 40 per cent of the province’s 
available power capacity and the majority of its baseload 
capacity. 
 
Exploration considered as a key R & D, resource and 
development component of our industry, is a key sustainability 
in the mining industry ensuring that we identify new resources 
and replacing those that have been mined out. The mining 
industry supports government investment in geoscience to 
ensure that they continue to attract new investment capital to 
the province. 
 
Exploration expenditures in 2013 are anticipated to total up to 
297 million. Potash continues to be focused on exploration in 
Saskatchewan, comprising of almost 52 per cent of 
expenditures. Uranium exploration estimated at one point . . . 
122 million, 42 per cent, followed by a base metal of 9.9 
million, gold, and 7.5 million in diamonds. 
 
Saskatchewan had gold production from five sites in 2013. 
Seabee and Santoy alliance operated resources accumulated 
projection under the 44 million ounces of gold. Seabee Gold 
Mine reached a milestone producing 100,000 ounces over in 
August of 2012. Golden Band Resources . . . [inaudible] . . . 
production from Roy Lloyd and Golden Heart mines in 2013 
until operations were suspended in February of 2014. 
 
Saskatchewan has over 25 operating mines producing potash, 
uranium, gold, coal, salt, silica sand, sodium sulphate, and clay, 
and bentonite. In addition, the potash, uranium, and gold and 
coal in Saskatchewan, as a wealth of developing minerals, 
resources including diamonds, platinum, rare earth elements, 
copper, zinc, nickel, sodium, potassium, sulphate, and 
mineralized brines. 
 
The provincial mining industry is recognized as one of the most 
technologically advanced in the world. Mining is a 

collaborative . . . mining in Saskatchewan’s economy directly 
contributing to an average over 1.5 billion in revenue to the 
province, provincial government. These revenues support 
government programs and services such as health care, 
education, and infrastructure development. 
 
Overall in 2008, mining accounted for 7.7 billion in the GDP or 
12 per cent of the total provincial economy. Direct or indirect 
introduced mining employment accounting for 30,500 jobs, 
over 6 per cent of the total employment, one in every 16 jobs 
with a payroll of 1.5 billion. In 2015, the mineral industry of 
Saskatchewan contributed 864 million to the province and 
federal government directly in royalties and taxes. This does not 
include personal income tax or employees or tax collected by 
municipalities. In 2013, the mineral industry in Saskatchewan 
directly contributed over one billion . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Pursuant to rule 27(4) we will 
proceed to move the motion moved by the member from 
Estevan: 
 

That this Assembly commends the Government of 
Saskatchewan for having very attractive mining policies 
which has led Saskatchewan to be ranked the most 
attractive jurisdiction for mining investment in the world. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I believe the . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Recorded division? On division? Oh, oh sorry. 
Call in the members. Call in the members. 
 
[The division bells rang from 12:59 until 13:00.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — All those in favour of the motion 
please rise. 
 

[Yeas — 45] 
 
Wall Moe Stewart 
Wyant Reiter Morgan 
Harpauer Doherty Duncan 
Beaudry-Mellor Hargrave D’Autremont 
Heppner Boyd Cheveldayoff 
Tell Eyre Harrison 
Ottenbreit Weekes Kirsch 
Steinley Makowsky Phillips 
Lawrence Wilson Campeau 
Docherty Michelson Cox 
Olauson Steele Young 
Fiaz Dennis McMorris 
Bonk Nerlien Lambert 
Buckingham Kaeding Sproule 
Forbes McCall Sarauer 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Those members who are opposed to 
the motion, please rise. 
 

[Nays — nil] 
 
Clerk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 



2518 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2017 

45; those opposed, nil. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The motion is carried. It is now past 
the time of adjournment, so this House stands adjourned until 
Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 13:04.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2491 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2491 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2491 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2491 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2492 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2515 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2492 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2492 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2492 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2492 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2493 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Mothers’ Day Tribute 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2493 
 Birthday Celebration for Petit Triplets 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2493 
 Saskatoon Teacher Receives National Award 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2493 
 Saskatchewan Literacy Awards of Merit 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2494 
 Saskatchewan Association of Architects Annual President’s Dinner 
  Buckingham ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2494 
 Aquatic Invasive Species Awareness Week 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2494 
 Saskatchewan Polytechnic School of Nursing Celebrates 50th Anniversary 
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2495 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Details of Land Transactions 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2495 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2495 
 Security of Personal Email Account 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2495 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2496 
 Role of School Boards and Intent of Bill 63 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2496 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2496 
 Support for Post-Secondary Educational Institutions 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2497 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2497 
 Carbon Pricing and Carbon Capture and Storage 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2498 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2498 
 Implementation of Recommendations Regarding Death in Custody 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2498 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2499 
 Drainage Issues and Water Management Strategy 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2499 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2499 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Legislation Regarding Political Donations 
  Forbes ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2500, 2510 
  Dennis ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2502, 2509 
  Sproule ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2503, 2510 
  Bonk ............................................................................................................................................................................... 2504, 2510 
  Meili ............................................................................................................................................................................... 2506, 2509 
  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2508 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2509 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2509 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2510 



 

  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2510 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2510 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 3 — Mining Investment in Saskatchewan 
  Steele ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2511 
 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 2517 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


	ADJOURNED DEBATES
	PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS
	Motion No. 3 — Mining Investment in Saskatchewan
	(continued)

