






















































Hansard: May 04, 2017


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 83A  THURSDAY, MAY 4, 2017, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 

 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 

Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 

 

 

 
 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 

Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 

Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 

Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 

Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 

Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 

Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 

Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 

Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 

Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 

Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 

Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 

Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 

D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 

Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 

Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 

Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 

Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 

Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 

Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 

Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 

Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 

Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 

Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 

Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 

Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 

Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 

Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 

Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 

Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 

Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 

McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 

Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 

Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 

Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 

Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 

Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 

Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 

Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 

Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 

Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 

Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 

Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 

Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 

Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 

Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 

Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 

Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 

Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 

Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 

Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 

Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 

Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 

Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 

Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 

Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 

Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 

Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 

 

 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 11 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2393 
 May 4, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’d request leave of the House 
for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
colleagues, for the leave. You know, Mr. Speaker, if we’re 
fortunate in our vocation, we will find that whatever career we 
choose might give us occasion to make lifelong friends. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I think all would agree that that’s very much the 
case in politics. It’s one of the advantages of being involved in 
politics. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have the honour of introducing to you and 
through you a lifelong friend, a very good friend of mine from 
my home community of Swift Current. And he’s joined by his 
family, Mr. Speaker. I have a few things to say about him, but 
I’ll make the introduction now, if I may. 
 
We have in your gallery today from Swift Current, Bryon 
Campbell. Maybe Bryon could give us a wave. He’s joined by 
his daughters, Sue Stenson, and Patricia Patton is here as well 
— Sue and Pat — and two of his grandkids, Blaine and Kelli, 
Sue’s son and daughter, also son and daughter of the late Rob. I 
graduated with Rob Stenson in Swift Current who himself was 
quite a business leader here right through Western Canada, and 
his efforts are responsible for a lot of new jobs created in our 
province and in Manitoba. And Blaine and Kelli are here as 
well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I got to know Bryon Campbell after first returning 
to Swift Current, having been away for some time. He had 
known my dad, knows my dad well. He was a senior leader in 
the Royal Bank here in this province. He was a regional 
manager for the Royal Bank of Canada in Saskatchewan, and he 
had come to know Dad, I think both in terms of their business 
arrangement, but I think also Dad and my Uncle Frank might 
have moved him and certainly moved his colleagues once or 
twice around the province. 
 
And so I got to know Bryon a little bit through that and through 
politics. I want to share with members of the House that Bryon 
Campbell was my very first campaign manager when I decided 
to run for the nomination of the Saskatchewan Party. He was a 
source of encouragement and counsel and then became my 
campaign manager for the ’99 campaign, where the party was 
only two years old. And so we didn’t perhaps have the 
sophisticated approach to campaigning that we do now. 

I could tell you, though, his history was in banking. His 
instruction to the candidate was not to keep banking hours. If I 
made the mistake of sitting in that campaign headquarters for 
longer than two or three minutes, he would remind me that 
there were no undecided voters in the campaign headquarters 
and to get out and start door knocking. 
 
He did that in ’99, led a successful campaign in those nascent 
years of our party in Swift Current and across the province, and 
then again in ’03 provided campaign leadership, and then again 
in ’07, Mr. Speaker. And he has been just a great source of 
counsel and support and friendship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can also share with members of the House that 
he’s been a leader within our home community. He served on 
the city council in Swift Current. He was one of the original 13 
business leaders in Swift Current that ensured the Swift Current 
Broncos could return to Swift Current from Lethbridge. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I am just honoured to have been able to make 
his friendship and to count him as one of my very, very best 
friends. I am grateful for his advice and for his encouragement. 
Mr. Speaker, may I say I think our party in general is grateful 
for his leadership which went beyond the constituency of Swift 
Current. And to the extent there is a Saskatchewan Party today, 
well Bryon Campbell played a very, very important role. 
 
So in the company and the presence of his family, it is a great 
honour for me to say for the public record how grateful I am to 
him personally, to thank him personally, to welcome him and 
his family here today. And I’d ask all members to join with me 
in welcoming Bryon and his family to the Legislative Assembly 
today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just to follow 
up briefly with the Premier here, in the introduction to Bryon 
Campbell, I welcome him to his Assembly. Obviously he’s 
worked hard to support the Premier and that party, and it’s 
people like these that actually do strengthen the democratic 
process. And it’s these kind of people that all of us have in our 
own lives and in our political lives that allow us to serve the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
By the thorough introduction, I suspect he . . . You know, we’re 
really trying to encourage candidates for the next team. I 
suspect that Mr. Bryon Campbell won’t be on our team in the 
next round, Mr. Speaker. But I do want to say to him, in his 
efforts within the democratic process in the province of 
Saskatchewan, thank you for your involvement. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would ask 
leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 



2394 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2017 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re joined 
in the gallery by a number of people that are here today for the 
reporting out of committee of Bill 63. We’d like to introduce 
some of the people that have travelled from across the province 
today for their support of our education system. And these are 
people that are representatives of our associate and partner 
schools as well as the Catholic school division. 
 
We’re joined, Mr. Speaker, by Richard Williams, 
superintendent, Seventh-day Adventist Christian School; by 
Andrew Savenye, principal, Seventh-day Adventist Christian 
School in Regina; Karen Landry, principal of Rosthern 
Christian School; Donna Ziegler, Chair of Regina Catholic 
School Board; and Vicky Bonnell, also from Regina Catholic; 
Bryan Hillis, Luther College; Rob Palmarin, Athol Murray 
College of Notre Dame; Wayne Hove, Lutheran Collegiate 
Bible Institute; Todd Harrison, principal of Harvest City 
Christian Academy; Dave Wells, pastor of Harvest City 
Church; Rod Rilling, principal of Regina Christian; Nina 
Brailean, Regina Christian; Rod Donison from the leadership 
impact program, a program dealing with at-risk youth; Curtis 
Kleisinger, executive director, Mother Theresa Middle School; 
Friar John Meehan, president of Campion College. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those people are here in support of the variety and 
diversity that we look to protect and promote in Bill 63. 
 
We’re also joined today, Mr. Speaker, by Jaimie 
Smith-Windsor, who is on the executive of the Saskatchewan 
School Boards Association. 
 
I would ask the members to welcome all of these people to their 
Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to join with the minister opposite in welcoming these 
incredibly valued partners in our publicly funded education 
system, leaders within education, leaders in our community, to 
the Assembly here today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These are people, many of them — I don’t know all of them 
real well but I know some of them quite well — and these are 
individuals and people and schools that enrich the lives of so 
many across Saskatchewan. They work to extend opportunity, 
to extend hope, to ensure challenge and care to so many. And to 
those that are here today, I thank you for your presence, but I 
also extend back to your teams and your staff and your boards 
and your respective organization a heartfelt thanks from a 
grateful opposition. 
 
It’s really a pleasure to have leadership from the Catholic 
schools here today in Vicky Bonnell and in Donna Ziegler, and 
other representation here as well. Of course we meet regularly, 
value the work. We had the chance to sit down earlier this week 
again and certainly that’s of great value. 
 
It’s a pleasure to have leadership of Luther here today, Mr. 
Speaker, President Hillis that’s here today. And you know, I 
think some members on the floor have a relationship. I think the 
Minister of Agriculture once . . . I think he attended with my 
father-in-law, at one point, over at Luther, Mr. Speaker. 

And you know, whether it’s Principal Mark Anderson or 
whether it’s people like legendary Ange Tillier, Mr. Speaker, 
over at Luther, that’s been inspirational to so many and a 
foundation in sport, Mr. Speaker, or friends of mine like Gerry 
Harris or Drew Hunter — just so many that make that program 
strong. 
 
And I have some familiarity with Luther because of course it 
used to be within my riding, Mr. Speaker, but moreover— I 
went to Thom Collegiate, a little further north — but my wife 
was a student at Luther High School, the student president at 
Luther, organizer of the LIT [Luther Invitational Tournament], 
a world-renowned or a North American-renowned basketball 
tournament as well, Mr. Speaker. So I thank them for being 
here. 
 
And I see Father Meehan here of Campion College. This is 
somebody who embodies service to our community. I guess 
what I’d like to do is ask for extended leave so I can continue 
just because these are folks that deserve their due. 
 
So Father Meehan, somebody who serves our community in 
exceptional ways. And somebody, Mr. Speaker, who I see in a 
selfless way interact with our community, really putting his 
faith into action, Mr. Speaker, and somebody that I know that’s 
deeply committed to reconciliation as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I see we have folks here from Notre Dame as well. I mean this 
is in many ways . . . For many when they think of 
Saskatchewan, they may think of Notre Dame through the 
historic efforts as a development for players and teams — and 
Rod Brind’Amour, through Wendel Clark and Curtis Joseph. 
Mr. Speaker, it’s really quite the place. 
 
And I see Curtis Kleisinger up there and leadership of Mother 
Teresa Middle School, an inspirational group of teachers in 
community that wraps supports and care around children, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’d like to identify them. 
 
You know, I know Harvest City’s here, Regina Christian 
School. I suspect I’m missing a few here right now, but I value 
their relationship. 
 
And I guess, Mr. Speaker, as I . . . I find the heckling by the 
Premier of Saskatchewan during an introduction of these 
leaders in their community to be maybe the tackiest thing I’ve 
ever seen on the floor of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. And I 
want to say this, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — It has been a long week. It is Thursday. I 
would ask all members . . . Order. Let us show . . . Let us hear 
the finishing remarks from the Leader of the Opposition on his 
introductions, and we’re going to carry on. Today we’ll have a 
much better decorum in this Assembly than in the past. I 
respectfully ask the Leader of the Opposition to wrap up his 
introductions and not to make them partisan. I recognize the 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of a 
grateful opposition, I’m so thankful to welcome these leaders to 
their Assembly in the face of a very challenging court decision. 



May 4, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2395 

It’s important and incumbent that we work together. We 
support students and stability. We support these schools, and we 
must appeal, Mr. Speaker. So it’s a time where we need to stand 
together. And we don’t need tacky political games, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
University. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. It is my pleasure to join with the minister and the 
member opposite in welcoming some of these fine individuals 
to their Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker. I have many of 
them as constituents of mine, Mr. Speaker, and so I’d like to 
just . . . if they could give a wave to us as I introduce their 
names. 
 
A good friend to many of us here from LeaderImpact, Rod 
Donison, who’s been a very good friend to me; as well Dr. John 
Meehan, the president of Campion College. If you would give a 
wave, sir. I can’t quite see around the thing. I’m an alumnus of 
Campion College; I also had the fortune of teaching at Campion 
College. And so they are important constituents of mine, as is 
Bryan Hillis from Luther College, Mr. Speaker, also a former 
colleague. 
 
I would also like to introduce Nina Brailean from the Regina 
Christian School, which is also in my constituency. Mr. 
Speaker, Rod Rilling is here with her. I would also like him to 
have a wave. And I believe accompanying them — I can’t quite 
see him — is Ian Hanna, a friend to many of us here who is 
seated up in the gallery as well. Would you join me in 
welcoming all these fine individuals to their Legislative 
Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — I request leave for extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I do concur that 
what is needed here is some calmness and some respect. And I 
want to join the members, all members in welcoming many 
guests to our gallery today. 
 
[10:15] 
 
Of course these are issues that we’re discussing about our kids, 
and there is a lot of care and emotion. And that is 
understandable. And I want to commend each of you for being 
here to express your views and your support for publicly funded 
education in this province. It is very important and it’s the 
reason that I stand here. 
 
I want to single out some guests in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, 
that I do know and have a relationship with. Jaimie 
Smith-Windsor, who is a member of the board of Sask Rivers 

Public School Division, who makes her home in Waskesiu. We 
started I think as trustees in the same group, and you stood out 
right away as someone who was passionate and articulate and 
was there for the right reasons. And I want to welcome you to 
your Assembly. 
 
A couple of other people up there I see, I see Donna Ziegler and 
Vicky Bonnell, and people that I had the real privilege to sit 
around many tables, joint tables with the Regina Public School 
Board and the Catholic School Board, and found many points, 
so many points of common interest. And I want to welcome you 
to your Assembly. 
 
I want to single out all of the folks from Luther, but particularly 
Dr. Bryan Hillis, who I think he remembers was a professor of 
mine when I was a student at Luther College. And at the risk of 
seeming like I am sucking up, it really was one of the best 
classes I ever took. I had an opportunity . . . It was a 
intersectional class around the intersections of sociology and 
philosophy and religion, and it really was a special class. I want 
to welcome you to your Assembly. 
 
The folks from Notre Dame. I’ll throw this in — my dad had 
the opportunity to play hockey for Père Murray at one point, 
and that is something that he will talk about at length. I come 
from Lang, not too far down the road from Notre Dame, and it 
is a place that holds a special place in the history of this 
province, and certainly the hockey history of this province. Mr. 
Speaker, I really do think it is important. 
 
I see Curtis from Mother Teresa Middle School. When I was 
the assistant director at Regina Transition House, we entered 
into partnership with that school and just had a delightful time 
there with the very special and dedicated students and staff 
there. And I want to welcome him to his Assembly as well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And of course the Harvest City Christian school and the Regina 
Christian School, associate schools within the public school 
system. And you know, I had an opportunity to meet with many 
of their students at the annual student and trustee meeting. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m getting heckled from the other side. And 
it’s not my intent to do anything other than welcome each of 
you and understand that your passion and your dedication to 
students who you represent is to be commended. Thank you. 
Welcome, and I invite all members to welcome you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Well thanks, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to take 
a little less time than a few others here in the introductions. But 
Coronation Park, the constituency of Coronation Park is well 
represented today and, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got one of the most 
diverse populations and school divisions in all the province. 
And I’d like to take an opportunity here to welcome a few folks. 
Dave Wells, pastor from Harvest City, can you give us a wave? 
Dave, welcome, and Todd Harrison, the principal from Harvest 
City. You do some marvellous work, and thanks again for 
everything you do on behalf of the constituency and the 
students at Harvest City. 
 



2396 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2017 

I’d also like to take a second here to single out Curtis 
Kleisinger, executive director of Mother Teresa Middle School. 
I’ve had an opportunity to be in Mother Teresa on many, many 
occasions. And there was one occasion when the member for 
Gardiner Park and I tried to win a cake-building contest. And 
we didn’t win, but for the love of God, we tried. 
 
But anyway, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of again all members here, 
Mother Teresa has done an exemplary job in teaching and 
mentoring vulnerable students. I just want to ensure that they 
understand the tremendous job that you do and you need to be 
recognized for that. So, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of all members 
and especially Coronation Park, thank you for everything 
you’ve done in regards to teaching our youth. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to certainly . . . If I 
could ask for leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just 
want to join with those welcoming the partners throughout the 
education system that are here today. But I particularly want to 
say a special word of welcome and thanks to a former professor 
of mine, a former teacher of mine, and I’m talking about Dr. 
Bryan Hillis of course. And certainly he did his best with me, 
Mr. Speaker, and we’re certainly appreciative of those efforts. 
 
I also want to say, as a Campion grad, I want to say to Father 
John Meehan, really good to see you here at your Legislative 
Assembly. And again those that would say Father John 
Meehan’s a real force for not just education but reconciliation in 
this province, they’ve got that exactly right. And it’s always 
good to see, you know, it’s always . . . Is it Father Dr. John or 
Dr. Father John? But anyway, good to see him here at his 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
And I also want to say, to Vicky Bonnell and Donna Ziegler 
from the Regina Catholic School Board, a special word of 
welcome. And it’s too bad that you weren’t here the other day 
when the member from Coronation Park was congratulating 
himself and his government for the new building at Sacred 
Heart Community School. It would have been great to see how 
that went over. Because of course these are two individuals that 
we owe that school and the great work being done for those 
students, we owe them so much, Mr. Speaker. So on behalf of 
the community of North Central in Regina Elphinstone-Centre, 
I want to say thank you so much for all that you did, 
particularly as regards Sacred Heart Community School. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with that I’d ask all members to join me in 
welcoming these very important people to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Quickly and respectfully, to all members of this House, I’d like 
to welcome a couple of individuals. First and foremost, Mr. 
Speaker, from the great community of Rosthern, Saskatchewan, 
is Karen Landry. She’s also the principal of the Rosthern 
Christian School in that community, Mr. Speaker, and down to 
observe the proceedings in the House here today. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I also would like to make mention of a board 
trustee of the Saskatchewan Rivers School Division, Jaimie 
Smith-Windsor, who I’ve had the opportunity, along with other 
MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] from the region, 
to have numerous meetings over the last number of years on 
important issues to that school division, as many of those 
schools are also in the constituency of Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in welcoming 
these individuals to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
make a couple of introductions. You know, last night we were 
in committee about Bill 63 and people stayed late into the 
evening. There are a couple people who are back here this 
morning, very concerned about the passage of Bill 63. 
 
And first I want to recognize Jackie Christianson over in the 
west gallery. Jackie is with CUPE [Canadian Union of Public 
Employees], the educational assistants who make our schools 
the schools that do the great work that they do. And also Tria 
Donaldson, also in the east gallery, of CUPE, again was here 
late into the evening watching the proceedings and the . . . the 
proceedings. And I’ll leave that at that. 
 
Also in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, are four very special guests 
who are very concerned about the privatization processes of this 
government now that it’s becoming more and more clear, are 
some folks with the Saskatchewan Transportation Company 
that are very concerned of the impact this has on the people of 
Saskatchewan throughout this province and how it seems this 
government has forgotten its way. These four members of the 
Amalgamated Transit Union are here to watch the proceedings, 
and they are Eric Carr, Clem Balanoff, Elana Kessler, and Ken 
Younghans. I would ask all members to join all of these people 
to their legislature. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I’ll 
join with colleagues from both sides of the House to welcome 
members of the education sector here, particularly Dr. Hillis 
who I’ve been able to get to know very well. 
 
I’ve been able to bring greetings to LIT for five years in a row, 
to open up their wonderful, longest-standing basketball 
tournament across Canada, I believe. And it’s a wonderful 
experience to see all the students take part in LIT. And it’s just 
a great event and shows the spirit of that school and it’s a 
wonderful . . . And hopefully I can go for five more years, Dr. 
Hillis. 
 



May 4, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2397 

And a good friend of mine from Mother Teresa School, Curtis 
Kleisinger, we played hockey together years and years ago. And 
Klinger was always a little bit faster than me, but I protected 
him on occasion. So it’s good to see you. Welcome to your 
Legislative Assembly. And the work that you do at Mother 
Teresa School, I’ve been able to visit there a couple times and 
it’s fantastic. 
 
And, Vicky and Donna, welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 
And, Vicky, I wish you were here when the member from 
Elphinstone voted against building a school in his constituency. 
That would have been something to see as well. So I wish all 
members would welcome these educators to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege 
to introduce, has been introduced already, but Rob Palmarin 
from Athol Murray College in Notre Dame. 
 
As many of us are doing on this side of the House, we’re 
introducing members that represent schools that are sitting in 
our constituency. As I jumped up to introduce Rob from Notre 
Dame, I realized it’s not in my constituency anymore. After five 
years and now redistribution, it’s in the member from 
Lumsden-Morse’s constituency. Sorry about that. 
 
I won’t go on to stories of my dealings with Notre Dame, 
coming from Milestone in that area, and playing a lot of sports, 
because none of them ended very well. So I’d just like to 
welcome him here. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, I’d like to introduce and welcome a constituent of 
mine who lives up in the beautiful national park, Prince Albert 
National Park. And, Jaimie Smith-Windsor, please be 
welcomed to the Assembly. We appreciate your service for all 
that you’ve done for Saskatchewan citizens. Thank you very 
much. Please welcome Jaimie to her Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, today marks 387 days 
since Mekayla Bali went missing from Yorkton, my hometown. 
It’s Missing Persons Week, and to you and through you to all 
members of the Assembly, it’s my honour to introduce her 
family seated on the floor of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker: 
Mekayla’s mother, Paula — can you give us a wave, Paula? — 
her siblings Joshua and Eliyora, grandma Margaret, and aunt 
Rhonda. Today you can notice they’re all wearing the same 
colour. It’s teal. It’s Mekayla’s favourite colour, and they wear 
that whenever they talk about their missing loved one. And 
joining the family today is a good friend of mine, Leonard 
Keshane. He is from Parkland Victims Services, as well as the 
former chief of Keeseekoose First Nation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mekayla’s disappearance is a sobering reminder 
that this could happen to anyone. Our hearts are with the Bali 
family, Mr. Speaker, and those in Saskatchewan with missing 

loved ones. We met earlier this morning with the government 
caucus and the family, and I will meet a little bit later with the 
Minister of Justice, talk about their story. I’d ask that both sides 
of the House join me in praying for Mekayla’s safe return, Mr. 
Speaker, and encourage the public to be informed about 
Mekayla’s very public disappearance and the family’s very 
public search, and help bring Mekayla home, Mr. Speaker. I ask 
all members to welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official 
opposition, I just want to say a word of welcome to the Bali 
family. And certainly . . . It was little less than a year ago that I 
had the privilege of being out on the streets of Regina, walking 
with the Bali family and spreading the word about Mekayla. 
 
And it’s hard to see you here today, because of course that time 
has gone on, and I can only imagine the toll that that takes. But 
if there’s some encouragement to be drawn from this, know that 
Mekayla is not forgotten and that that search will go on. And 
may your prayers be answered some day, and very soon. But on 
behalf of the official opposition, I just want to say a word of 
welcome and encouragement that Mekayla is not forgotten. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you and to all members of the House, I’d like to 
introduce 38 students from École St. Margaret in Moose Jaw, 
our fair city. They’re from grade 4 and grade 7. And they’re 
accompanied by their teacher . . . there’s actually three of them, 
so they must be quite a group, but grade 4 and 7. We have 
Madame Jamie Forrest — just give us a wave. Monsieur 
Clayton Boyer. And if I screw up the pronunciation, pardon me. 
Monsieur Jean-Yves Savoie. Thank you, and welcome them to 
their Legislative Building. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
morning we had introductions of a number of worthy guests 
involved in the education field, but I think the reason that 
education is such a hot topic and a passionate topic is because 
of the students sitting in our gallery today. There’s another 
school group, a small school group from the great community 
of Ituna. Members might remember that Ituna was a finalist in 
the Kraft Hockeyville competition. 
 
[10:30] 
 
And so I’d like to introduce nine grade 8 students who are 
accompanied by their teacher, Cindy Yanko. They’re sitting in 
the second row on the west gallery, along with Angie Polegi as 
one of the chaperones, and Wesley Kanciruk, the bus driver. 
And I apologize if I perhaps mispronounced that last name. I’ll 
be meeting with them later, Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure they’ll 
have lots of questions for me. And so I’d ask all members to 
welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
North. 



2398 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2017 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
just want to join my colleague from Moose Jaw Wakamow in 
welcoming the students from St. Margaret’s. Many of the 
students from St. Margaret’s also live in Moose Jaw North. And 
my grandson attended that school for five years, and I know the 
good work that they do in St. Margaret’s. So I want to extend a 
welcome to them as well. So welcome, and thank you. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again to present a petition opposing the Sask Party’s cuts to 
spiritual care. Mr. Speaker, it was interesting, just a few days 
ago in committee we had an opportunity to talk about spiritual 
care, and the minister told me there was some inequity in 
service: not every health region had spiritual care, this 
important service. So instead of expanding it, Mr. Speaker, 
they’ve chosen to cut it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The petitioners point out that in this last budget, the Sask Party 
has eliminated funding for spiritual care services within our 
health facilities. They point out that we will be the only 
province within Canada to not fund this support for patients, 
residents, and their families seeking wellness. The petitioners 
point out that the Sask Party hid their plan to scrap funding 
from spiritual care in health region facilities in the last election, 
which was just over a year ago, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They point out that spiritual care responds to the spiritual and 
emotional needs of patients and residents and provides a 
compassionate listening presence in times of crisis. And they 
point out that spiritual care supports families, patients, and 
residents in making difficult decisions, and lastly that spiritual 
care can provide support for all families, patients, and residents 
in obtaining comfort and support, regardless of faith or belief, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
immediately reinstate the funding for spiritual care services 
in this province’s health region facilities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens of Prince 
Albert. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We’re all very concerned that the federal-imposed carbon tax 
would have severe negative consequences to the Saskatchewan 
economy. And furthermore, a federal-imposed carbon tax does 
absolutely nothing to reduce carbon; it’s simply an unfair tax 
grab. I’d like to read the prayer: 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on our 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed from citizens from 
Briercrest, from Caron, from Goodeve, from Moose Jaw, from 
Bienfait, and Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand 
in my place today to answer the call from the member from 
Prince Albert Northcote for anyone in the Assembly, anyone to 
stand up and help fight for the city of Prince Albert, the city of 
bridge, where the community and the region of the northern part 
of the province are asking for a second bridge for Prince Albert. 
I’m very proud to stand in my place to answer that call to 
support the member from Prince Albert Northcote. 
 
And the need for a second bridge for Prince Albert has never 
been clearer than it is today. Prince Albert and all the 
communities north of Prince Albert and all the businesses of 
Prince Albert and north that send people and products through 
Prince Albert require a solution and leadership. So the prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker. They ask: 
 

That the Sask Party government stop stalling and hiding 
behind rhetoric, and refusing to listen to the people of 
Saskatchewan calling for action, and begin immediately to 
plan and then quickly commence the construction of a 
second bridge for Prince Albert using federal and 
provincial dollars. 

 
And as we do day after day, week after week, and month after 
month, and now year after year, Mr. Speaker, we are presenting 
this petition. And the people that have signed this petition are 
from all throughout Saskatchewan. And on this particular page, 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this page are primarily 
from Prince Albert, and I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today to 
present a petition to ensure job security for victims of domestic 
violence. The people who have signed this petition want to 
bring to our attention the following: Saskatchewan has the 
highest rate of domestic violence by intimate partners amongst 
all Canadian provinces. Citizens of Saskatchewan are concerned 
about the lack of support for victims of domestic abuse, and one 
in three Canadian workers have been impacted by domestic 
violence, and for many, the violence follows them to work. 
Financial stability and a supportive work environment are vital 
for any victim of domestic abuse, and victims of domestic abuse 
should not be further victimized at work. Employers lose $77.9 
million annually due to the direct and indirect impacts of 
domestic violence. 
 
Employers are responsible for providing safe workplaces. 
Manitoba has already enacted such legislation. Ontario is on its 



May 4, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2399 

way to enacting legislation. We’ve introduced a private 
member’s bill to do similar work here, Mr. Speaker, and these 
bills ensure that job security is provided for victims of domestic 
violence. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan enact 
legislation that requires all employers to provide a 
minimum of five paid workdays and a minimum of 17 
weeks of unpaid work leave with the assurance of job 
security upon their return for all victims of domestic abuse 
in Saskatchewan. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the individuals who have signed this 
petition today are from the communities of Swift Current and 
Cadillac. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition again on pay equity. And the undersigned residents of 
the province of Saskatchewan want to bring to our attention the 
following: that the citizens of this province believe in an 
economy powered by transparency, accountability, security, and 
equity, and that all women should be paid equitably; that 
women are powerful drivers of economic growth, and their 
economic empowerment benefits us all. 
 
We know that the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives 
found that in Saskatoon in 2016, women earned on average 63 
cents for every dollar that a man makes, and in Regina women 
earned on average 73 cents for every dollar a man makes. 
According to the most recent StatsCan data, the national gender 
wage gap for full-time workers is 72 cents for every dollar a 
man makes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan eliminate 
the wage gap between women and men across all sectors 
where the Government of Saskatchewan has jurisdiction, 
provide a framework under which this can be done within 
this term of the Assembly, and that the Saskatchewan 
government call upon workplaces within Saskatchewan 
within the private sector to eliminate the wage gap between 
women and men. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition today come 
from Pleasantdale, Chaplin, and Saskatoon. I do so present. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure today to stand 
and present a petition to increase the funding to Prince Albert 
mobile crisis. Due to a cut in funding, Prince Albert mobile 
crisis unit has had to close its door during daytime hours, 
resulting in a loss of resource to people in distress. And since 

it’s Mental Health Week, I feel it’s important to identify the 
role that these crisis workers play with addressing mental health 
issues in the community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the crisis workers are trained to identify 
individuals struggling with mental health issues, and they’re 
aware of the services available for individuals needing mental 
health services. And studies show that if individuals get 
services as soon as they need them, the services they need later 
on is minimal, and it’s a cost-saving measure to ensure that we 
have the crisis services available immediately. 
 
But one of the important things, Mr. Speaker, is that these crisis 
intervention workers are trained to use the suicide risk 
assessment so they can evaluate the level of risk of suicide for 
clients, and they know exactly what kind of services they need 
due to the level of risk that they present at. And so it’s really 
crucial that we have crisis intervention services available 24 
hours, 7 days a week in our third-largest city, which is Prince 
Albert. 
 
The daytime closure of Prince Albert mobile crisis has put 
stress on Prince Albert Police Service, the Victoria Hospital 
staff, and other agencies who are not trained or qualified to 
provide this counselling and intervention services to clients. I’ll 
read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to increase funding to 
Prince Albert mobile crisis unit so they may once again 
offer 24-hour emergency crisis service. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing this particular petition 
come from the community of Prince Albert and actually come 
from Prince Albert Carlton constituency. And they’re hoping 
that their member is paying attention today. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition in support of scrapping Bill 63. Those who’ve signed 
this petition want to draw our attention to the following, and 
unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this may be their last chance to 
have their voices heard. 
 
They want us to know that they are opposed to changing The 
Education Act with Bill 63 as it currently reads until the 
government takes part in active, good faith, transparent 
conversations with the Saskatchewan School Boards 
Association. They want transparency and agreement upon all, if 
any, changes to The Education Act. They want us to know that 
it’s imperative that the government recognizes that there must 
be an appropriate time frame in which elected boards are able to 
convey all information of decisions that will affect their 
communities. They want us to know that they wish the 
government would recognize that local school boards are the 
voice of Saskatchewan communities and that decisions should 
remain with such elected boards. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 



2400 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2017 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan repeal Bill 
63 and preserve governance of elected school boards. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these signatures again, as well as the emails, have 
been rolling in from around the province. The particular pages 
that I am presenting today are from Yellow Grass, Weyburn, 
Fillmore, Indian Head, Fort Qu’Appelle, Edgeley, Halbrite, 
Lang, McLean, Wolseley, Balgonie, Cowessess, Midale, 
Estevan, and McTaggart. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are people who . . . I recognize many of 
these names. They are not necessarily our supporters, but they 
are supporters of publicly funded education, and they want this 
bill scrapped. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition calling on 
the government to restore funding to post-secondary 
institutions. In recent years, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen a 
precipitous drop in the number of students from lower income 
families accessing post-secondary education. And we’ve seen a 
significant rise in the costs of education, with Saskatchewan 
students paying among the highest rates of tuition in the 
country. 
 
In this budget, Mr. Speaker, we saw once again this government 
choosing to cut post-secondary education, with a 5.6 per cent 
cut to universities and colleges, a cut that’s already resulted in 
job losses at Sask Polytechnic, that is likely to result in more 
job and program losses and increases in costs for students. 
Alongside this we’ve seen a decrease in student aid and the 
elimination of the tax credit for students on tuition and books, 
Mr. Speaker. As a result, education is becoming less affordable 
and less accessible. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately restore 
funding to Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions and 
stop the damaging cuts to our students. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing the petition today are from 
Saskatoon. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. The people who have signed this petition are opposed 
to the Sask Party’s plan to scrap and the sell-off of the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company. They would like us all 
to know that STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company] 
provides a vital service to many seniors, workers, and their 
families throughout the province, and that by scrapping STC 
out of the blue and without asking permission of the owners, the 
Saskatchewan people, the Sask Party is sending a clear sign 
about how little they care about protecting our Crowns like 
SaskTel; and that STC helps drive the economy with a parcel 
service that serves farms and other businesses. Mr. Speaker, I’ll 
read the prayer: 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately stop 
the plan to scrap and sell off Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company, and to resume transportation services to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 

 
It is supported by many leaders and it is signed by thousands 
and thousands of Saskatchewan residents. I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Mosaic K3 Mine Grand Opening 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you. Yesterday, I and the Speaker had 
the honour of attending a major event in my constituency and 
the Speaker’s hometown, the grand opening of the Mosaic 
Esterhazy K3 mine. This milestone is historic for Mosaic and 
for the province as K3 is the first production shaft to be sunk in 
this province in almost 50 years. 
 
Mosaic has invested $3.2 billion to increase the capacity of the 
mine to 21 million tonnes per year when it’s completed by 
2024. The new expansion is expected to extend the life of this 
mine by another 50 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this mine was already the largest underground 
potash mine in the world, and with this expansion it will 
continue to be for decades to come. This mine also has the 
distinction of having the tallest structure between Winnipeg and 
Calgary, with massive facilities that are almost beyond your 
imagination. 
 
This investment is a major employer in the region and a huge 
economic driver in the province. The continued expansion, even 
in the midst of commodity price uncertainty, speaks to the 
resiliency and strength of the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
Our government has been working tirelessly to make sure that 
Saskatchewan is a great place to live, work, and invest, and this 
mine expansion is further proof that the policies of this 
government are working. That is why there is no surprise when 
the Fraser Institute named Saskatchewan the most attractive 
place in the world for mining investment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
Mosaic, their employees, and the local community on the grand 
opening of the expansion at the K3 mine in Esterhazy. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Wastewater Project at Co-op Refinery Complex Wins 
Global Water Award 

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize 
the innovative work of a great Saskatchewan company. 
Recently the wastewater improvement project at the Co-op 
Refinery Complex was named industrial project of the year at 
the annual Global Water Awards held in Madrid, Spain on April 
24th, 2017. The award recognizes the project commissioned in 
2016 as the most impressive technical or environmental 



May 4, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2401 

achievement in the field of industrial water. 
 
Mr. Speaker, several years ago the refinery expanded its 
operations to produce 30,000 more barrels of oil per day, taking 
it from 100,000 barrels to 130,000 barrels per day, which of 
course increased its water usage. 
 
The refinery’s water source was a blend of wells and city water, 
and of course water is a precious resource. And this wastewater 
improvement project allows the refinery to be efficient and 
sustainable, actually recovering every drop of water, recycling 
100 per cent of the wastewater — 2 million gallons daily, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
With GE’s [General Electric] technology, in this project all the 
wastewater is recovered in a socially responsible and 
environmentally sound way that conserves water for Regina and 
the entire province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in recognizing 
Federated Co-op and the Co-op Refinery Complex’s leadership 
and investment in this meaningful, world-leading project. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 
 

Yorkton Minor Football Hosts Football Night in 
Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was great 
to take part in the 11th annual Cornerstone Credit Union 
Yorkton Football Night in Saskatchewan. It was a star-studded 
event, raising money to make sure that the ability to pay does 
not keep young people from playing football. The hall was 
filled with guests who made sure the event was successful. And 
the many local sponsors made sure the minor football club will 
be well supported for another year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, like every other year, there was a solid group of 
speakers. That included Hall of Famer Dan Farthing, who 
opened the event, and Grey Cup-winning coach Paul LaPolice 
was the keynote speaker. All the speakers did very well, but Mr. 
Speaker, LaPolice really stood out, speaking about how 
leadership should be humble and selfless, and how to treat 
others. It was a powerful message. 
 
Mr. Speaker, like many communities across the province, there 
are hard-working people who make events like this happen, 
dedicating countless hours into organizing, coordinating, and 
making sure that the event goes off without a hitch, and I would 
like to acknowledge some of these. These people are Barry 
Sharpe, former teacher of the Yorkton Regional High School; 
Darcy Zaharia; Sheri Trapp, formerly of the Roughriders; Roby 
Sharpe, teacher of the Yorkton Regional High School; and 
Jason Farrell, among many others. 
 
This annual football night also has close connections to my 
colleague, the member from Gardiner Park, who got honourable 
mentions time and time again throughout the evening, as he 
spoke at the first event as well as the event last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
Yorkton Minor Football on another successful football night 

and thank everyone who helped make it happen. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 

Students Mobilizing Against Cuts 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Students Mobilizing 
Against Cuts, or SMAC, is a group of university students that 
has organized an impressive five-day series of positive and 
creative actions in opposition to this government’s cuts to 
advanced education and cuts to vital services that support our 
post-secondary students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our province’s post-secondary students have been 
hit particularly hard by this budget. From cuts to funding to the 
elimination of tax deductions on textbooks and tuition fees, the 
Sask Party government is making over-burdened students pay 
even more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’ve been no shortage of protests against the 
Sask Party cuts, both here on the steps of the legislature and in 
every corner of the province. Saskatchewan people want 
change, and it’s very clear why. From education to health care 
to jobs, the Sask Party government’s cuts are hurting 
Saskatchewan people. Earlier this week, we saw a member 
opposite rise with what appeared to be absolute glee at the 
opportunity to criticize these protests with no insight into the 
way this government’s actions have left people hurt and angry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, thousands of people from across our province 
have united against these heartless cuts. Instead of pointing 
fingers, this government should take the opportunity to listen to 
the valuable messages people are desperately trying to bring to 
their attention. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me today 
in recognizing Students Mobilizing Against Cuts and all the 
other individuals, groups, and organizations who’ve mobilized 
in positive, creative resistance to this government’s 
short-sighted cuts. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 

Honouring our Lifeblood Event 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on May 1st 
I had the honour to attend the Honouring our Lifeblood event 
along with numerous blood and stem cell donors, volunteers, 
community groups, and the partners of Canadian Blood 
Services at the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] 
Heritage Centre. 
 
The evening focused on celebrating the unseen heroes within 
our province — the individuals who ensure those who need 
blood, blood products, stem cells, organs, or tissue. Mr. 
Speaker, throughout the evening I had the privilege to 
personally meet and listen to all the attendees who have had 
personal experiences and connections with ever-so-important 
blood product donations. It was an eye-opening experience to 
hear how donations have saved and healed countless individuals 
within our province and in our country. 
 
I stand here today to not only share my experience in this event, 



2402 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2017 

but to also advocate for the importance of donating blood 
because the fact of the matter is that half of all Canadians will 
either need blood or know someone who does need blood. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I would like to share my sincere 
appreciation and gratitude towards Canadian Blood Services 
who provide an essential service to individuals in our province 
and in our country. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Regina Pats Players Honoured at 
Western Hockey League Awards 

 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is an exciting time 
of year to be a Pats fan, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the Regina Pats 
were given four awards at the 2017 Western Hockey League 
Award Luncheon in Calgary. Pats head coach John Paddock 
was awarded both Coach of the Year and Executive of the Year. 
He has been a mentor and a leader to his young athletes, 
keeping them calm during the ups and downs of a regular 
season, and during the current playoff run. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Sam Steel was named WHL [Western Hockey 
League] Player of the Year. Not only is he an exceptional 
athlete, but a role model for all young boys and girls who look 
forward to cheering him on week by week, hoping that one day 
they can be just like him. 
 
Lastly, the Regina Pats were awarded the NHL [National 
Hockey League] Marketing and Business Award of the year. 
The owner group and business group teams work seven days a 
week to ensure that the dedicated fans and players are well 
taken care of as they continue to pack the stands in honour of 
the Princess Patricia’s Canadian Light Infantry. From 
continuous game sell-outs to exciting between-period 
entertainment, this group has provided a high-quality, 
family-friendly entertaining event for fans of all ages. 
 
The city is still buzzing from the incredible game six win 
against the Lethbridge Hurricanes this past Sunday. And the 
momentum is building as we are now just four wins away from 
the Memorial Cup. The WHL finals start tomorrow, with the 
Pats hosting the Seattle Thunderbirds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if I also didn’t mention Ethan 
Bear from Ochapowace, who won defenceman of the year over 
Connor Hobbs. And a leader within the Seattle Thunderbirds, 
Turner Ottenbreit, who will be here on Friday, and his uncle is 
looking forward to watching him play. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me and Greg in 
congratulating the Regina Pats. Go Pats go. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Springtime in the Country 
 
Mr. Nerlien: — Mr. Speaker, the calendar tells us that March 
20th is the first day of spring. We in rural Saskatchewan will 
tell you that it is a much more personal thing: 

When the morning dew is past and the frogs begin to croak 
When the last remnants of flax straw will soon turn to smoke 
 
When the snowbirds are all back from annual vacation 
When spring auction sales are abuzz with anticipation 
 
When kids of all ages are cold and wet and from each you hear 
a shriek 
When someone is catching the first fish now running in the 
creek 
 
When the smells of stew and biscuits reach out from open 
window 
When spring cleaning leaves room for early tomato plants to 
grow 
 
When talk around the kitchen table moves from winter woe 
When the neighbours start deliberating on exactly what to grow 
 
When the kids are in the yard with each a stick or hoe 
When learning how water flows is something they must know 
 
When last year’s crops are hauled to town, bills paid, and credit 
let 
When seed drills, tractors, and till equipment is technically set 
 
When each new calf is born and smells of first fields tilled 
When robins sing their joyful sound and first steaks are outdoor 
grilled. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know spring is really here, and it is for that 
reason we wish all of our agriculture community a safe and 
productive planting season. Thank you. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Question of Privilege 
 
The Speaker: — Earlier today the Government House Leader 
raised a question of privilege under the provisions of rule 12 of 
the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan. Upon receipt of this notice, in accordance with 
the rules, both House leaders were informed of the details of the 
case and the proposed question of privilege. 
 
It is the responsibility of the Speaker to determine if a prima 
facie case of privilege has been established. Contempt of this 
Assembly is a serious charge which requires careful 
examination of the case and this Assembly’s practices and 
precedents. I wish to inform the Assembly that I have not had 
sufficient time to reach a decision on this question, so for that 
reason, I shall defer my ruling.  
 
Members are not to discuss or debate the matter of the 
possibility of leaked information. This is a very serious charge 
that I do not take lightly. 
 
I ask all members to heighten the decorum in this Assembly. 
We should have vigorous debate in this Assembly on ideas and 
policies, but we should not debate the character of hon. 
members from both sides of the Assembly. 
 
Today in question period, I will have zero patience for any 



May 4, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2403 

members that challenge the principles that this Assembly has 
been built on. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Details of Land Transaction 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — You know, Mr. Speaker, the 
relationship between what the Premier says and what the facts 
are is growing more and more tenuous day after day on front 
after front. And it’s on full display with the Sask Party’s GTH 
[Global Transportation Hub] scandal, from the 300-acre 
giveaway to CP [Canadian Pacific] for free, or the $11 million 
that were given away to two Sask Party supporters, all while the 
nuns and taxpayers got ripped off, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So to the Premier: will he at the very least take some 
responsibility and admit that this 300-acre giveaway happened 
two full years after the Sask Party formed government? And 
will he also finally answer a question that he’s ducked time and 
time again as to when he learned that the original seller of land 
in the Sask Party’s GTH scandal, who of course made millions, 
was also in a direct business relationship with the then minister, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
[11:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the early preamble of the 
member’s question is factually incorrect. I would suggest to 
members opposite we’ve produced cabinet documents that 
show that it was the NDP [New Democratic Party] government 
that allocated $33 million to in part help CPR [Canadian Pacific 
Railway] move the railway tracks to the GTH. Fortunately, Mr. 
Speaker, we think that was the right decision, but we were able 
to reduce the amount, reduce the cost significantly from the 33. 
But, Mr. Speaker, we acknowledge it started under the NDP. 
 
But this is another occasion, I think, where the fact and the 
record needs to be corrected. This is serious. Moments earlier 
this morning, the Leader of the Opposition stood up to profess 
his unqualified support for independent schools, the likes of 
which . . . associate schools, the likes of which are here in the 
gallery today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when he was the Education critic in 2012, here’s 
what he asked of our Minister of Education after we increased 
funding to those very schools. After we increased funding to 
those very schools, he said, his question was, and I quote 
November 15th, 2012 from Hansard: 
 

Will the minister do the right thing? Will he stop diverting 
dollars from a publicly funded education system? 

 
He went on to decry the fact that we were going to fund those 
very schools for which he professed his support. Mr. Speaker, I 
think consistency is important, not just with respect to the GTH 
issue but also with respect to funding of schools in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Intent of Bill 40 and Ownership of Crown 
Corporations 

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that’s a complete 
mischaracterization by the Premier of Saskatchewan, and we 
should suspect nothing less. It’s what we see from him day after 
day with our Crowns, with our finances, with the GTH . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — The root of my question was pretty 
simple. It was, will the Premier come clean? And he said a 
whole lot, but basically to say no. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll try another topic. Yesterday when talking 
about the Sask Party’s schemes to scrap and sell off STC before 
Bill 40 had passed, the Premier said, “The advice was you can’t 
because it’s in the Act. And a wind-down’s not defined, so you 
could consider that a privatization and in violation of the Act.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, just last week, the Minister of Justice, the minister 
responsible for Bill 40, was asked if the Sask Party’s 
privatization bill was needed to scrap, chop up, or sell off STC. 
The minister said, “I would say no.” No, Mr. Speaker. Why has 
this answer changed all of sudden now that Bill 40’s been 
rammed forward and has become law, Mr. Speaker? Why 
wasn’t the Premier of Saskatchewan straight with the people of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there was both views coming 
from the Ministry of Justice and counsel that the government 
relies on with respect to a wind-down. Some were of the view 
that there was a chance that it could be challenged. The 
consensus view was that it probably wouldn’t be successful. 
That’s why the Attorney General would have answered as he 
did. Mr. Speaker, we think that Bill 40 now clarifies the 
situation. 
 
I’m going to challenge the Leader of the Opposition again, 
however, because here’s what else he had to say about the 
schools for which he professed unqualified NDP support. 
November 15 in the House in a question to the government after 
we announced funding to these schools, he said, “Mr. Speaker, 
almost one year ago that government forged ahead, diverting 
dollars from our publicly funded education system into funding 
new private schools.” 
 
Earlier on in March of that same year he said, “. . . this 
government is diverting already thin educational dollars to 
private independent schools. This move [he said] reduces 
equity, standards, and support for students . . .” Well the 
member’s heckling that this is politics. No, Mr. Speaker, this is 
about consistency. 
 
Earlier today members opposite stood in their place and 
professed unqualified support for those schools, and we 
welcome that if they did. But, Mr. Speaker, now is the chance 



2404 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2017 

for the member, the leader, the now interim leader of the NDP 
to stand up and say why just a few short years ago he decried 
funding to those very schools. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier is 
mischaracterizing this, and we should expect nothing less. And 
I guess if the Premier, the comment around new schools, memo 
to the Premier . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Maybe a bit of late-breaking news for 
the Premier, but Luther and Notre Dame, these schools are not 
new in the province of Saskatchewan. They’ve served students 
for years and years and years, Mr. Speaker. But you know, this 
is a Premier that breaks his word and has broken trust with 
Saskatchewan people, and we see that with our Crown 
corporations. 
 
You know, the Premier was far more clear yesterday in a scrum. 
He got the question. When he had a question, he said, quote . . . 
or the question was, “So Bill 40 allowed you to wind down STC 
where you couldn’t have before?” His answer: “Correct.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, after all the bluster on the other side about how 
Bill 40 was nothing more than supposed housekeeping, at least 
the Premier is now finally admitting his true motivations. But 
no one is too excited, Mr. Speaker, because the Premier also 
tried to claim yesterday that “There will be no sell-off of a 
Crown. In fact under the legislation, a sell-off is impossible.” 
Then he tried to desperately pitch his privatization bill as 
something that’s going to “might strengthen the Crown,” Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier tell us how Bill 40 made STC 
stronger? And why didn’t he have the decency and backbone to 
take his . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I have cautioned members not to question the 
character of hon. members. I’ll let the Leader of the Opposition 
finish his question please. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Why wouldn’t have the Premier of 
Saskatchewan at least not taken his Crown sell-off scheme to 
the people of Saskatchewan for a vote? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, as a result of Bill 40 there can 
be no sell-off. That’s the news; that’s the essence of the 
legislation. As a result of Bill 40 introduced and now passed in 
this legislature, privatization of those Crowns cannot happen, 
Mr. Speaker. In fact what can happen, Mr. Speaker, what can 
happen, however, is that Crown corporations can pursue the 
kinds of partnerships that the NDP advocated be pursued. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to read from some NDP talking notes, 
from when they were the government. The talking note is on 
SaskEnergy letterhead. And the issue, it says, is the government 

planning to sell TransGas? Here is the key talking points it 
suggests to the government — to the NDP — of the day: 
 

TransGas is a strong, well-run profitable business. We’re 
always ready and willing to listen to anyone who is [this is 
the NDP now] interested in partnering with us in growing 
Saskatchewan’s energy industry. If and when such a 
business arrangement is finalized, we will announce it. 

 
By the way not before . . . No lobby registry, no disclosure that 
they met with Atco or TCPL [TransCanada Pipelines Limited]. 
That’s what it says. The talking points go on. The NDP talking 
points on this very issue, which would now be enabled by Bill 
40 that they oppose, the final talking point is: 
 

Any business arrangement that we undertake will have two 
conditions. First, it will grow the company and keep jobs in 
Saskatchewan. And second, it will keep control of 
TransGas in the hands of its owners, the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 

 
These NDP talking points could’ve been the drafting terms for 
Bill 40, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Role of School Boards and Intent of Bill 63 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — This is the same very Premier that went 
to the people of Saskatchewan just a year ago, looked them in 
their eyes, and told them that our Crowns are not for sale. And 
now before us we have legislation that allows . . . and schemes 
that are selling up to 49 per cent of all of our Crowns, Mr. 
Speaker. You know, it’s answers like that and the actions of the 
Sask Party that are tearing apart the institutions, the foundations 
of what generations have built and that give us strength. 
 
The Sask Party’s latest bill gives the minister and cabinet 
overrule of local, democratically elected voices overseeing our 
kid’s classrooms. Mr. Speaker, the amendments they brought 
forward do nothing to stop that. They do nothing to prevent the 
Sask Party from doing whatever they want in our kids’ 
classrooms. 
 
They’ve said time and time again, they don’t want this bill. And 
they are trusting the Sask Party less and less; in fact 91 per cent 
of Saskatchewan people are against the Sask Party’s attack on 
education. Mr. Speaker, they want their local voices to remain 
in education. So will the Premier finally do the right thing: 
listen, scrap Bill 63 and his indecent attack on our education 
system? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, incredibly the 
leader, the interim Leader of the NDP just characterized Bill 40 
as an attack on the institutions. Bill 40 would allow for the 
Crowns to partner so long as the people of the province do not 
lose majority control. The government, the people must stay in 
control, but partnerships might be allowed if it strengthens the 
Crowns, if it creates jobs in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just read a memo from the NDP. Now the 



May 4, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2405 

Deputy Leader of the NDP was in the cabinet that approved this 
talking point, and the member for Elphinstone was in the 
Calvert government that approved this plan, and so was the 
member for Saskatoon Centre. They approved a plan. They 
have talking points about how it was absolutely the correct 
thing for them to sell a part of TransGas so long as, so long as: 
 

Any business arrangement that we undertake will have two 
conditions. First, it will grow this company and keep jobs 
in Saskatchewan. And second, it will keep control of 
TransGas in the hands of its owners, the people of the 
province . . .  

 
When they did it, Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t tearing at the fabric of 
the institutions. Mr. Speaker, why in the world do they have a 
different position today, except for politics? 
 
Now with respect to the question of education funding, Mr. 
Speaker, or Bill 63, I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that had Bill 63 
been in existence, this government would have stepped in and 
stopped that lawsuit that has now put in peril and risk the very 
funding to associate schools. It’s risked that funding. It’s risked 
our separate and public system. Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve said 
we’ll use the notwithstanding clause on that particular court 
ruling. The Leader of the NDP has said he would advocate 
considering the notwithstanding clause. 
 
Mr. Speaker, notwithstanding his two different positions he’s 
stated today on funding associate schools, will he at least have 
one position in support of the government to invoke the 
notwithstanding clause, support our public system, our separate 
system, and the chance for us to properly fund faith-based 
schools, Muslim and Christian schools in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — He has been very clear. We support adequate 
funding for all students in this province, and instead of 
dismissing concerns . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Instead of dismissing concerns and recklessly, 
recklessly creating division, it is past time that the Premier and 
the minister start listening to Saskatchewan people and finally 
start standing up for Saskatchewan education. 
 
Last night in committee, it was the same old story. He had no 
defence for why this was a budget bill, not even any defence 
about why he needs these new, overarching powers. Mr. 
Speaker, he uses examples that are over a decade old, and yet he 
has spent the last five years as the Minister of Education and 
did nothing to make any of these changes that he now says are 
so urgent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister has changed course on some of his 
poor decisions before. Will he now, before it’s too late, do the 
right thing and scrap Bill 63? 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the purpose of Bill 63 is to 
make sure that we’ve got some clarity and that we’ve got the 
ability to make sure that we have good decisions that are being 
made. The member opposite talks about decisions that were 
made over 10 years ago. Mr. Speaker, those same decisions are 
problematic in today’s world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we now have situations in the province where 
we’re paying for more than one director in a school division. 
We now have situations where we can’t agree on busing. But, 
Mr. Speaker, most importantly, we have a situation as a result 
of the Theodore school case where we’ve got a situation that’s 
absolutely untenable, to try and move thousands and thousands 
and thousands of students from one school division to another. 
That is something that this government is not about. That’s why 
we’re using the notwithstanding clause. 
 
I’d urge the members across to come on board and support that 
decision. Sooner or later, there will be legislation before the 
House. We’d ask them to stand up for the students of this 
province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, he was a trustee. He was a board 
Chair. And he should know the important role that these local 
voices play, and he should be defending them. Instead, Mr. 
Speaker, the minister loves to use a few examples that he has up 
his sleeve to claim superiority over locally elected trustees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for each of the cases he brings up, he had and 
currently has, without Bill 63, the power to not approve their 
budgets. So, Mr. Speaker, if he is already so proud of the many 
things that are being done in our school system and he already 
has the power to get boards on the honest track but has just 
failed to properly use his discretion, what is the real reason that 
he is ramming Bill 63 forward? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we value the good work 
that school divisions do in our province. We think it’s necessary 
that we have certain abilities to override them. We’ve made 
some House amendments to the bill. And, Mr. Speaker, I want 
to read from a media release from the Saskatchewan School 
Boards Association issued earlier today: 
 

“We appreciate that the government listened to boards and 
the public and has now made some amendments to Bill 
63,” said Dr. Shawn Davidson, president of the SSBA. 
“Trustees are elected to be the voice of public education 
and we think it is vital those roles and responsibilities are 
preserved in law.” 

 
And that’s exactly the amendments that were made to the 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we want to sit down and work with those people, 
develop regulations that work for them and work best for the 
students of our province. That is the commitment that our 



2406 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2017 

government has made — the students of the province, the 
teachers of our province, and the school divisions in our 
province. Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are unable to take 
a position on anything to do with it, and like to walk both sides 
of the street. And, Mr. Speaker, we will hold them to account. 
 
[11:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, the minister is being very selective 
with his quotes today, and this bill is about giving the minister 
full control over our school divisions, period. The Sask Party is 
running roughshod over Saskatchewan people, and the 
amendments do nothing to change that. Mr. Speaker, the SSBA 
[Saskatchewan School Boards Association], the STF 
[Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation], school divisions, parents, 
and teachers all oppose this scheme to silence local voices in 
education and giving all decision-making powers to the minister 
and to the Sask Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was only after the Sask Party rushed Bill 40 into 
law that they finally admitted the truth about their motivations 
for that bill. Will the minister show that he has learned from 
that mistake? Will he come clean with the real reasons that he’s 
ramming Bill 63 through? What schools does he want to close? 
How many divisions does he want to amalgamate or eliminate? 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — We proposed amendments to the 
legislation, amendments that were asked for by the SSBA. Do 
you know who voted against those amendments? The members 
opposite. Mr. Speaker, the members opposite talk about 
wanting to close schools. Mr. Speaker, I’ve sat in this House 
and stood in this House, and I’ve read from a list of 176 schools 
closed by the members opposite. The members opposite cannot 
come into this House and walk both sides of the street. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have yet to take a firm position on the 
Theodore school case. Mr. Speaker, that decision will have very 
profound impact on our system as it is now. It will affect 
separate schools. It will affect associate schools. It will affect 
independent schools; qualified independent, historical high 
schools. Mr. Speaker, we want to work through that. We want 
to be able to give parents and schools protection, Mr. Speaker, 
and I don’t hear it coming from over there. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 

Closing of Saskatchewan Transportation Corporation 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier admitted they 
needed Bill 40 to scrap STC, period. But they didn’t do their 
homework. They didn’t even look into the true costs of 
scrapping and selling off STC — the cost to people’s health, the 
cost to the economy, and to the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re slashing jobs and abandoning 
Saskatchewan people. The corrections, health care, social 
services, library, and on and on will all need to pay someone 
else to do what STC did so well. But the minister told me this 

week in committee that the Sask Party didn’t even look into the 
true cost. Mr. Speaker, how could they be so irresponsible to 
the workers, their families, and all of Saskatchewan people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I’ve said 
in the past many times, Mr. Speaker, it was a very difficult 
decision to wind down STC, especially as it affected, the effect 
it had on the 224 hard-working employees of STC, Mr. 
Speaker. And I want to thank those employees for their service, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, we did have to look again at the overall 
business: the subsidy going from $25 in 2007 all the way up to 
$94, Mr. Speaker, with the ridership declining 35 per cent since 
2012 and down 18,000 rides just in the past year, Mr. Speaker. 
That was just unsustainable, Mr. Speaker, for us to continue 
operating at that level. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I must remind people that the NDP were cutting 
routes in 1993-94, Mr. Speaker, when that subsidy was only 
$2.18. And it was $94 now, Mr. Speaker, so I feel we were very 
justified. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

Status of Saskatchewan Government Insurance 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let’s recap: the 
Education minister who says the Sask Party should be able to 
overrule any local school board at any time, the Premier who 
after months of Sask Party denials finally admitted that they 
needed Bill 40 to scrap STC, then we had the Minister of STC 
who wants to split hairs about what is and what is not a 
meeting. And now we know that when minister after minister 
and even the Premier said there were no offers on the table, the 
Minister for SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] admits 
that, in reality, is there were 11 offers on the table. Mr. Speaker, 
now we’re hearing that SGI employees are being warned of a 
possible sell-off. 
 
Mr. Speaker, whatever happened to being held accountable? 
Whatever happened to looking the people of Saskatchewan in 
the eye and telling them the truth? Mr. Speaker, what is their 
plans for SGI? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister in charge of SGI. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Mr. Speaker, you know, I would . . . 
As often we have to do in this House, I need to stand and 
correct some of the statements made by the members opposite. 
Yesterday the Leader of the Opposition said that on Tuesday 
night in committee when asked about SGI, I had skirted and 
dodged questions. 
 
The member from Lakeview was there and she knows full well, 
Mr. Speaker, that I did not dodge any questions before 
answering them, Mr. Speaker. Well he would only need to 
consult with Hansard to know that when I was asked a 
question, I answered it directly. He did say that I had pitched 



May 4, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2407 

our criteria for considering strategic partners as some sort of a 
good deal. Mr. Speaker, I never used that phrase. I simply stated 
the criteria that we would consider were there to be an offer for 
SGI. 
 
He also said I had meetings with 11 different entities and that is 
simply untrue, Mr. Speaker. Neither my staff nor I have ever 
had meetings or discussions with these 11 entities that he 
alluded to. Those discussions were directly made with the CEO 
[chief executive officer] of SGI, as I stated in estimates, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I think the Leader of the Opposition 
would do well to actually watch . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Whoa, whoa. Quickly, I’ll ask the minister to 
finish his response. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — I think it would do the opposition 
leader well to review Hansard, to talk to the member from 
Lakeview before bringing such accusations. I’ll not call into 
question his character as the Leader of the Opposition. 
However, I hope he begins to do the same for me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

Reporting of Political Donations 
 
Mr. Forbes: — There you go, Mr. Speaker. A meeting is not a 
meeting and who you talking to when you run into them. Well 
there you go. You don’t play dodgeball, eh? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, ministerial accountability used to mean 
something, but the Sask Party seems to have forgotten that. Mr. 
Speaker, after a decade of Sask Party games, spin, and lines, 
people are starting to have less and less faith in government. 
They see a $60 million tax giveaway to corporations while their 
taxes go up on everything from kids’ clothes to a night out, and 
they wonder who their government really is working for, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Whenever we ask about getting big money out of politics, the 
Sask Party has nothing but excuses or attacks, but they never 
have a real answer. In the midst of all the Sask Party’s doing to 
hurt Saskatchewan families and undo so much that 
Saskatchewan people have pride in, will they take that 
important step with us? Will they show the people of 
Saskatchewan that their government influence or favour cannot 
be bought? Will they finally join us and get big money out of 
Saskatchewan politics? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this is a remarkable question coming from that member, Mr. 
Speaker, whose . . . During the last election, unions donated 
over $356,000 to their campaign. . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
But that’s okay. That’s okay, Mr. Speaker. But there’s no 
accountability, Mr. Speaker. During their leader’s . . . during 
their . . . 
 
[Interjections] 

The Speaker: — This is the final response in question period. I 
would ask all members to please be respectful and listen to the 
minister’s response. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, the member knows that all 
registered parties are required to publicly report their donations 
and expenses, Mr. Speaker. And on top of that, Mr. Speaker, we 
have lobbying legislation in this province, legislation which was 
supported by the opposition, Mr. Speaker. So we have full 
transparency, Mr. Speaker, with respect to who is talking to 
politicians on this side of the House and on that side of the 
House too, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But really, Mr. Speaker, when it comes right down to it, this is 
an accountable process. The lobbying legislation adds to the 
credibility of the system that we have in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, and it works just fine. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 53, 
The Provincial Health Authority Act without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the Minister of 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill be now 
read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bills and Bill No. 
53, The Provincial Health Authority Act and that the bill be now 
read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed to move 
third reading. I recognize the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 53 — The Provincial Health Authority Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — I move that the bill be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 53, The Provincial Health Authority Act be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 



2408 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2017 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — On division. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried on division. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 54, 
The Provincial Health Authority Consequential Amendment 
Act, 2017, a bilingual bill, without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in the 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the Minister of 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill be now 
read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 54 and the 
bill be now read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed to move 
third reading. I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 54 — The Provincial Health Authority 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2017/Loi de 2017 portant 

modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée 
The Provincial Health Authority Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — I move that the bill be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 54 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — On division. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried on division. 
 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 63, 
The Education Amendment Act, 2017, a bilingual bill, with 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the Deputy 
Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave 
to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill, 
and that the bill and its amendments be now read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration of the Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 63 
and the bill and its amendments be now read a third time. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Why is the member from Regina 
Lakeview on her feet? 
 
Ms. Beck: — Request to make comments with regard to third 
reading. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave was granted. We will continue on. So 
when the question of leave was asked, it was leave to waive 
consideration in the Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 63, 
not leave for the member from Regina Lakeview to speak. It is 
not debatable, the motion on first and second reading, but she 
will have the opportunity to provide remarks on third reading. 
So we will now continue on with the motion. When shall the 
amendment be read a first time? 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 

Bill No. 63 — The Education Amendment Act, 2017 
Loi modificative de 2017 sur l’éducation 

 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the 
amendments be now read a first and second time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that the 
amendments be now read a first and second time. This is a 
non-debatable motion. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 



May 4, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2409 

reading of the amendments. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. I recognize the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 63 — The Education Amendment Act, 2017 
Loi modificative de 2017 sur l’éducation 

 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
[11:30] 
 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’m obviously 
anxious to enter some comments on third reading of Bill 63. 
And I will keep my comments brief. 
 
This is a bill that has been universally panned and concerns 
raised by all members across the sector, across the province, 
from the North to the South, public, Catholic, urban, rural, 
united teachers, parents, community members united in their 
opposition to this bill in the overreach and the minister’s new 
ability to force really damaging cuts through our education 
system. 
 
I think we’ve been very clear about where we stand on this bill, 
and I would urge all members to vote against this bill and in 
favour of public education, publicly funded education in this 
province for all students. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — All right. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Call in the members. 
 
[The division bells rang from 11:31 until 11:54.] 
 
The Speaker: — All those in favour of the motion please rise. 
 

[Yeas — 47] 
 

Wall Moe Stewart 
Wyant Reiter Morgan 
Harpauer Doherty Duncan 
Beaudry-Mellor Hargrave D’Autremont 
Heppner Boyd Marit 
Tell Eyre Merriman 
Harrison Ottenbreit Ross 
Weekes Hart Kirsch 
Bradshaw Steinley Makowsky 

Phillips Lawrence Wilson 
Campeau Docherty Michelson 
Doke Cox Olauson 
Steele Young Fiaz 
Dennis McMorris Bonk 
Carr Nerlien Lambert 
Buckingham Kaeding  
 
The Speaker: — All those opposed please rise. 
 

[Nays —10] 
 
Wotherspoon Vermette Chartier 
Belanger Sproule Forbes 
Rancourt Beck McCall 
Meili   
 
Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 47; those 
opposed, 10. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Gardiner 
Park. 
 

Support for Separate, Public, and Faith-Based Schools 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
always a pleasure to join in debate on this side on behalf of the 
government, with a few other members that are going to join as 
well. And I’ll just remind those folks that might be watching 
this afternoon or those in the gallery what this motion is about. 
It’s a very important motion, and we’ve heard a lot about it in 
the news the last few days. And it’s basically to ensure 
non-Catholic students can continue to attend Catholic schools 
and ensure other faith-based schools outside the separate school 
system continue to receive provincial funding. Again maybe 
you’ll know a recent court case, that has brought this certainly 
to the forefront here in our province. And it’s a very important 
issue to many people that attend both the public and the 
separate system and the faith-based schools as well. 
 
I might have some insight into this, Mr. Speaker. I’m trained as 
a teacher. I think a couple members opposite are teachers as 
well. We have several former school board trustees on this side, 
and they’ve served the people well and now have moved on to 
this Assembly. 
 
And I’ve only taken schooling and only have that experience in 
the public system. I went to public schools growing up. I went 
to high school, university, U of S [University of Saskatchewan]. 
And then in my teaching time, again I was only mostly a 
substitute teacher, so I don’t profess to know all what teachers 
go through. I have some idea, but again you don’t have to do 
marking or not a lot of phone calls with parents and those types 
of things. You’re kind of just there for the day. But I guess you 



2410 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2017 

get some idea, Mr. Speaker. And I was very happy. I think I got 
a very good education. I had great teachers, and I’m sure many 
members of the House will agree with that. In the public 
system, they certainly do a good job. 
 
And now my kids . . . My wife is Catholic, and when we got 
married, we decided that our kids would be raised Catholic. 
We’re talking about parent choice. I think this motion is 
definitely about parent choice, Mr. Speaker. In that decision, 
I’m not sure how much choice I actually had upon our getting 
married, but I will say, maybe I’d better say it was a great 
choice to get married to Tami . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
There we go. 
 
[12:00] 
 
But again, our province has been well served by the separate 
system for over 100 years. And I think it’s important to note 
right back well before Confederation, the first settlers, the first 
schools in our country, what would become our country, in 
even the 1600s, the first schools were faith-based schools from 
the Catholic Church mostly in Quebec. If I remember from 
reading some time ago, the first school in the Northwest 
Territories — what became Alberta — in 1842 was a separate 
Catholic school, so the very first school in that way. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been well served by that system since 
Saskatchewan joined Confederation. Of course in 1867, when 
we became a country with the four provinces, minority rights 
were a very important part of that. Of course I’m not a historian 
or scholar on Confederation, but I question whether we 
would’ve joined Confederation if there wasn’t those choice in 
schools and those rights for the separate system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In my own family, as I mentioned, my kids go to a Catholic 
school. They get a great education. They absolutely . . . the 
teachers there. I think of my youngest son’s teacher. Every 
week we get an email about, boy, all sorts of things that are 
going on in the school. It takes a while to read. I can’t imagine 
how much time she puts into that. They’re just professional. 
They do a great job over at St. Gabriel. 
 
When I think back to my grandfather, he was unfortunately 
orphaned at 12 years old, and he was taken in by the Catholic 
school in Yorkton in those days, and that was in the 1920s. And 
you know, I’m glad there was that option for him. I don’t know 
the lay of the land back then of course, but they took him in, 
and they had room and board for him. He stayed there most of 
the year. And it was an important institution, and those folks 
obviously did great work. 
 
My brother . . . I went to the public system. Past the time that I 
started school, they started a Ukrainian immersion program, but 
it was in the separate system. It was at St. Goretti in Saskatoon. 
And you had to get up early in the morning; I think he caught 
the bus at 7:30, was home by 4:30. So a bit of a longer school 
day. It was all the way across town. 
 
But that was an option. That was an option. My parents could 
choose to send him to Ukrainian immersion. It wasn’t available 
in the public system, and so that’s the situation. So I never 
really got to go to school with my brother. That’s kind of a 
different situation, but that was what my parents chose to do, 

and I think he, again, was well served by that system. 
 
Real quick, when I went to university, I took a class at St. 
Thomas More College at the U of S. It was recommended to me 
by . . . There was a particular teacher that taught English there. 
It wasn’t her fault, with my English skills. She was a great 
teacher, and I’m glad I took that class. I’m glad that was 
available to me. I wonder what the members opposite . . . just 
sort of as an insert here, I don’t know where they stand on 
post-secondary funding, public funding for those folks in the 
separate area. I’m not sure where they stand. I hope maybe they 
can clarify that. 
 
I remember — I better watch my time here — training camp 
when I played football, it was at Luther collegiate at the U of R 
[University of Regina]. And it was right beside Campion 
College. I still remember that meeting room, the theatre on the 
second floor there, and I particularly remember the beds. The 
separate and the Catholic, they do a great job, but their bed 
design needs a little work, for the bigger guys. And there are 
certainly individuals way bigger than I that fit into those dorms. 
But I still have very good memories of training camp being 
housed there. 
 
And I know many . . . I think we all do. All of us have family 
members, friends, close friends that go to the faith-based 
schools, particularly here in Regina. I think we’re very served 
well by that system, as I’ve mentioned, not only the separate but 
the faith-based as well. I’ll talk about it in just a second. Of 
course I’m not sure what the hang-up from the NDP is on those 
schools, honestly, and maybe I’ll get into that in a little bit. 
They still need 24 credits to graduate. They have all the same 
standards from the Ministry of Education, and they still do a 
good job. They get a great education, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think of, it was mentioned earlier, the Luther Invitational 
Tournament. Like what a jewel on the sporting map of Regina. 
It would be a shame if that was no longer there, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s been around for 60-plus years. 
 
I have a little bit of a relationship with the Outlook LCBI 
[Lutheran Collegiate Bible Institute]. Many, many years ago 
was when I played Huskie football. We had several teammates. 
That was a bit of a football factory back then. And maybe I 
won’t go into that. I had some stories about that, but my time is 
running out as it always does on these debates. And of course 
we think about Notre Dame college, Mr. Speaker. My seatmate 
made sure that I mentioned a few of the hockey players; he’s a 
hockey guy. So you think of Lecavalier, Richards, Clark, 
Schwartz. Keith Aulie, I mean, he’s a good Saskatchewan boy. 
Part of his family does good work in this building. And on 
behalf of the people of the province, Curtis Joseph, Rod 
Brind’Amour, you know, they’ve represented Canada well on 
the international stage, all from that faith-based education, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And of course Mother Teresa right here in Regina, I think the 
member from Coronation Park knows it well. I’ve been to a few 
things there, as several of us have. The member mentioned, I 
think earlier, we had a gingerbread building contest — my son, 
along with him and I believe your CA [constituency assistant]. 
And the part that I think put us over the top . . . We won that. 
You said we were just participating. No, no, Mr. Speaker. We 



May 4, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2411 

won that event, the gingerbread building contest. It raised 
money, I think, for Hope’s Home, I believe. And I think what 
got us over the top is the gingerbread hot tub that . . . inspired 
by the member from Coronation Park. 
 
So we had a few question and answer sessions there as well. 
They do great jobs. They do a great job, sorry, at Mother 
Teresa. And just a few words about what they do. They: 
 

. . . select students primarily based on two criteria [this is 
from their website] — need and motivation. Students and 
their families will take part in a clearly defined admissions 
process and most will come from the North Central and 
Core areas of Regina. 

 
They’ll provide transportation for students that live within the 
areas, and they have several enrichment programs. They’re 
involved in enriching activities, as I mentioned: cooking, 
zumba, mindfulness, babysitting, football, art, hip hop, 
basketball, improv, quilting, beading, singing, yoga, 
cheerleading, history club, quilling, engineers building, drama, 
and a three-week summer program. 
 
They have an extensive school day. It begins at 8 a.m., ends at 
4:30, provide meals, get the kids to and from there. Again, a lot 
of the students have seen tough times before, and they find 
success here at Mother Teresa. It notes on their website, and it’s 
very transparent, their attendance record. It’s well over 90 per 
cent, and I would guess there probably had been less in other 
situations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Boy, they do a lot of great things. They support students, not 
only when they’re in Grade 6, 7, and 8. They support them right 
through to high school. They mentor them. They have mentors. 
They help with teachers, administrators. They do a . . . 
[inaudible] . . . work. The result is graduate support made 700 
contacts with the students after they graduated from Mother 
Teresa. Attendance rate was 90.7 per cent. So their attendance 
at Mother Teresa was well over the 90’s. It continues beyond to 
high school. The pass rate, Mr. Speaker, for high school 
students was 94 per cent — 94 per cent. They do great work. 
 
Just a few quick quotes from some of the students, and again 
I’m quoting: 
 

I love this school. I love the after-school programs, the 
teachers, staff, and the subjects we do. When I come to 
this school, I know I won’t be judged and I will be loved. I 
appreciate that the teachers care about the students the 
same no matter what they do. I like that they give us tools 
to help us when we get older. I learned how to play 
football at MTMS. 

 
I know here there’s a picture of two students that went on to 
play Sask Selects, a program I’m familiar with. They got to go 
down to Austin, Texas to play tackle football a couple of years 
ago. “I appreciate how the teachers love us no matter what, and 
they help us when we're in trouble. There’s always laughter and 
excitement.” 
 
Obviously, Mr. Speaker, they’re doing extremely good work 
there, Mr. Speaker, I think something this and the public sector 
does a good job of. But they also team with the private sector. 

Now I know the members opposite get a little nervous when 
they hear about that, but there’s scholarships provided by MLT 
[MacPherson Leslie & Tyerman]. I saw earlier the Riders, they 
gave $100,000 to Mâmawêyatitân, the new school there to help 
along with them, Mr. Speaker. There’s a social impact bond 
Mosaic Stadium did for Mother Teresa, Mr. Speaker, and a 
million dollars to help those students achieve more. This can 
only be a good thing, Mr. Speaker. This can only be a good 
thing. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, basically this motion, I think for me, is 
about choice, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s great for the taxpayers as 
well. I think there’s this idea across the way that there’s a zero 
sum game all the time. Because somebody makes a million 
bucks playing hockey over here, somehow I’m paid less 
because of that. 
 
And I think that idea extends to this debate right here, Mr. 
Speaker. They think because there’s other people outside the 
public system that that somehow weakens the public system in 
itself, and that’s just not the case. I think it’s complementary, 
and it helps for the taxpayers, Mr. Speaker. They only pay 
roughly 50 to 80 per cent of the first pupil’s payment to pay for 
those students. Taxpayers in those faith-based schools, they 
don’t pay for busing. They don’t pay for any capital, Mr. 
Speaker, And so I think those are only good situations, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I think this school, all of the faith-based schools, they do a 
great job, Mr. Speaker. I think this is all about choice, Mr. 
Speaker. This is about choice for parents. We see success in 
choice in some of the things the NDP don’t like, Mr. Speaker 
— in MRIs [magnetic resonance imaging], in surgeries, liquor 
stores, Mr. Speaker. I know that stuff makes them 
uncomfortable. I think choices drive innovation, competition to 
produce higher quality — in general, not necessarily in this case 
— better goods and services, and it lowers costs, Mr. Speaker. 
Choices, as always, choices empower people. Choices empower 
people. No choice or just one choice, that empowers 
bureaucrats and government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think and I hope the members, they clarify their statements. I 
hope the Education critic . . . I think that would say a lot if she 
didn’t get up and speak to this motion. And speaking of the 
motion, I will get to that. And I’m going to move: 
 

That this Assembly supports the government’s 
commitment to take the necessary steps to ensure 
non-Catholic students can continue to attend Catholic 
schools and to ensure other faith-based schools outside the 
separate school system continue to receive provincial 
funding. 

 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Regina Gardiner Park has 
moved: 
 

That this Assembly supports the government’s 
commitment to take the necessary steps to ensure 
non-Catholic students can continue to attend Catholic 
schools and to ensure other faith-based schools outside the 
separate school system continue to receive provincial 



2412 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2017 

funding. 
 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
from Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to enter into 
this debate today and to have the opportunity to talk about 
education in our province. And certainly that has been a focus 
for myself as critic but for our whole caucus — not just today, 
not just yesterday, but long-standing commitment to education 
in this province. 
 
We have educators on this side, public school board trustees, 
and people who have worked in their communities to support 
children, both in school and out of school. And so this is not an 
issue that we take lightly or that we come to late in the game. 
 
[12:15] 
 
And I also want to say that I think that there’s a real need here 
to show some leadership, to show some calm, to show some 
respect for the very, very important issue that is funding for 
education for all students in this province. This is not something 
that I consider to be a game, a political game or otherwise. This 
is exactly the reason why I stand here today, is to support the 
chances for all kids in this province. And the best way that we 
can do that is to ensure that all children in this province have 
access to a strong education and that we support that with our 
words, with our deeds, and with dollars. That we make choices 
that invest in our students and not divest in our students, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The other thing that I wanted to . . . I know that there are some 
guests here with us and perhaps guests listening at home. And I 
take some very strong concern at some of the misinformation 
that has been disseminated about this issue, in fact emails sent, 
emails sent by members opposite stating that we, the NDP has a 
plan or don’t support the funding of associate schools, for 
example. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that there’s a need for clarity, and I want to 
clarify a few things. One of them is that we have no position to 
reduce funding to associate schools, historical schools, 
independent schools, or any school that receives public money. 
Clearly what this fight has been about, for the past year, is 
going around this province and trying to support education, 
support dollars flowing into our schools, all schools. 
 
There’s a lot of concern out there about the decisions that were 
made in this budget. There was a decision made to take $60 
million from our students, all students, in this budget, at the 
same time as there is a $60 million corporate tax giveaway. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s a decision that is made on that side. So to be 
talking about, you know, support for classrooms at a time when 
you’re taking $60 million out of all classrooms in this province, 
I hardly know what to say about that. 
 
The other thing that I want to say here is that there’s a need for 
some clarity around this issue, and that is the Theodore 
decision. This is a complicated, long-standing issue in this 
province. It has roots back into the very formation of this 
province, certainly back into the way that the school systems, 
both school systems, were set up. And the Theodore case itself 

goes back 12 years. 
 
We’ve been very clear: we support the decision to appeal. And I 
was very interested and a bit surprised last night in committee 
to hear from the Minister of Education that he was less clear 
about the government’s decision to enter into that appeal, even 
though it would support the Catholic board’s appeal. So that is 
something that I have a lot of concern about, Mr. Speaker. This 
is not something that we should be grandstanding about. There 
has been talk of the notwithstanding clause. That is a very, very 
significant measure that should be given consideration but not 
be entered into lightly, and certainly not like this. Not to distract 
from Bill 63. It’s so clear, Mr. Speaker, what is going on here. 
This is a bill that gives unprecedented power to the minister. It 
goes against the wishes of people across this province. 
 
Going back last year when the government first started talking 
about transformational change, there were a thousand trial 
balloons floated up and there was a lot of concern in the sector, 
a sector that already was under attack, feeling disrespected, 
feeling not consulted, feeling disregarded, blamed, in the case 
of many teachers and those who work in our schools, and 
administrators. This was the context in which we threw up this 
idea of transformational change. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They did. 
 
Ms. Beck: — They did. That this context . . . Mr. Perrins 
presented a report that very clearly stated that there was no 
appetite for the loss of local voice. Mr. Perrins stated that there 
was no appetite for further amalgamations. And those pieces 
were only strengthened by the panel that met after, at the 
beginning of this year. 
 
Then this bill showed up as a budget bill, Bill 63, which means 
we only get five hours of debate on it, and we already saw how 
quick the decision was rushed on that. But, Mr. Speaker, people 
are paying attention. And members opposite voted knowing full 
well that they did so against the wishes of people in their 
communities, against teachers, against school boards — public 
school boards, Catholic school boards, northern school boards, 
southern school boards — communities all around this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I presented my petitions today I noted a 
number of folks from the Yellow Grass and Weyburn, Fort 
Qu’Appelle area. As I said, names that I recognize, and names 
that, you know, aren’t necessarily NDP supporters, but people 
who I am proud to bring their voice here and to stand up for 
them, and to let you know what they think about this bill, and 
what they think about attempts to divide and distract.  
 
We have an opportunity in this province to do something really 
important with education. We have something very . . . an 
important, an important possibility here. People are paying 
attention . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well the member is 
heckling from her seat, Mr. Speaker. I think that what is being 
missed here is the opportunity to actually envision what we 
could do for our kids in this province, all kids. 
 
We have more people than ever paying attention to education. 
Ninety-one per cent of people in this province are opposed to 
the cuts by this government, Mr. Speaker. We have a time when 



May 4, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2413 

we have the business community engaged. They want to put 
education at the top of the list. We have people who’ve gone all 
around this province and they say, it is time we really think 
about where we’re at with regard to education in this province 
and where we could be. How do we ensure that kids get the 
education that they need so that they have the tools that they 
need and that our whole province has the tools that we need to 
move forward into this century. 
 
And so to see this so disregarded and this gamesmanship 
happen around kids is really, really disappointing and frankly 
shameful. Shameful — $60 million out of our kids’ classrooms 
at a time that you are giving corporate tax breaks to the tune of 
$60 million. That is unconscionable. That is a decision. This is 
not politics. That is a deliberate decision that is made. And, you 
know, and members opposite don’t want to hear this because I 
know they’re hearing the same thing from their constituents. 
And I could not be more clear. Our support is fully, fully for all 
students receiving public dollars in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think that members opposite by their bluster, by their 
attempts to pull everything in are just belying the fact that they 
know what I know — that people are watching. They are angry 
about these cuts. They are angry about Bill 63. They want it 
stopped. Even the quote that the minister stood up today and 
talked about the SSBA, you know, he was very selective with 
that quote. They said they were happy that some amendments 
were put back in, but they want the government to engage in 
relationship, in transparency, and sit down and rewrite the 
whole Act for the situation that we find ourselves in in this 
province today and going into the future. And, Mr. Speaker, 
members on this side are so, would be so happy to enter into 
that debate, to really put a focus on our kids instead of playing 
crass, divisive politics with our kids, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, budgets really speak to the values of government, 
and I think that you saw with this budget exactly where the 
priorities of this government lay and, Mr. Speaker, I’m 
disappointed by that. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon University. 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to 
stand in my place today and support the motion as presented by 
the member from Regina Gardiner Park. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this motion is all about choice. The Theodore 
decision is all about choice and choice for the parents to pick 
and choose which education they’re going to have for their 
child. As a government, we stand for fair and equitable 
education throughout our province. This Theodore decision will 
affect between 5 and 10,000 kids in every corner of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Freedom of choice is a basic right in our country, Mr. Speaker. 
Where our children are educated has to be one of the most 
important decisions that a parent can make. And we need to 
ensure that they continue to have that ability. If ever there was a 
motion that the opposition should support, this is the one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my parents, Joan and Mel, were both Catholic 
school teachers. My father was a principal in Saskatoon, and 

my mom taught for 35 years as well. So being raised as a 
Catholic with parents that were both teachers in the Catholic 
system, I didn’t have much of a choice. They had a choice, but I 
didn’t have much of a choice whether I attended Catholic or 
public school. 
 
But having said that, there was the choice. Cardinal Leger 
School, where I attended, was a great school — great teachers, 
great administration, principal, sports teams, arts, drama. But so 
was College Park, just across the park. They had the same 
opportunities that I had when I went to Cardinal Leger. But, Mr. 
Speaker, many of the families in my school and many of my 
friends weren’t Catholic. Some of them were Protestant, 
Lutheran, you name it, Mr. Speaker. We had every religion in 
that school. 
 
They had the choice to go to that school. Now why they made 
that choice, I’m not sure. It could be many different reasons. It 
could be the teachers, could be the school sports teams because 
we were pretty dominant in the late ’80s when I went there. But 
whatever the decision that their parents made, they had the 
choice. And that’s what’s being taken away in this court ruling 
out of Theodore. 
 
We can’t fund one student and not the other in a school that was 
chosen by their parents. It doesn’t matter what school that they 
choose to go to — whether it’s public, Catholic, independent, 
associated schools — we can’t as a government make those 
choices for parents. Choices, Mr. Speaker, should be made by 
the parents and we’re not in the business of picking for those 
parents. 
 
After I heard about the decision in Theodore, Mr. Speaker, I 
looked back and I thought, how would that affect my family 
right now? And I came up with a fairly good analogy and an 
anecdote and I’ll share it here. My son Connor graduated from 
grade 8 in a Catholic school, went to St. Joseph High School in 
Saskatoon, another Catholic school. When he was halfway 
through Grade 10, he decided that to follow his dream of 
becoming a mechanic, an automotive service technician, which 
is what he wanted to do. He wanted to enrol in the public high 
school, Walter Murray, Mr. Speaker, because they had an 
automotive service technician program and he was interested in 
it. 
 
He was allowed to go and transfer into Walter Murray, Mr. 
Speaker, and take classes that enable him now to register and 
enrol at Sask Polytechnic. It gave him the bedrock. It gave him 
the opportunity to see what he was getting into, number one; 
and number two, see if he would thrive at it. Mr. Speaker, he 
won a couple of awards at Walter Murray as he was going 
through the program and I’m quite proud of that. 
 
If the role was reversed, if the situation was reversed and we 
weren’t Catholic and Connor was going to a public school, but 
yet St. Joseph had that program, my son, under this decision, 
wouldn’t be allowed — unless I paid for it — to go to that 
program, get the education that he really wanted to follow his 
dream and become that mechanic that he is going to be. And 
I’m glad, because my car needs repairs all the time. But he 
wouldn’t be allowed to do that unless I paid for it out of my 
pocket, even after I’ve paid all the same taxes that everybody 
else has had. 



2414 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2017 

Mr. Speaker, there’s also another story that I’ll touch briefly on. 
The member from Saskatoon Westview, his daughter has 
special needs. When she was going to look at entering the 
school system, they enrolled her at St. Augustine School — 
once again a good Catholic Saskatoon University school — 
because they had individual programs for children that needed 
that little extra help that could help her before she got into the 
school system. That was at St. Augustine, Mr. Speaker. Now 
the member from Saskatoon Westview isn’t Catholic. That 
program was offered at that Catholic school at that time, and it 
enabled her to not fall behind. She was able to stay with her 
classmates and able to continue her education and not fall 
behind. Mr. Speaker, the Theodore decision would stop that 
unless, once again, the parents can pay for it. Mr. Speaker, 
that’s not fair. It’s not equitable, and it takes away choice. 
 
[12:30] 
 
Our government supports both public and Catholic school 
systems. We also support the historical high schools, associated 
schools, and qualified independent schools. A couple of them 
are in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon Christian School, 
and in Saskatoon University, the Saskatoon Misbah School. We 
have a heritage and a history that we need to protect. 
 
Our government has been a strong supporter of education, Mr. 
Speaker, throughout our mandates. I hear every day that we’re 
not . . . that we’re cutting, that we’re not providing the 
education or the dollars that we need to for our students. 
 
What I can’t understand is why the members opposite think 
that, because we fund these other schools and these other 
systems, that it takes away from the public system. It doesn’t. 
We’re not sharing the same pie. We made the pie bigger, Mr. 
Speaker. And I’ve got numbers here. I’ve got numbers here that 
back that up. In 2007 overall funding for education was less 
than a billion dollars. In 2016 it was over $2 billion, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s an increase of 114 per cent when student 
enrolment only went up 10 per cent. Operating budget 1.41 
billion in 2007, 1.86 billion in 2016, up 32 per cent. Overall, we 
have invested in capital spending in our schools, Mr. Speaker, 
$1.5 billion. We’ve opened 40 new schools, 25 major 
renovations, Mr. Speaker. We’ve opened 15,200 daycare spaces 
over the last 9 years, Mr. Speaker, up 62 per cent. We’ve added 
161 pre-kindergarten programs, up 104 per cent. And we 
created the first early years plan, Mr. Speaker. I would say that 
we’re investing in our education system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now it’s hard to believe that anyone in this place would support 
taking away a parent’s right to choose an education for their 
children, and yet that’s what we hear day after day after day in 
this place, Mr. Speaker. November 15th, 2012, I’d like to quote 
from Hansard, Mr. Speaker, and I quote Mr. Wotherspoon: 
 

Mr. Speaker, almost one year ago that government forged 
ahead, diverting dollars from our publicly funded 
education system into funding new private schools . . . 
Beyond the risk of fragmenting education, it takes dollars 
away at a time that we need to properly fund and support 
education in this province. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, nothing could be further from the truth. 
After what the figures that I just read to you, what they say, 

there’s nothing further from the truth, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
supporting all education and all students in our province, Mr. 
Speaker, at record levels. Mr. Speaker, we are protecting choice 
for parents to send their child to the school that will provide the 
best education for them, for the future and beyond. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as I started out by saying. I’m going to support 
the motion from the member from Regina Gardiner Park. I’m 
going to stand with the students and the parents in this province, 
and I’m going to continue to do the work that our government is 
doing, especially as it relates to the Theodore decision. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As you know, I was 
elected fairly recently in a by-election, and one of the things 
that I heard a lot on the doorstep . . . There was a pretty 
common conversation. I’d knock on the door and say my name 
and say what I was doing there, and before I’d even finish the 
people at the door would say, we’re educators. We’ll take a 
sign. 
 
And that was before this budget. That was before Bill 63. But it 
was a pretty constant refrain, that people who are involved in 
the education system, people who had children in the education 
system were really concerned about the direction of this 
government. I’m quite certain that if we were having that 
by-election again today, I’d have even more of those types of 
conversations. 
 
And we see that. I think we see evidence of that in the types of 
rallies that have been going on around the province. Rallies like 
the one yesterday on the steps of this building where we saw a 
couple hundred people at least out there — students, teachers, 
parents, all sorts of people in the community — not happy with 
Bill 63, not thinking we should go down that route. So we’ve 
already got . . . And why is that relevant? Obviously we’re not 
debating Bill 63. But it’s relevant because it speaks to the 
confidence that the people of this province have in this 
government regarding education. It speaks to the fact that the 
people of this province, they support quality, accessible, 
publicly funded education, as do we. As do we, as a party in 
Saskatchewan. That means, it means public and separate 
schools. It means associate schools. It means your historical 
schools. And we support all of those schools, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And Saskatchewan is a special place. You know, we’re a 
special place in some ways. Perhaps the last place in North 
America where, if you go to a good school, it’s a public school. 
There are no private schools . . . people don’t pay extra money 
to go to schools in general, in Saskatchewan, the way they do in 
other parts of this country, other parts . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes, they do. 
 
Mr. Meili: — A very minor amount. A very minor amount. In 
the majority of this province, the majority of students are in the 
public system, and it’s publicly funded education. And even 
those associate schools, which you’re referring to, receive 
public support. That’s a pretty wonderful thing that you don’t 
have people having to go deep into their pockets to have access 



May 4, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2415 

to these schools. If you go to a good school it’s because . . . If 
you go to any school in this province, you’re going to a good 
school. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s why this discussion before us is so 
important. It’s so important that we’re able to preserve that 
nature, that all of those schools that receive public support — 
associate schools, historical schools, and the major schools, the 
publicly funded and Catholic separate schools — they continue 
to be within the public system. They continue to have that 
support so that they’re able to thrive, so that we don’t see a 
split. And that’s why this is so important, and it’s why we have 
been so clear. That’s why we’ve been so clear in saying that we 
support Catholic schools. It’s why we are so clear in saying we 
support public schools, and why we’re so clear in saying that 
we need to see this decision appealed. 
 
We need the clarity on what is really meant in the law, and we 
need the time to actually think through the depths of this issue. 
But the fact of the matter is that those things are before us. The 
opportunity for clarity, as we take this from a lower court to a 
higher court, and the opportunity for time as that appeal process 
continues. Which is why it does appear to be a bit hasty, and as 
my colleague from Regina Lakeview has suggested, a bit 
political to run headlong into the notwithstanding without even 
seeing whether or not this government is committed to putting 
its own appeal in, which is a big question for me. Why have we 
gone so far to the notwithstanding clause? It may be the thing to 
do, but going there before we even see if this government is 
actually going to appeal the decision. Are they going to join 
alongside the Catholic school board and appeal the decision? 
That still has not been clear. 
 
So that tells me what this is really about is that it’s a distraction. 
It’s a distraction from this budget, this budget with which 
people are very frustrated. It’s a distraction from the scandals, 
the scandals of the GTH, the scandals of the Regina bypass. 
And it’s a scandal from their own record on education, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Because we’ve got a group here that’s trying to present 
themselves as the great defenders, the great defenders of 
education. It’s really, really hard to swallow this argument that 
we’ve got the great defenders of education in front of us. We 
have in front of us a government that has cut at every level — 
pre-K [pre-kindergarten], K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12], 
and post-secondary. This budget has severe cuts to education. 
There’s your commitment to defending quality education — 
$60 million out of K to 12 alone. And as my colleague . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate it. As my 
colleague has so clearly pointed out, a loss of $60 million from 
the public education system and $60 million cut in corporate tax 
cuts — that shows you where these great defenders of education 
are, where their real priorities are. They’re not in making sure 
that our classrooms have enough supports. We are already 
hearing from school boards that they’re going to have . . . from 
school divisions, they’re going to have to have larger class 
sizes. That they’re not going to have supports like educational 

assistants, teachers’ assistants. There’s not going to be enough 
English as an additional language support for that large number 
of new immigrants who need that kind of support. It’s getting to 
be more difficult to be a teacher. It’s going to be more difficult 
to be a student, Mr. Speaker, and that is directly connected to 
these cuts. 
 
We’re also seeing the cuts of things like school supplies for 
families who are living in poverty no longer having school 
supplies covered. Just making it more difficult to be a student, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And of course it doesn’t end at K to 12. We’ve seen the 5.6 per 
cent cut in universities, colleges. We’ve already seen job losses 
in Sask Polytechnic. We’re very likely to see job, program 
losses, or tuition increases in the universities. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got significant disinvestment in 
education at every phase. We even saw the effort in this budget 
to eliminate a great deal of funding, the majority of the funding, 
for libraries in this province. Yes, that’s been walked back, 
walked back reluctantly, walked back after weeks of defending 
it as the right choice. Only under significant public pressure was 
that actually returned. It would be very wise of this government 
to listen to that public pressure, to make those investments in 
education instead of cutting corporate taxes. But no, instead 
they’re appealing to distractions, trying to focus on other things 
because they don’t want to walk back those poor decisions. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, now we saw today, we saw today the passing 
of Bill 63, a bill that takes away the local control of schools. 
We’ve already seen cuts to funding for governance so that it’s 
harder for schools, Catholic and public school board, to be able 
to actually organize themselves, actually run their operations 
the way they ought to. Now we’re seeing this change with Bill 
63, where that governance will no longer even reside in their 
hands, Mr. Speaker, with the moving from legislation to 
regulation of so many elements — the number of trustees, their 
compensation, the spending on capital, spending on operating 
budgets. This is a significant overreach where now instead of 
changing through legislation, this government can now change 
essentially on a whim what’s going on at the level of the local 
school board. 
 
You know, this is a long-standing approach. We saw this in the 
past with this government with changes to mill rates, and now 
we’re seeing this with Bill 63. We heard the president of the 
Saskatchewan School Boards Association saying that they’re 
looking to make school boards the face and no longer the voice 
of education in the province. And we heard the minister today 
try to justify this and say oh, it’s just fine. We’ve made some 
amendments. The Saskatchewan School Boards Association’s 
just fine. It’s not true. The STF, the SSBA, they’re still not in 
favour of these changes, Mr. Speaker. They still would’ve liked 
that bill scrapped. They’re still disappointed that it passed. 
 
And that disappointment is consistent with what was heard in a 
province-wide consultation where it was very clear, the 
message from the people of this province was very clear. They 
did not want these changes. They didn’t want amalgamation of 
school boards. That was made clear. But they wanted to . . . 
Why didn’t they want that? They wanted to maintain the local 
voice. And there’s no question about that message having come 



2416 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2017 

through loud and clear in the reports around those meetings. 
 
And yet here we have this significant power grab. So you’ll 
excuse me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if I don’t feel confident in this 
government taking over education. I don’t feel confident in this 
government dealing with the complexities of this very serious 
case, this case that has emerged from the Theodore case, this 
discussion of the Catholic and public school boards. I don’t feel 
that we can really trust this government, when they made so 
many mistakes already, when they’ve cut so much in education 
already, to be able to manage this very important file, Mr. 
Speaker. I don’t think we should see this government managing 
school boards out of the office of the Minister of Education, and 
I don’t have confidence in them completing a decent job of this 
effort. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
rise in the House today to enter this 75-minute debate. I have a 
bit of history behind me when it comes to school divisions. I 
was a member of the board for nine years in Melfort. I spent 
three years as facilities chairman, three years as finance 
chairman, three years as chairman of the board, and in that time 
I learned a great deal. I learned about, to respect teachers, to 
respect students, and to respect the taxpayers. And it was . . . 
Once you see the inner workings of the school divisions and the 
way they work, you understand it so much better. 
 
[12:45] 
 
To me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this motion works in two parts. It 
has two pieces to it that we have to look at independently. We 
have to look at the choice for the students and the parents, and 
we have to say, is it fair, knowing that all these students are our 
children. They’re people in Saskatchewan who’s growing up. 
So it starts for me with my daughter and her husband who lived 
in Saskatoon, had a neighbourhood school, one very close to 
them, decided not to go to that. And even though they were 
Protestant, they went to the Catholic school because it had a 
better arts program for my grandson, Justice. 
 
And I suppose I look at that, they made that decision based on 
what they could do, what it would do for their child. Is that 
wrong? That in this case, if it goes forward, they could still go 
there, but they wouldn’t be funded by the government to go 
there. That child would not be funded. Is that fair? Is that right? 
Can anybody make any sense of that at all? 
 
When they talk about real estate, they talk about location, 
location, location. And so you move next door to . . . where a 
school right across the street, that that school is a separate 
school and you can’t go to that. Your children, our 
Saskatchewan children, be educated by a Saskatchewan system, 
but if you go to that school, you’re not funded. Is that fair? Is 
that right? It just does not make any sense. 
 
So we have a school in Theodore; we have a school in 
Englefeld that I consider, I like to number them 177 and 178 
because while the NDP were proficient at getting rid of 176 
schools, they missed two because the communities fought back 
and they worked hard. And they kept their school in Theodore, 

and they kept their school in Englefeld. Now I almost have a 
feeling they’re gunning for them again. And they’re going after 
trying to get that number 177 and number 178, because they’re 
still holding a grudge that they were able to stand up to the 
original onslaught of the NDP government. 
 
They stand there, and they criticize us for what? For having 
children in Englefeld and children in Theodore that couldn’t go 
to that school or could go but have to pay $10,000 a year? 
Because that’s what it would seem they would believe. 
 
A Muslim child in Regina can go to a Muslim school, a 
faith-based school, if they pay for it, according to them. If they 
pay for it, according to them, according to the interim leader of 
the NDP, not the future leader, but the interim leader who said 
on November 15th, 2012 in Hansard, “Will the minister do the 
right thing?” And he’s talking about faith-based schools: 
 

Will the minister do the right thing? Will he stop diverting 
dollars from a publicly funded education system? Will he 
put forward a plan that supports all students in this 
province? 

 
Well I would suggest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a plan for 
that. This is exactly a plan for that. This is saying that we will 
fund a child going to school in Saskatchewan. That’s what it’s 
about. It’s not about all these different places and everything 
else. It’s about funding children to go to school in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The second part of this is the physical part of this and the 
financial part of this, of taking 10,000 students out of a system 
that has worked well for over 100 years, taking 10,000 off this 
system, leaving holes in schools, and moving it to this system. 
 
Now the opposition has been watching Alberta, and obviously 
there’s no end of money so . . . but 10,000 students. The 
average school in Saskatchewan is 238 students. I am very 
proud that this government has built 40 new schools. However, 
however, you divide 10,000 students by 238, we would have to 
build another 42 schools to house those students in there. 
 
Now there was a time, and there was a time not that long ago 
when I was on the school division in Melfort, and our school 
could probably hold those students. They could hold more 
students because our young people were leaving. And they were 
having children in Alberta, and they were having children in 
Manitoba and in BC [British Columbia] and everything else. 
And our population, during the wondrous times of the 
opposition, was dropping. And they were dropping in our young 
people. And we all remember . . . Maybe we don’t all remember 
that. 
 
But I remember having a school that was 70 per cent full. And I 
remember the day — and I remember this so clearly — that I 
walked into the Centennial Auditorium, as it was called at that 
time, and I had a . . . watching the speaker from the Department 
of Education, Government of Saskatchewan, and he had this 
chart. And the chart said, here’s our population, school 
population, 10 years ago. Here’s our school population five 
years ago. Here’s our school population today. Here’s our 
school population in five years. Here’s our school population in 
10 years. That was their attitude, just straight down. I sat there 



May 4, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2417 

for about 38 more seconds, and I thought if that’s what our 
leadership looks like, I’m not going to sit here and take it. 
 
You know, it seems to me that with our population growing by 
120,000 in the last seven years . . . youngest population in 
Canada, one of the great things about this province. And you 
know, we have . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And here it 
comes. Here it comes, great time to cut, because they’re not 
talking about the child. They never talk about the child. That 
they think if you’re over here, if you go to a faith-based school, 
that somehow a dollar we spend over there isn’t a dollar 
educating our children. And that’s, you know, it’s just so hard 
to understand. And it is; it is shameful, and I’m a little 
embarrassed by that. 
 
I am not embarrassed however by our education funding where 
we went from 944 million in total funding to 2.2 billion in nine 
and a half years. I’m not embarrassed about our operating 
funding that went from 1.1 or 1.41 billion to 1.86 billion, up 32 
per cent.  
 
And if I was them, I would be so embarrassed about not only 
closing 176 schools, but investing in capital in 2007, $18 
million. In 2016 our investment was $119 million, 40 schools, 
$119 million, 40 new schools, 25 major renovations in schools, 
and created the prevented maintenance. We have so much to be 
proud of. And I’m going to be supporting this bill, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Thank you very much. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and a pleasure to 
enter this debate. I think it’s a very important one and one that 
people in the province are watching closely. 
 
And I want to thank my colleagues for being clear about our 
position and being very concerned about the antics over there, 
the bit of a circus, because unfortunately our kids are not seeing 
the commitment they should be seeing from this government. 
And you know, all those members over there . . . In fact I asked 
a minister the other day about how much our last budget was. It 
was 8 billion; now it’s 14 billion. And they can’t . . . They seem 
to even have to attack our kids more with this $60 million tax 
cut. 
 
You know we have the Minister of Education who says he 
doesn’t want to see that money go to the boardroom or the 
courtroom but in the classroom. We can all agree with that. But 
except they’re sending $60 million to the corporate boardroom. 
Why don’t you take that money that you’re sending from the 
corporate boardroom back into the classroom? And that’s the 
issue that parents are worried about, that were on the steps of 
the legislature yesterday, of which I saw none of those folks out 
yesterday at that discussion.  
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was a teacher in rural 
Saskatchewan in the 1980s, and the member from Meadow 
Lake would know this, would know this school that I taught in 
in Makwa. He would know that school well, and he would 
know the high school was closed under the Conservative 
government. He knows that for a fact. He knows that for a fact. 
Over there these guys are reconstructing the history, and I 

understand the previous speaker was talking about his role as a 
board Chair. If he truly was a board Chair, he knew, he would 
know. He was the one who closed those schools. It was his 
responsibility because that’s a local responsibility. That’s the 
case. That’s the truth, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I have to say this. I have to say this. Sometimes, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we have tells that really predict our future 
behaviour, things that we do that really speak to our 
commitment to spirituality and family values and all of that 
kind of thing. Those are things that we see when we look at 
people and say, doesn’t look like they’re really telling us the 
truth. They’re not really speaking to us in our eyes. So we really 
have to wonder what’s happening behind the scenes. 
 
We see two examples, two examples in this budget where I 
wonder about the commitment to spirituality and family values. 
And of course the first one, and we had questions today about 
cutting the spiritual care of those who are in need in our 
hospitals. How can this government on one hand stand up today 
and talk about what they’re talking about and on the other hand 
slash that budget, slash that budget? And then the other one 
clearly is for those people who are on social assistance. The 
most vulnerable people in our province are having their funerals 
cut as of July 1st. Now it’s just not the Protestants. It’s all 
people. It’s the First Nations people, people of different faiths, 
who will not be able to access that to say goodbye to their loved 
ones in a respectful, dignified manner. So that’s just a little 
predictor of what their feelings are today and what it will be in 
the future. 
 
But I have one that, you know, when we were preparing for this 
debate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and you will remember this. The 
current Minister of Education who also was and is the Minister 
of Labour, 2012, he introduced some amendments to The 
Saskatchewan Employment Act, created the employment Act. 
One of the things he did was he eliminated the reference to 
Sunday, which is interesting because the government on the 
side of that day said, well we want to be like the rest of Canada. 
We don’t want to recognize our unique characteristics here in 
Saskatchewan. We want to be like everybody else. So they got 
rid of any reference to Sunday when it comes to the weekend. 
And we tried to raise this with them over there, and of course 
they said, “Not an issue. People don’t really care.” But today, 
it’s all of a sudden a big issue. 
 
But this is the letter I wrote to the Most Reverend Daniel Bohan 
on September 21st, 2013: 
 

Dear Most Reverend Bohan, 
 
I read with interest the article in Saturday’s Leader-Post 
regarding your pastoral letter that was distributed in 
Regina’s Catholic churches today. I want to say that I 
applaud your thoughtful reflections on the new challenges 
that The Saskatchewan Employment Act unfortunately 
creates. 
 
Specifically, I appreciated your comments about Sunday. 
The removal of the reference to Sunday in the new 
legislation creates an unjust vulnerability that unfortunately 
many workers and their families may now have to face in 
Saskatchewan. 



2418 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2017 

Once again, thank you for your leadership as shown in 
your pastoral letter on work and worship. It’s important 
that we continually be, as you suggest, in the service of the 
common good for our people. 

 
Fortunately, the pressure from the spiritual groups led to the 
reinstatement of Sunday into the regulations. So people do have 
a force for good in this thing. 
 
But I do have to tell you that I was amazed that this government 
could do such an action. And I’m amazed when we passed that 
budget that did in funerals for those who are most vulnerable in 
Saskatchewan; that they did in spiritual care in the province. I 
couldn’t believe it. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this is a very important issue. But these folks, 
I have to say and the Premier has said, the Premier has said, the 
best predictor of future behaviour is past behaviour. And these 
are the kind of things that they do. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It now being 1 o’clock, the normal 
time of adjournment, this House stands adjourned until Monday 
at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 
 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2393 
  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 2393, 2394 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2394 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 2395 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2395 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2395 
  McCall ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2396, 2397 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2396 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2396 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2396 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2397 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2397 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2397 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2397 
  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2397 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2398 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2398 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2398 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2398 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2398 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2399 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2399 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2399 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2400 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2400 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Mosaic K3 Mine Grand Opening 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2400 
 Wastewater Project at Co-op Refinery Complex Wins Global Water Award 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2400 
 Yorkton Minor Football Hosts Football Night in Saskatchewan 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2401 
 Students Mobilizing Against Cuts 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2401 
 Honouring our Lifeblood Event 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2401 
 Regina Pats Players Honoured at Western Hockey League Awards 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2402 
 Springtime in the Country 
  Nerlien ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2402 
STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Question of Privilege 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2402 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Details of Land Transaction 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2403 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2403 
 Intent of Bill 40 and Ownership of Crown Corporations 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2403 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2403 
 Role of School Boards and Intent of Bill 63 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2404 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2404 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2405 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2405 
 Closing of Saskatchewan Transportation Corporation 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2406 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2406 
 Status of Saskatchewan Government Insurance 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2406 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2406 



 

 Reporting of Political Donations 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2407 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2407 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Human Services 
  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2407 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 53 — The Provincial Health Authority Act 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2407 
 Bill No. 54 — The Provincial Health Authority Consequential Amendment Act, 2017 
 Loi de 2017 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Provincial Health Authority Act 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2408 
 Bill No. 63 — The Education Amendment Act, 2017/Loi modificative de 2017 sur l’éducation 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2409 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2409 
 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 2409 
FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 Bill No. 63 — The Education Amendment Act, 2017/Loi modificative de 2017 sur l’éducation 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2408 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Support for Separate, Public, and Faith-based Schools 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 2409 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2412 
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2413 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2414 
  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2416 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2417 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


